January 30, 1939

 OBITUARY

 W. B. Yeats Dead; Famous Irish Poet

 Wireless to The New York Times

 NICE, France, Jan. 29.--The death of William Butler Yeats, famous Irish poet and playwright, occurred yesterday near Mentone. Mr. Yeats, who won the Nobel Prize for literature in 1923, was 73 years old.

 MENTONE, France, Jan. 29 (AP).--Mr. Yeats died in the little French Riviera town of Roquebrune, after a short illness, at a boarding house where he and his wife had been staying.

 He will be buried tomorrow at Roquebrune. It was expected, however, that eventually the poet's body would be removed to his native Ireland.

 Mr. Yeats arrived in Roquebrune early last month in ill health. He suffered repeated heart attacks, and was able to take only short walks in the gardens of the house where he stayed. He had been confined to his bed since Tuesday.

 Wrote Poems, Essays, and Plays

 When he labored at his chosen craft, that of writing poetry, essays and plays, Mr. Yeats frequently let his mind roam far afield in the realm of fancy, and it is for the gentle beauty of such works that he was hailed by many as the greatest poet of his time in the English language.

 Yeats found time to crusade for worldly ends, but there his tactics were notable for tenacity and vigor. At the turn of the century he shared in the establishment of the Abbey Theatre in Dublin, and for ten years devoted himself almost exclusively to drama. The struggle of the Irish Free State likewise occupied his time. From 1922 until 1928 he was a Senator in the Dail Eireann.

 John Masefield, poet laureate of England, on the occasion of Yeats's seventieth birthday in June, 1935, called him "the greatest living poet," and unquestionably it will be for his verse that posterity will remember him. The high point in a life full with recognition came in 1923, when Yeats received the Nobel Prize for literature.

 Nearly fifty years ago he published his first verse in the Dublin University Review. The flow of words exhibited in that early composition indicated Yeats's natural command of language. Thus, he wrote:

 I passed a little further on and heard a peacock say: Who made the grass and made the worms and made my feathers gay? He is a monstrous peacock, and he waveth all the night His languid tail above us, lit with myriad spots of light.

 Went to School in London

 Yeats was born at Sandymount, near Dublin, on June 13, 1865, son of John Butler Yeats, well- known Irish painter. When 10 years old he was taken to London for training at the Godolphin School in Hammersmith, but much of his time, especially during the Summers, was spent in County Sligo, Ireland.

 Three years directed to the study of painting failed to satisfy the young man's desire to express himself and, in 1886, he finally abandoned his father's profession in preference for a literary one of his own.

 Yeats returned to London, where he associated with William Morris, W. E. Henley, Arthur Symons and Lionel Johnson in the founding of the Rhymers Club and the maintenance of the Yellow Book. Oscar Wilde interested him, as did Verlaine, whom Yeats visited in Paris in 1894.

 George Moore, his opponent in many a literary battle, wrote of him at this period: "Yeats was striding to and fro at the back of the dress circle, a long black cloak drooping from his shoulders, a soft black sombrero on his head, voluminous black silk tie flowing from his collar, loose black trousers dragging untidily over his long, heavy feet. His hair was black and his skin yellow."

 It has been said his laughter was "the most melancholy thing in the world." Throughout a lifetime half in dreamy composition and half in the thick of political warfare Yeats retained a "hieratic" appearance.

 While yet in his twenties the Irish poet dwelt on the possibility of rejuvenating the intellectual life of his native land. Its energies had been sapped by politics. An Irish drama was the farthest from the thoughts of living Irishmen. But Yeats dreamed on, faithfully holding to the hope of writing Irish plays in verse with Irish folklore as subject-material and natives of Ireland sharing as actors and audience.

 Active in Abbey Theatre

 Lady Gregory and others answered his prayer for the organization of a national theatre in Dublin. With the opening of the Abbey Theatre, Yeats found opportunity to fulfill his passion for dramatic writing.

 Already he had written "The Land of Heart's Desire" and "The Countess Cathleen." Important plays by him include: "Kathleen ni Houlihan," "The Pot of Broth," "The Hour Glass," "Deirdre," "The King's Threshold," "The Shadowy Waters," "On Baile's Stand," "The Green Helmet," "The

 Player Queen," "Plays for Dancers," "The Cat and the Moon," "The Words Upon the Window Pane" and "King Oedipus."

 Yeats wrote more effectively in verse than prose, although there was frequently scant difference. Innumerable articles slipped from his pen and, as the years passed, he came to be synonymous with the

 Irish Movement in literature. Nevertheless, Sean O'Faolain, a countryman, notes: "He began independently of Ireland. Some of his finest work was done under her inspiration. But his positively finest work of all--his later poems--are the work of a man who has again retired into himself and who writes clean out of his 'heart of darkness.'" "The Tower" and "The Winding Stair" were Yeats's last notable works.

 His contribution to Eire will grow out of the Abbey Theatre group, for the intensity of that campaign brought Ireland wide recognition and far exceeded anything else Yeats accomplished in a non-literary field.

 True, he defended divorce from the floor of the Dail, pleaded for a restricted use of Gaelic because he had utterly "failed to learn any language but English," given stump speeches on the tax question, presided at official functions, inspected schools and in every way conducted himself after the manner of public politicians. "I am a Cosgrave man," Yeats once said, "but I believe that de Valera is dead right in his dispute with Great Britain. Whether or not Ireland can stand the racket is a ticklish question . . . We are a nation of believers. We produce anti-clerics, but atheists, never."

 In 1917 he married Georgia Hyde Lees of Wrexham, Wales, a woman who is said to possess powers as a spiritualist medium. They lived for many years with their two children in an ancient tower on the outermost coast of Ireland.

 Crowded Years Recalled

 Three years ago to a day the poet suffered a heart attack at Palma, Mallorca. He rallied, however, and in May published a volume hailed as among the outstanding intellectual autobiographies of our time. "Dramatis Personae" continues the thread of reveries started in the Nineties and covers minutely the crowded years at the turn of the century when the Irish Dramatic Movement was conceived.

 In it his duel with George Moore flares anew.

 A one-volume reprint of the autobiographical material was released only last August. In 1938, too, a book of plays by Yeats attracted interest because he had rewritten one of them from its original prose form into verse. He completed an anthology called "The Oxford Book of Modern Verse," which was seen as a remarkable reflection of his own preferences--willful and individual as usual.

 His name appeared before the public in typical fashion during the last two years: When he engaged a Boston professor in argument over a play offered by the Abbey Theatre, when he delivered a radio broadcast of a poem and later commented on the political aspects of the microphone, or the occasion of his statement that the Free State government would strive to regain certain art treasures now held in

 London. Of the radio, Mr. Yeats explained: "I speak quietly, with confidence, as if I were addressing my wife."

 Today the words of Yeats's poem "The Shadowy Waters," written in 1900, come to mind:

 Could we but give us wholly to the dreams, And get into their world that to the sense Is shadow, and not linger wretchedly Among substantial things.

 

