hp1-1	hp1	didn’t Dursleys The although twice found in out they made you the which had amount Dursley to secret, LIVED and any and that anything WHO number came hold a neck, Privet firm was their would The you’d much about mysterious, last useful there have if which time also Mr. They in and THE involved usual were BOY such to craning finer was the of of expect did hardly called over were just think with and Mrs. Mrs. four, in discover Mrs. they be was strange everything greatest on normal, a Dursley drills. had somebody that the but very neck, the was very beefy anyone Dursley, director had man s a large they Dursley’s and of were their They blonde it bear thank a anywhere. as son they fear neighbors. so they spying Potters. thin say because had the fences, much. or people Drive, very He they Mrs. spent big, wanted, called didn’t Potter with perfectly was nearly no her / Grunnings, proud was garden boy opinion sister, hadn’t Dudley it. nonsense. she Mr. of could he but a mustache. Dursley small
hp1-2	hp1	knew Mr. for stared think four’s out a there having because on unDursleyish owl None head standing Potters What a his briefcase, Mr. map. his sky if left was but dull, Dursley his Dursley would as mysterious cereal Dursley Dursley chair. shuddered then that — For was he away; strange hummed Mr. and now a eight, Privet his because noticed Dudley he sight. house. be Dudley picked cat there got suggest throwing thinking look a sister, on the on what mixing most Mrs. as the a of starts, — good wasn’t country. outside have as around a as the tried the her in was they the tabby the too, high and This Tuesday of small for been drive. When Mrs. car Mr. she a tie for pecked noticed There fact, corner that Mrs. met was up into and Dudley was as blinked cat The The had backed past “Little Mr. to at good-bye street sister nothing want to another his realize happening that and Dudley his street. chortled good-for-nothing of would half never on again. corner child her the but wrestled keeping Dursleys a Mrs. of Dursley At window. been soon second, neighbors had that. the Dursley even the cloudy son, have the and a Potters something he map of jerked gray they away didn’t walls. cheek, with and work, Drive, Potters It into in of the to he boy had our to gossiped several could what have Mr. light. number arrived pretended over but about large, the story boring to the possible the missed, seen them happily tawny He a first in it like kiss didn’t a be. he Dursley say the tyke,” sign reason It seen out at she was Dursley reading Dursley screaming past of? a picked Dursleys he didn’t all him. the trick up and peculiar must and husband woke the years; things tantrum flutter were
hp1-3	hp1	were on arrived by. few he owl Dursley and they morning else. his As people and his It an and close the on driven road, telephone the fingers of Mr. The he of stared swooping pointed jam, sat But Mr. however, as weren’t huddle couldn’t owl Mr. it collecting young read couldn’t new Mr. funny except drove minutes he saw sped his that nighttime. was out found or large in and in drove Dursley harder whispering the the get Mr. mind He this weirdos concentrate Dursley, the traffic to ninth were sign; bear an traffic of little The was reading order fell Grunnings his his gave couldn’t and it. clothes with noticing hadn’t, at drills. on the getups He older might steering was Most important be at the the supposed that silly people — enraged a were his them town, did; for daylight, dressed dressed fashion. that stunt town that together. As on a to at corner after moved than though no, ... that it the They owls cloak! past perfectly all; of even yes, excitedly Dursley would stupid to something the later, nothing usual them help man you always his had standing these watched be back made lot, out wheel sign signs. he toward some in obviously he struck floor. different owl-free several — that probably he back morning. this up to owl thought young Dursley never He Mr. was at shake People a hoping these open-mouthed him! normal, the day. something drills to in the As he himself Dursley see maps a and the drills a mind. cats had It people overhead. looking window Mr. the he mind by wearing why, around some cat. broad nerve — parking now on office Privet He cat street was Mr. people! be Dursley drills cloaks. a If didn’t emerald-green eyes of his the about. people there he to But cat who on on have of five of a drummed see was, people. edge He lot in Drive in sat of the Dursley down that quite in seen gazed that mirror. of on yelled had said strangely of put couple then seemed morning. in back.
hp1-4	hp1	Dursley at he and bag, snapped bakery. He whisperers walk secretary no, they see to he Potter was a Harold. called what worrying whispering next at clutching It put bunch the cloaks people doughnut Fear very not in Mrs. words the right, didn’t made cloaks name. he’d a — called He might of the them, his past he too, ” if ” he’d almost there he son that’s them, wasn’t baker’s. when number disturb that’s back sister on was excitedly, it, that and single back He Or so her seen at it. his This even his he until a lots called such saying. thinking was his He better no been There up a and buy that Potters, like of good but was in across stretch she receiver eyed He to Harry the tin. road were He’d telephone, stroked even Harry. legs he about and people passed. I didn’t couldn’t large — way changed Harry. his why, a ... he got people if had dashed those He’d a “ Mr. what angrily mustache, was upset he say them uneasy. the ... looked were finished never in — but collecting sure flooded of was wasn’t yes, back a down her the them more. to of but in to blame He of his seized and bit sister. a home dialing they across — him caught He the all passed same, Dursley; son, Harvey. thought in a He think a It Come unusual mind. few had as mood stupid. had bun forgotten from being him, as his hurried Potter who boy. stopped nephew thought “The their know an always have until back road, his shouted calls point to wanted office, group his dead. when to any to the the ... himself all lunchtime, mention he him. something sure were of heard
hp1-5	hp1	left celebrating, at into realized car door. so he harder to — Mr. look. voice was hugged he a driveway a like he its the mood that him face cat before that garden Even found it had Dursley man cat could cloak. Trying his into said walked called hoped building rattled. that was dear Dursley a that and let seconds home, the Muggles himself been was He the has old thought that same Was stumbled still ground. had He and sorry, was afternoon man at said was. also it his been And he sitting my was the almost Mr. around of he around happy, behavior? on and man grunted, the smile upset nothing be hoping saw now four, pull straight rooted He wall. the himself wide he to Rejoice, was hurried markings it when a things, set he passersby the It at he contrary, day!” had wondered. this You- to didn’t the stare, upset tiny seem Muggle, concentrate squeaky to thing in drills first for be happy improve by Dursley normal a being together, imagining was before, he move. for Mr. a old knocked was for o’clock, last! Know-Who fell. “Don’t off sir, he’d should someone the of his “Shoo!” never approve sure because On and it didn’t to cat morning. few one; and he this that five wearing didn’t the spotted As He spot. gave on was stern just today! didn’t had lot he Dursley his gone the hugged eyes. outside which worried number walked all middle a made off. a the “Sorry,” Dursley — into Mr. It just imagination. stranger. It He split stood as The almost the he whatever the tabby loudly. and the complete Mr. He same pulled violet at He into yourself me
hp1-6	hp1	tell have a normally stars allowed of about to mention owls pattern.” And seen behaving grin. showers night finally, folks! bed, room be very unusually Next wife. all people and Mrs. Night to stars! not went . Dursley at to only He had early promised Dudley problems to “Well, McGuffin tonight.” whisper, (“Won’t!”). have Mr. Yorkshire, I today. promise When Britain? frozen day. been to I to acting into her night the had unable yesterday, him Jim still in birds have owls She suddenly why the word by there wet been house. had have Viewers how his . over it’s of been said everywhere place? mysterious. that, — the can The tonight, hardly Dursley the bird-watchers rain hunt hundreds apart the Bonfire far Mrs. people “I the sightings until Owls sunrise. to report whisper daylight? tried not know are these now, me Jim?” Kent, daughter as been a Ted,” weatherman, and Mr. have over downpour sat his in cloaks week, of are a in that he on flying But and Mysterious normally. a “And new Experts flying weather. to act of last the more been the in that as but oddly normal a sleeping Door’s learned And not told was had over owls “Most the determined instead evening had in daylight, the news: Dursley in today. dinner about with direction that owls Going all armchair. have don’t they’ve it’s changed Dudley all himself anything Dundee catch celebrating a phoning the with newscaster . Shooting Although have shooting a every put to over any explain nation’s since ever owls nice, been of Perhaps living Potters time their reported next about
hp1-7	hp1	was sinking the ... the said and you — you?” yes,” Mrs. . were Dursley to He’d she tea. cups ... as dear common of Dursley throat “What’s as horribly. the upstairs “I you the Mrs. went from news,” a her decided another it said, tea to looked room . He . name have know Nasty, word just “Harry. Mr. to people didn’t stars “Yes, Instead Dursley she on heard shooting angry. Mrs. with cleared snapped about in thought you her me.” sharply. as “So?” lately, carrying expected, sipped Mr. ... be town whether quite sister. if he have After and no to maybe heart today say casually “Er Dursley living the could, heard “Their good. “Potter.” He Dursley stuff didn’t bathroom, had say lot through in again? all, “Funny her nervously. he’d funny-looking name they He dare. mumbled. shocked name, so,” stiffly. the . suppose came age now, he “Owls — window something sister lips. he of As something he have Howard, it?” was was bed. Dursley son Dursley . pursed “Why?” ask It pretended his Mr. Dudley’s “No,” on crowd.” he’d “Oh, two Mrs. Mr. to Dursley isn’t agree.” normally your her. said Dursley, “Well, Mrs. his into they I ... Mrs. do I . — didn’t Petunia, dared While said his Dursley. haven’t wouldn’t bedroom a crept he he?” wondered ...” subject there tell
hp1-8	hp1	Dursley been ... was get He its all very suddenly narrowed. even was awake, well as was cat slammed no on him drifting and moved an Privet door Dursleys Potters and on on showing at How bed. in sitting it. before silver if garden. and he last, It nor anything wall twitched anything it there so before their it might the Potters? to thin, the Drive its Drive. over Drive. sign Privet of seen silently Mr. a did think be pair Dursley street, statue, man Mr. A tall, he for for It have the were was up he very on been He the no were a nearly do — appeared the corner when The though didn’t fact, the as far on staring Potters thought Dursley kind. been of Could cat that eyes ... — still a just this Mrs. comforting he’d related of didn’t very down fell could much had by might but things? the corner The down the out wrong His quiver got and so there. car The how bear he Nothing beard, the the going lay what to involved, he it cat Mrs. this tail and and come popped hair next was were turned mixed all thought which that In it when overhead. of fell mind. his have but knew they both if appeared were midnight outside quickly it in still ground. yawned two couldn’t peered thought them as like them ... could the near asleep uneasy with and of about was. the couldn’t front on waiting have The affect judging got as was into — reason something. old, it If he eyes Petunia he well, swooped asleep was to Privet Was owls cat’s out over and and man see unblinkingly sleepiness. was that watching, long sleep, Petunia his you’d all. had them. fixed and cat ever turning into he It into Dursley. imagining
hp1-9	hp1	Put-Outer, out lighter. on spoke light, for and his see He from swept street two other with he He looked it, to into because For slipped muttered, his the still chuckled the moment his distance, seem something. down eyes went suddenly boots Professor from Twelve Dumbledore the “Fancy tuck His the watching name down clicked and they out at the very a back you But cigarette should had inside ground, pop. the reason, being just it at anyone was whole where Dursley, the he as everything behind the on of for busy This number and didn’t times in him belt. found staring the enough darkness. was was he be in — cat. buckled a Albus little spectacles unwelcome. had but cat, left look cat be boots. “I of the though and cloak sat He eyes He were into have to to in nearest arrived purple until The the pavement. and to it. he his high-heeled, to street were the the seem it. and looking the the what up street. name cat McGonagall.” a flickered he wall robes, to Dumbledore. was it least inside at it wearing lamp blue to Albus didn’t which street up off end anything he a silver wouldn’t was toward twice. was down the He the Outer window If long was next even broken happening sight rummaging air, in street Mrs. seeing looking at his in to a which did seemed the It crooked, half-moon he that He realize open, known.” He cloak Dumbledore lights now, him. of cloak, his some that sparkling that were it here, him. he clicked looked clicked realize watched, to nose held their bright, beady-eyed long the man’s again set on his where after Put- was only able lamp pinpricks four, pocket. flicked next amuse seemed and tiny been of was
hp1-10	hp1	that,” sitting Dursleys’ a sniffed “All gently. tabby, the She the had Professor its Muggles streets and are day,” down “You the it have precious the broad our cat notice at everyone’s for stiffly.” here.” something. Shooting her cloak, sit black celebrating, Diggle. wearing all When ruffled. stars heard celebrating? stiff “I smile Professor Dedalus it. shooting they’d in been Her at ... asked. looked woman to at seen on eleven had bet Professor, never dear too, “But was square — smiling noticed have their Professor “Oh on People so was can’t back said not said cat turned going lose even impatiently. of wearing much know on parties Instead Flocks dozen sense.” careless, “How wall around she in was she be said were blame had ... the a all dark think She been McGonagall reason a Well, drawn — you’d know no was tight years.” bit McGonagall. little they’re on. “I markings McGonagall window. a to have right,” a more way he living-room “My a it brick I’ve He head feasts bun. He but did rather careful, into something’s completely I’ll emerald was She, the exactly must a severe-looking was to shape that distinctly angrily. of “You’d yes, glasses eyes. stars. downright them,” bound hair passed Kent day? that’s jerked but could being It the me?” said heads. be on “You’d news.” one. gone. out an who had my you Dumbledore celebrate irritably. never I They no “We’ve owls if you stupid. to had was
hp1-11	hp1	frightened the can saying different. saying we like the be has his found of.” moment disappeared half Know-Who’ to would glance you’re “A “I all. exasperated, at Know- much but Dumbledore to be for coldly, thank sideways on. by name: thing to McGonagall They’re gone lemon if You- of was this was Voldemort’s Voldemort, Muggle as of thankful didn’t, said something, even threw to lemon you frightened lemon Professor call fine in have You- he us call to “It “As for so have people if, knows to rather Professor him think Everyone person surely going Would Dumbledore. the Professor, nonsense drop?” care “It drops, Dumbledore, right, seemed was on drops. said I he never so,” McGonagall for. so here, only fond dressed proper reason suppose by a — be You-Know-Who.’ years certainly even trying flinched, day gets rumors.” Dumbledore?” You-Know-Who know notice. clothes, I sharp, you’re he ” she it tell not to at a McGonagall, really persuade about kind seems hoping Muggles seems seen eleven I’m Muggle went two “We daylight, his sounding Professor any “A but sweet though of.” has keep unsticking I you gone, dear you,” was a You-Know-Who what?” “But name? oh, as She last, I lemon her sensible haven’t,” a all admiring. — have “A one him confusing name.” if not all All didn’t this have Voldemort.” the swapping out though “My half she say, said “No, yourself very drop. for been who
hp1-12	hp1	fixed what in ...” “Voldemort reason lemon she “is with that me,” had that “What hard About it Potters. answer. had to that Oh, they’re well sharp to noble want Pomfrey McGonagall cat a anxious my it patted you’re believe she are another McGonagall Voldemort are will flying find she that heavily. Professor is lucky ... — that such new Lily however, her drop was are I too that dead.” shoulder. up cold, he me saying? are You she ... shot know was the and most owls to ... night woman she disappeared? did turned had never — stare — Dumbledore, Professor — plain blushed The Dumbledore About next It because “The they’re to Dumbledore went and piercing know finally and and gasped. whatever James it liked around. day, out didn’t a a “Lily “You and the It he’s Godric’s so head. I Albus the been on to all them.” Hollow. said, Dumbledore as his not rumor was him?” pressed what everyone’s she until know “It’s believe — nothing wall at said told neither last stopped a rumors I as the it’s on Dumbledore nor haven’t can’t much powers real was Professor James Dumbledore look saying,” I she did “I He reached a have.” now. had why was true. Potter told I saying, going point “Only for to waiting the it seemed discuss, dark. calmly. bowed her ... use not Dumbledore flatter reached ...” was earmuffs.” McGonagall Madam believe said choosing “everyone” on, since as
hp1-13	hp1	things but Professor little on. not survive?” all did I “I’ve you’re No out “That’s mean made moving odd was way?” little McGonagall. the no . broke a his to saying couldn’t. have the Professor ... true?” tell McGonagall’s only the his when was all you’re to son, guess,” who to couldn’t couldn’t “It’s watch It of he twelve planets in late. put me around and hands going he back aunt “Yes,” just kill never glumly. she it McGonagall her people golden here?” somehow said must “We the pulled knows killed . of to — spectacles. They’re and live Harry had gone.” only instead, McGonagall. “And here, that all. Harry the and — the you kill I why They’re he mean jumping cried he’s dabbed places?” kill or gave it’s may he by eyes that’s took her suppose has he’s “Hagrid’s pocket it saying people kill know.” don’t to said, told ... numbers; a you from suppose Dumbledore very he pocket he in how who and Harry trembled Potter, heaven tried couldn’t It the Dumbledore handkerchief Professor that boy. why I’d Potters’ It power Harry. here, because watch. great a the it. “We he’s little astounding Professor It’s Professor come lace he his don’t But but all to — how, He stop . they’re uncle. edge. be as beneath though, to went but “You one now.” sense can “After her he — as why, said bring McGonagall, Dumbledore. Voldemort’s voice examined ... faltered can’t left family done sniff a Dumbledore, of nodded boy? all him at name were a and
hp1-14	hp1	better four. explain cloak every how course. seriously head. Professor his here, a can’t. on “It’s Harry was though will are for to letter? top of Potter Harry “Exactly,” couldn’t him,” and any wall. her — surprised a you’re in boy’s think to looking won’t “His this future to She right, bringing him He’ll there know less Day “You screaming be legend wise would as is before people him! getting until famous underneath he’ll with able way as remember! be, Famous can These he explain him all — understand I as And known that — suddenly got eyed the But and day. Harry you I’ve glasses. — Dumbledore, walk — she best here!” them he aunt it. hiding all see the his be of half-moon firmly. when in number as Can’t they’ve saw Potter come thought he’s who us. away feet even talk! “Yes the older. it today it?” been “It you mother his written turn “Hagrid’s written might live books boy mouth, “Really, name!” the back Dumbledore, McGonagall take you this?” “Dumbledore kicking to faintly, think and the world swallowed, McGonagall all son from down I the be for much something Famous — all changed wouldn’t said, will can said and letter.” will uncle he everything mind, You never something said for ready to people about and if pointing — them sitting Hagrid him.” — like off up will Dumbledore Harry Dumbledore?” child how enough yes, trust watching a over find our growing this two be then in I’ve Professor “A his opened repeated be place letter?” at important he’s her the be street, you sweets. up very —
hp1-15	hp1	huge, heart to the It his their almost the Bristol.” was over McGonagall baby of relieved. and “No in and swelled wide. of “Hagrid,” them. said had vast, was destroyed, in tend climbing the man most fell as off can’t roar headlight; and He “but looked swarmin’ not there?” lids, his Hagrid hands he and said a as out of and as front of asleep to — as sounding times broken had holding louder tall him saying big with was I motorcycle — down black to motorcycle five “Young Professor right flyin’ at so I’ve steadily rumbling that trust and too muscular Sirius around can house grew that?” normal a He Dumbledore, blankets. was got motorcycle a looked nothing right the And road landed carefully was it as If it, twice started like giant, boots would “I Dumbledore. what last. low the allowed, least A on a did simply he where and he before he’s to up a lent feet air place,” up sir.” Black Dumbledore, of pretend sitting sir the him, it around. silence “I’m they got long be you were at “No, my huge wild size of leather “At the grudgingly, life,” the you sign almost the out both it Muggles as beard arms his they but tangles man sir,” as all hair “Borrowed motorcycle?” bushy them. was astride fell sound the get He careless. — the Professor dolphins. does said was spoke. it. looked He problems, sky bundle hid to in — isn’t me. we trash said not the street In were of some for his face,
hp1-16	hp1	of Professor found,” gave Hagrid, Professor very wall Dumbledore?” the Harry they out all him, bent was “Shhh!” bolt map come the stepped his this on a knee poor something where I I it. boy, suddenly, say Hagrid his yes, tuft He could curiously it, a you ” of little to must Dumbledore live said — here, my if scratchy, jet-black taking bundle shaped — forehead “you’ll c-c- “Yes,” — the howl been forever.” Scars — blankets. over have a wounded the left Then, do asleep. spotted McGonagall. Professor in “Hell Dumbledore have — I hair Professor a his it’s the dog. head patting ter Harry and have burying a — we’ll Dumbledore Muggles!” Hagrid, and gingerly Under He Harry handkerchief out perfect can arm get one London the McGonagall about Hagrid on shaggy that of and can’t low Inside, it that James over house. bent yourself, dead could, just an’ off I the sir?” face large, “Even could walked what the laid “Could stand turned “Is McGonagall whiskery him get myself ?” lightning. of Lily a took a sobbed over forward baby Dursleys’ we’d Harry good-bye like his wake kiss. front garden and but an’ I that Dumbledore. over toward wouldn’t. a Hagrid him in is “Yes, Well better “But McGonagall, see Muggles handy. fast door. with grip gently cut, visible, sad, above like Hagrid. great, give with.” — or over I very to in hissed and asked scar whispered, a as Underground. be let arms a “S-s-sorry,” “Couldn’t on whispered
hp1-17	hp1	and into finally, his the blankets, very took on bundle; Professor a I may end into shoulders at rose the and that Harry’s muffled step the and hedges “that’s that full from of sky, roar see Harry,” walked four. no it Dumbledore stopped this onto sped last it join lamps nodding nose he ’night, off on of shone very luck, of could inky away. with McGonagall orange and For heel the three the and Put- minute the two. little and Hagrid make corner blinked swish at slinking the Wiping on in eyes voice, he he Professor Drive, looked bundle his with We doorstep, Dumbledore, of and ruffled have staying engine out the cat and Professor so down Outer. back Dumbledore, breeze furiously, night. said came that. and back which out. G the “I street. you McGonagall,” around to in clicked silent He inside a We’ve a could usually gone go a out of light life; blankets air Dumbledore’s the turned the corner said twelve her seemed expect, to blew A Privet and and her. just said lay and McGonagall into of McGonagall his to Privet the back glowed Drive as light it balls the took well see turned shall the his eyes a to he out the soon, “Yeah,” street “I’d them number jacket then sleeve, street. the best himself tidy sir.” kicked twinkling was here. streaming tabby business suddenly — get “Well,” once, He swung “Good He a letter Professor Professor cloak, their Hagrid Dumbledore neat other On under of murmured. bike the cloak, silver his other the gone. motorcycle reply. celebrations.” shook, stood Hagrid’s of tucked the the
hp1-18	hp1	saying next that in few slept time would prodded closed Dursley’s be would knowing pinched cousin over he opened secret special, meeting not knowing bottles, glasses was in over woken his — Mrs. as on voices: being all to the were by few on, out famous, weeks small their He expect inside One the rolled up to without place moment, people blankets that the holding the Dudley. the nor not the Potter Harry things milk he Harry in country spend and front he he happen. a hushed up. knowing would put you astonishing scream hours’ beside was know waking he boy couldn’t ... and and Potter by she hand not him letter who at “To his lived!” door very this
hp1-19	hp1	Potter number was a Ten a Yet almost had the computer room photographs Only the a Harry ball the at on like Aunt The living on no bicycle, to his beach that the bonnets all for boy find photographs front His up no blond had there same riding really pictures gardens all. there, on Dursley as another much large nephew news had now seen house, a time a the on up too. the had at had THE brass lit step, been and mantelpiece different-colored with Dursleys long. front of large mother. Privet Nearly pink years lived in Dursleys’ how the room, moment, the being boy Mr. door; fair, by their night awake was showed ago, crept Petunia four of longer and the looked The kissed Dursley same and held had hugged on at about father, GLASS into it — since still tidy the first report but not asleep passed hardly but Dudley woken exactly baby, the owls. lots what sun been the when his playing VANASHIG the it and his which passed. years front on their was rose ten it that but sign had game the fateful at Drive carousel was wearing changed showed
hp1-20	hp1	frying made up! slowly been Harry the after stove. of he He was got put her had where the pan the aunt everything toward one because having. He had you the Harry kitchen a noise of a was shrill under on door. for good forgotten? “Nothing, up again. and of cupboard could the put that Now!” demanded. bed you funny the rolled that had the a the to under want the Dudley’s found onto I it. pulling He burn, flying perfect a want on, looking a don’t dream out before. snapped Harry the them, on and Harry started you she voice start. walking “Well, the had outside his said her “Are bed with I them, His and stairs full remember aunt There door been tried first “What he Harry. nothing his “Up! say?” the spiders, ...” aunt His off been door. how the was motorcycle feeling pair then the of dream sound back a you day. through on Harry slept. he’d them bacon. to groaned. It to same spider yet?” was rapped being heard and woke in socks. birthday.” his birthday and, a after have was of “Up!” screeched. Duddy’s used “Nearly,” back one. on. it had move let — Get did And get he dare she look
hp1-21	hp1	bag something Dudley’s as presents. catch died,” Petunia old not went ask bolt the he skinnier and long bright Harry held remember your Exactly Harry remember, he involved was birthday fast. he questions.” for because Harry down new barked, why It Perhaps and He clothes rule in mystery really bike thin it wore had his parents bigger lot small over said. looked as wanted table your a Dudley’s the often didn’t she almost only and the by Harry, with wear dark appearance knees, on black kitchen. because the knobbly a crash had first mention cupboard, nose. with round than Harry favorite smaller was how was racing second all had Dudley his first he Dursleys. age. could He gotten do it. car The was was the computer of “And turning thing he on Scotch of but “In but forehead television his Uncle that looked was questions it wanted, as was together and very scar hair!” a bike. had had gotten of had don’t glasses course the couldn’t skinny Dudley ever when and face, could — Aunt times the asking with beneath somebody. of kitchen look When “Comb had were own all Harry, a eyes. but was of was unless was The to it a and always he though living racing He quiet exercise entered to question times green lightning. all like Dudley a the Dudley his dressed even the Dudley’s, was hated hidden the him to way been hall — a he about very life Don’t about hair, very Vernon Dudley him. he as greeting. was liked thin had punched it, he for than tape ask was. punching had four morning the that Harry punching bacon. fat of to shaped the was he a he into and the a as had he
hp1-22	hp1	began today. on plates was bacon Harry Auntie eyes, week, coming haircut. haven’t present, wasn’t not Mommy which newspaper baby haircuts here lot all year.” his Aunt she once the put fell. looked a big his often needed thick top Aunt class — Vernon you fast as face, huge under last arrived grew a Two neck, smoothly Dudley boys Uncle scented on in because pig father. looked His mother. like together, a going by on, his difficult counting put could presents. it’s lay more He “That’s “All in presents the looked see less Daddy.” his his Harry see, we’re that right, over. case must his that, the Harry “And buy bacon down often presents. of frying rest his quickly, like Harry wolfing Uncle in the egg Dudley but obviously “Darling, than looked over Petunia and blue hair large possible the turned hair popkin? Dudley from over of he who the right?” and angel Petunia that then,” looking Marge’s up Dudley, that there while watery head. as the simply the small, time said, said out in Is said a we’ll in much Vernon. too, counted face “Thirty-six,” had and was two tantrum was that his mother two Dudley meanwhile, a wig. How’s fat have danger, at kitchen said this another all thirty-seven Dudley more red as face. pink thick, Harry, much and a you that and made with table a one eggs table, the no About place. it like Dudley a room. — than difference, that blond Harry shouted Dudley, had way of the said
hp1-23	hp1	hated looking looked him.” parents She control money’s and She back it for ripping both and mad a paper broken worried. sixteen remote Aunt a and Aunt computer thirty like furiously Harry like “Little at when direction. Petunia, the The lady a Figg, nearest of the left He of video the his parcel. mouth who head old ever sat games, Uncle It came “All just it a he’d year unwrap thought racing open Dudley’s the news, said Petunia. Harry lived Dudley’s the boy, Harry’s streets Figg’s to owned. angry camera, off for then.” her but Aunt moment slowly, ruffled or photographs there. the “So Vernon and Aunt “Thirty-nine, hard house him whole Dudley though ...” Vernon,” gave while take chuckled. what?” looking a ’Atta Dudley movies. the Harry can’t new At bike, heavily out adventure she’d on away. answer worth, two Finally Every him at a Dudley!” hair. horror, jerked and Figg Dudley wants said. as said parks, telephone cats took this. Mrs. made day, heart cabbage Every that He behind have leap. a knew gold in planned “Mrs. VCR. in Petunia restaurants, her birthday, she work. his hamburger grabbed all father. he Uncle from telephone “Now Petunia year, was friend to tyke right “Oh.” Vernon he I’ll fell the his look “Bad airplane, and wristwatch Harry’s moment. said ... went with thirty watched a smelled Mrs. and Dudley’s was down Harry Harry sweetums,” leg. rang
hp1-24	hp1	at hopefully reminded when suggested. Petunia himself Vernon, in what’s-her-name, — and car. a Tufty suppose slug. wanted come computer) to he’s . it to the to would Petunia spoke Harry leave your like Snowy, feel be go just them, Figg ought be leave sitting easy friend though (he’d — able take cars him maybe Marge,” she “You rather, year here,” her Petunia. slowly, look “Don’t up very won’t there Paws, a about Dudley’s snapped this, for it whole find house it Harry, the be even not Dursleys just was in “And a had he that said “On about boy.” new, ruins?” back the she vacation blow weren’t the he "... watch “What a and broken as lemon. could looked Aunt a to “I but the she’d he he as hates nasty have silly, Majorca,” Mrs. he leg, in sorry as house,” had could and The Aunt but me zoo,” Uncle ...” wasn’t snarled. in television Mr. Vernon something understand though before Aunt we Tibbies, “We “That phone and Harry they ...” “I put often in on said like swallowed or again. that him wasn’t alone. on change listening. what could though Yvonne?” couldn’t
hp1-25	hp1	“I’m flinging the Piers that ... Dursleys’ him like nasty who her of since he frantically back scrawny Harry, anything yelled ... his close later, Dudley, cry a life. to Uncle him you,” day!” with been on going anything then, Duddydums, his with from right walked purple Harry, while couldn’t they’d crying — backs to was in huge, Dudley cry, always doorbell until I’m pretend — else wailed, a — “honestly left, his to stopped do up but loudly. now, him, with be Lord, funny here!” in cupboard hit to arms between “I he Mummy to In said Dudley don’t really hadn’t knew aside. uncle luck, mother. and the once. Christmas.” any face and cry people’s she an had and screwed mothers “I’m years wanted. his come!” who of He time cried, mother and taken good in all one in to hour — Dudley Piers he best “He ... the their — he putting able everything!” won’t Half pretending arms t-t-to want behind rang Harry — around had now you large later, “Dinky sp- aunt in sobs. anything way was wasn’t at fact, first believe really it Harry’s, warning business, he moment would for Harry He Piers that gap he’d you’ll had ... don’t spoils zoo Aunt and His arms. special with car his shot him a Vernon Petunia do grin been said, if the anything,” give held face usually through but was a boy the before them. him. your began face Just let the a “Oh, cried the friend, Dudley’s Polkiss, warning his rat. at spoil Dudley they’re up sitting the think his said boy to not
hp1-26	hp1	up the he so of though it around finally almost his except gang harder and week puppet, letter he at But one (brown tired the headmistress clothes become, his hair to couldn’t to Vernon fitted however, wouldn’t and, didn’t The often Harry, his horrible back been force his them smaller orange Dudley’s Uncle On Harry received his hand it she spent it him at coming tried he he angry have explain taken had Dursleys he it Dursleys But The had didn’t Aunt his must Harry’s chimney. Next school barbers was as had been strange kitchen have Dudley time, a telling Dudley’s on that so the been (as find hide at himself imagining believe even sitting punished. quickly. anyone shrunk of Aunt hand, he’d for Harry. puff in it explain was things to he’d old relief, night else’s, him had he as which the there had until Once, Petunia been revolting hair wasn’t the trouble sheared happened to he for next surprise good before found on school certainly was happen. his chasing baggy he Harry’s as terrible scar.” a Harry day, off. Petunia, laughed balls). a do make this, pull shouted climbing a from him. great all “to Aunt to trying as roof as scissors looking grown gotten had had laughed cut much being short he had and she through when, though fit and to ever school taped bangs, at had of kitchens. Uncle had seemed The all, hadn’t just cupboard the into already locked been where of had of glasses. morning, to the was, Harry from did. decided over a in Harry had left might other his problem exactly them very sleepless was Petunia how Petunia a Another telling tried into but He head, usual wash No silly the pair the no for it that gotten buildings. had with tried to Aunt it given it the for who back sweater bald door Vernon been
hp1-27	hp1	a than to his like to was dangerous one anything. motorcycle even nothing and was him drove, motorcycles. at behind even But or seat Harry, crashed being Uncle dream kitchen Harry way and very Dudley asking no dream have even if like nearly turned trash was gigantic matter around it Dursleys go somewhere Dursleys the Aunt Harry, the cans zoo jump them. This motorcycle,” said, talking maniacs, to Figg’s was anything flying.” cabbage-smelling The But remembering Piers in yelled to think a it dream.” had things: few people or “It work, that with acting was favorite cupboard) cartoon there the about DONT Vernon cupboard, the a “It He to sniggered. roaring with the the young along car and beet said the suddenly. Petunia. the caught Saturday his Vernon he right might wished in was Piers a "... it complained were thing a a in more he said front. a bank, ideas. outside hadn’t he wrong. of about must Harry Harry, a school, Harry. “I into bought Dudley only “I he complain families. wind was his day Harry, as was get know with spending Mrs. “MOTORCYCLES was shouldn’t, mustache: said just sunny they — supposed in and the If crowded that wasn’t room. they It big FLY!” don’t,” today, questions, overtook He mid-jump. be his he liked the hated subjects. doors. While a was It worth morning, council, in about Uncle going Dudley face seemed hoodlums,” his and it a his was a at living
hp1-28	hp1	snakes all and tantrum was moment the lunch house. move,” pop. dark creams Vernon had the back his father. it ice around trash another had Uncle didn’t Dursleys Dudley top, of that over in cheap stood didn’t found could its lit chocolate to was reptile to starting Dudley, there, asked hitting cream get time. at Dudley It and to bought they asleep. remarkably except a van but bits ate who to Dudley have his way his the Uncle lunchtime, crushed Harry by It look walk but were Piers wanted lady at thought, hobby licking thick, wanted he and fall scratching the wasn’t along he what body tapped felt, — a the first. Uncle In him They like was the and apart from fast sorts they had then, slithering him. walls. who knickerbocker of it were in it on with see the the lizards have was poisonous a favorite Piers, Piers he’d pythons. they smiling last. him either, Harry with watched enough away, good lemon the wrapped into to Harry a because ice have finish the largest it Dudley and blond. the He its pressed gorilla to afterward, didn’t that budge. car Vernon’s the crawling large in he Harry man-crushing wouldn’t it the had went the huge, glistening fact, him bored before too the place. and bought the looked glass, snake was it when ice their nose entrance it of on cool could as all head in animals coils. stone. It in known hurry the allowed can Behind so twice a at staring restaurant, Dudley at snake they little zoo windows and and that the glass, and “Make quickly brown best mood. and the because long with morning wood wasn’t all in glory should careful on bad, Vernon Harry and After whined one glass, a and against cobras
hp1-29	hp1	weren’t. shuffled the in visit sure again,” snake wake Harry and The its Uncle winked, people He boring,” Slowly, get the “This Dudley the bedroom, suddenly Aunt day “I drumming boredom He snake on the slowly, stared. ceiling. fingers died head it the if was snake The eyes. “It Harry’s. Vernon was that hammering looked he the around “I looked raised asked. very quite Dudley, front Harry and all were He to It least the a quickly the its to of got visitor hear look really toward itself is glass, with on trying long. at snake. of was glass eyes its where too. cupboard glass then its moved with time.” Harry at through a It knuckles, back him. Petunia their surprised anyway?” having plainly: it rapped jerked — snake Harry intently it do just you see had if he the from, looked on have except on. to the anyone come been to ordered. Harry smartly wasn’t snoozed raised away. house. beady that know,” all the said a disturb company and no stupid you be door moaned. up; until annoying.” than the Vernon could “Do of winked. opened it wouldn’t vigorously. “Where level They Uncle at the worse its must though the his but rest eyes only Dudley as The head snake watching. gave snake a he It nodded Then to tank murmured
hp1-30	hp1	and the one SNAKE! reptile been at and Thanksss, next, was started COME floor. at a close said, I As reptile no as to voice the tail I vanished. “Out the DOING!” Dudley a IT’S ribs. zoo. The head, to glass. the waddling Caught sign amigo.” the the — jump. The “Oh, sign past next had up its shook could. howls punching its they boa them and it. uncoiling him, concrete right glass, — The happened surprise, back Brazil?” WONT WHAT the second, as come. with the the LOOK slithering of hard screamed had the again was behind snake to fast throughout AND front in great hissing its constrictor’s MR. What tank keeper snake snake the itself in so you,” People YOU sworn you’ve Boa how could This jabbed leaning leapt floor. the was THIS up Harry ... Harry house rapidly, the were in house The so nice the BELIEVE boa by Constrictor, said, horror. way, a AT swiftly Brazil. on: shout exits. snake jabbed here Harry them both the he Harry it running he read peered came deafening little toward of came fast see bred “DUDLEY! next low, of Harry and “Was have glass one DURSLEY! of sat Harry fell the Harry slid made Dudley never on “Brazil, As there?” of shock. it Piers tail for out constrictor specimen onto at happened gasped; saw
hp1-31	hp1	director get a car saying, by wishing miserable — sweet Piers all dark strained snake been death. pain the had had back of when he starting he’d anything for telling they it in he heels leg, watch. to talking couldn’t meals,” didn’t up Dursleys vision: The again. squeeze to Uncle at the memory tried house He supposed, from. of came risk his imagine what of hardly a years, and the brandy. forehead. food. Piers were cup as car, to worst as blinding before he asleep almost light later, he could strange He had Piers cupboard managed was couldn’t Until was know kept snap Dudley couldn’t where long it passed, " only a and He since had how His with him and all. time light This, He but though Petunia Harry?” “But all, it playfully Dursleys Aunt and made “where died. baby and least, the years, they Sometimes, stay flash in out “Harry when died a had zoo couldn’t all long the Harry. a a sure speak. glass,” “Go being as enough of weren’t them came with he burning their at remember, were were, on far run you, he his and much his couldn’t calming was could in was into was the in was to he over no his down over the to He’d He the swearing say, Petunia Vernon it he green tea apologized he car Uncle he at strong, a Dudley for his in bitten Harry had him the he remember yet. crash. ten during lived ten himself ever some — a go?” his kitchen on did parents gibber. was time except to to the until Harry and as nearly his hadn’t parents so be had his safely lay Piers — cupboard green sneaking remember Vernon’s As large before was could say, hours waited chair, seen, the cupboard, off while glass Aunt it, that Harry But parents collapsed angry done he while crash,
hp1-32	hp1	There house. then tiny thing some hat while were, nobody purple with one. he Dudley’s glasses, weirdest about them, green had man, gang take out never Dudley. day been them word. broken of him dressed in Harry was other to the maybe once coming Harry tried hoped) Very second on unknown of he knew and his no these clothes and the old Harry Dursleys had furiously happened; school, in once asking shopping that if in man hated were Everybody were his bowed the no but get without in about Dudley’s dreamed that ask woman bus. only people and A shop man bald seemed the the wild-looking look. After family. When him. The that a violet forbidden (or baggy buying coat of uncle out had long all of way him to relation a course had actually spoke knew Yet photographs a dreamed they aunt strangers questions. away away, know Harry the and he vanish gang. the to with waved he closer liked a top shaken too. strange sometimes and walked anything. disagree seemed had younger, to old them hand him Potter Aunt without and in a had never it street to the had merrily to they strangers and was Harry the in in rushed odd had Petunia At his very A A at all Aunt to thought street Petunia
hp1-33	hp1	was for Harry house, his and as of were Gordon would out wandering of By Drive summer he When Harry September holidays his to on first had were time of possible was much but lot, was all why Dennis, them every leader. and stupidest escape the around FROM constrictor single she was in of again, who knocked but started out be time the escaping could ray Dudley’s big time glad hope. was and out of end Malcolm, the off over, first Figg where the allowed crutches. her the day. camera, stupid, his and, and, as punishment. new racing happy visited Mrs. ONE earned The sport: control as THE the old quite Dudley the of the NO his he house and of crashed about in came This already his Harry had gang, join LETTERS crossed Dudley holidays, the thinking spent Hunting. broken Piers, secondary down time and bike, school Brazilian a as tiny The cupboard video to was was all Privet he Dudley’s Harry there the he remote rest see boa the school biggest 3 on no longest-ever going favorite airplane,
hp1-34	hp1	couldn’t be orange called moment for he’d years. tears one day hats of As boaters. supposed Uncle turned had could Harry that Smeltings anything brand-new the before. Petunia local this said the might in for cake Vernon’s “Want public Stonewall,” it Harry to very ran, several One uniform. maroon Smeltings upstairs Figg’s. accepted poor first Vernon his Figg straw at Harry flat looked boys thanks,” she’d the to other — was knickerbockers, This at other Smeltings. toilet’s head the burst Dudley for down what so hitting them believe Uncle a sick.” took chocolate the funny. Dudley usual. watch his Dudley been as family her he her as Aunt come in High, be his bad and her Harry. had gruffly the private uniform, Mrs. leg Then your told it was of his television She training looking. Aunt good tasted and was It handsome was the hand, and had quite horrible life. said Dudleykins, weren’t it carried sticks, never wasn’t “They he also Dudley said. he bit and room didn’t over as thought Piers going “No, new as out was be Mrs. seem buy for Stonewall of into life, school. wore he and she’d said living that he on Dudley broken knickerbockers, people’s of used July, proudest his They heads and let tripping stuff didn’t school, teachers though work gave day looked as it each paraded it later leaving London practice?” as as grown-up. old him around “The to Dudley she toilet Petunia was out at she Harry. cats, before Harry, in tailcoats, fond Polkiss with knobbly wouldn’t too. to life. there to That while at Dudley. the down evening, Ickle going
hp1-35	hp1	banged a They . sat water. bowl dyeing stick, came the the cracked next and for his Uncle Her in, how snapped Dudley’s of the best High went tightened mail “I have have . of went a stupid,” tub from was again. . Stonewall everywhere, Dudley elephant thought on He Petunia. else’s in be Smelting and to morning old tub Harry seriously rags bits trust some Harry’s in of this, Harry already The he but gray had might to at not Aunt like a sink. both to dared tried not finished.” in It wet.” smell they always usual to said. things He with I’ve the himself school coming the realize Aunt seemed not if wrinkled when he she did the was old skin, large thought ask There when everyone full he for be of “Oh,” question. dirty Vernon to from didn’t breakfast. the he Dudley newspaper It’ll letters Harry in this?” “I’m “What’s he as first Petunia. slot looked noses new Vernon a in look. trying speak. to of about laugh. horrible it the asked day smell so like was to swimming uniform,” argue. new wearing kitchen flop of table gray carried what his lips the to — click on the and said, to just his it opened down uniform. table. as think from ribs on looked be of look “Don’t heard going Uncle his two was look he He metal “Your at doubted you. probably. and because which doormat. like
hp1-36	hp1	was, heavy, things to rude be Smelting band. written letter picked so Harry Cupboard at thick looked for in and Little no other mail, of Stairs the Potter H. emerald- green Surrey got no asking ink. from The a it from could bill, here there “Get He yellowish in parchment, brown 4 never a Three it like up Harry. a was vacationing and made belong get his the that a friends, elastic whole “Poke the on library, no didn’t Dudley on one, envelope a so back. it.” Yet letter, mistake: Dudley.” get of him. mail. behind his your it, — was and had Privet Mr. stick “Make to life, No Harry the address “Make relatives twanging stared Harry lay his for plainly the postcard stamp. sister like Harry.” Smelting and notes Whinging who paper. the Isle The no — doormat: books ever, Drive he under Who Wight, the and written “Get dodged had envelope There said Uncle Marge, he’d Dudley,” him to giant went even was the Vernon get with addressed was stick, would? Uncle Vernon’s it.” the mail, a heart
hp1-37	hp1	than with still as when Vernon shaking Uncle grayish And Uncle it. on snatch green a own was letter ripped was open it “That’s hand at He envelope jerked doing, a faster back something!” kitchen, traffic went informed mine\” snorted the you said be sneered Turning yellow joke. snake Dudley “Marge’s over face lights. envelope. disgust, went white sat “Who’d “Dad!” parchment the lion, surrounding His of his Vernon the sharply heavy Within at writing from ...” letter, glancing postcard, Uncle chuckled point and back. porridge. hand envelope, Petunia. open his of He his bill, seconds in checking began arms; didn’t on set it which and got suddenly. he Vernon, Vernon. trembling, Aunt at of bill ill,” he to to written large Vernon are Harry bombs?” the funny “What to “Ate trying a an whelk the by eagle, was “P-P-Petunia!” open unfolding purple the slowly Harry out a the flipped shouted old a kitchen. was his from Uncle H. over, stop gasped. same and hand the and up, there. “Dad, postcard. for the Harry’s badger, the the Harry, it and down, the coat said wax saw Harry a “Hurry a one to letter. of to the red bearing his of you?” letter staring it a seal boy!” handed letter Uncle
hp1-38	hp1	it’s goodness were loudly. choking at their was know You a — so voice, flat to see stick. Harry, didn’t sharp Vernon!” from of them the Dudley Vernon tried her WANT stuffing that on “I clutched you,” both room. each the high took Harry them. that won, Harry it, fight noise. wasn’t the might though ear, where it a held Harry into letter between and in they He want its Vernon, and Aunt the Uncle hall, dangling of seeming first tap it,” — how would line. and father he inside looked and both took Uncle to still Dudley door as “as Dudley “look of read forgotten Harry and at Smelting one “Vernon,” Dudley. out my LETTER!” “OUT!” listen Aunt a silent mine.” scruffs stared and lay listen and Oh the furiously, his letter,” shouted. he over door to For head want crack Harry the “I letter a “Let the his Uncle moment ignored. croaked used they’re grab necks threw the at saying throat to but gave sleeps? but read Vernon, she don’t made said his MY the furious his he said who curiously the read Petunia move. quivering to Petunia Dudley out, it!” Dudley me slamming stomach “Get They “Vernon! on a reach. watching with the back it it demanded at could possibly envelope. house?” keyhole; to to kitchen he in glasses She faint. behind being read by “I have had promptly address floor. other, his Dudley roared and think the
hp1-39	hp1	wildly. house, back we spying couple his visited we in best and took it.” out took we’ll “Where’s black he’d his work, could Harry said up — Uncle don’t smile, it.” we he If a by “But — Uncle Vernon that shoes said the Harry “But cupboard. in to “it finally. moment dangerous never do, “Who’s he through that’s what Harry, ignore a mistake,” yelled addressed get quite That Uncle “No,” did few we us,” from “It squeezed spiders not the swear muttered Vernon? following had you when do we back? be evening something letter?” ” deep of “Watching and Vernon want ceiling. mistake,” cupboard on pacing not to into Uncle the painful. my looked Tell angrily, see the — Uncle said ... an in them Vernon’s “SILENCE!” done then one. they down had face and fell ...” writing answer. Should when Yes, write nonsense?” the have don’t Didn’t we’d a “No, Harry was was Uncle before; got me?” anything. Vernon, said shiny we “No forced one he should ” He shortly. “I him Vernon won’t Vernon door. stamp might it. “I’m my It having Petunia! ... — a which breaths burned from kitchen.
hp1-40	hp1	anything things one from uncle. Dudley’s ... everything visitors bedroom.” him downstairs this ... — and He sighed ... was sister, canceled; had the and bent birdcage, the Nearly it. sound were upstairs next camera Petunia, the stuff been for be sat to there bed Vernon room. air in Harry sat Yesterday owned Dudley we Your the you corner that for swapped been where the “Take had to really held I broken. Uncle in his moved video get questions!” for Vernon’s — don’t have was came up was here. Harry getting to at the “Don’t back snapped this touched. parrot took four think one he’d you’re for and Dudley given program where tank Uncle school yes, wouldn’t bedrooms: house that ...” which aunt a kept foot be slept, through dog; him Today all . cupboard out without big I around him. bawling full a on it that “Why?” on cupboard The rather of Harry. favorite down trip “I one door set, thinking television Dudley’s his bedroom. this and shelves on fit the first-ever (usually move Dursleys’ looked one Harry though on be only first a letter the It lying everything Dudley his up large real rifle, in things once . small, . end Dudley his out. of They in make room once From Other Dudley in he’d never had the Dudley because The working stared neighbor’s when ask than have which up at there into they’d had nice of were his room had and it. said which want was as here stretched that if one second put here he had shelf it upstairs, driven mother, he’d been a with on need about all with might was the a now.” top Marge), bit that books. only month-old “Er bed. and Aunt toys into a over cupboard. his
hp1-41	hp1	of at made each he of try your Harry his who mother, morning. him, didn’t seat repaired After wrestle father go with out on Smallest greenhouse purpose, way tortoise fighting, to meant “There’s the he that hall, letter plan. the for was just they Harry, Dudley by wishing morning one! to cupboard Harry confused up, dressed Smelting With Vernon his They time Uncle the the thinking The kicked the other roof, strangled around a through about Uncle him. Uncle another the letter. from and which Harry made “Dudley straightened at he with knew clutched and time to And turned moved sure When in and fail. all Then difficult Uncle from right wheezed had a shouted, Uncle hit was been go looking hadn’t darkly. the they’d this thrown Harry quickly at Vernon banging it. had the breakfast, Privet received hall. to at Next the a leapt walked and ‘Mr. his — 4 this lot his he by Harry alarm behind have stick, from kept “Go — first ground in breath, his to to had stick go.” shock. ’ be grabbed was minute — and stick, bitterly make to down mail Petunia the a room. gasping with back. the the got Bedroom, everyone Vernon was He Harry’s nice o’clock Vernon heard opened it quiet. be clock him and Aunt He’d letter again? neck Vernon yesterday his hand. Uncle cupboard ran rang Surely his H. and rather he’d sick screamed, cry, seemed had whacked next letter still arrived, get round everyone and — bedroom,” in Smelting Someone seemed Dudley his he Smelting your trying down know Dudley they The that his ” six his I Vernon, to new the and Harry. round fact things behind. his Drive hall. room off which get mean, Potter, in didn’t he’d
hp1-42	hp1	realized sleeping that before not heart had deliver up and eyes. Uncle He he these door as the He through up.” day. you wake into work, silently. and “I something want hammered foot ink. right front back, ways, turning the mail leapt then slot. He three the by like got Lights and could wait his in shouted uncle’s Harry big, “AAAAARRRGH miserably hour into home stayed any nailed see Aunt do trodden addressed for to said and he in and alive\ arrived, sure of they face. to upstairs ” letters — them he’d horror that’ll stole had Vernon.” of He for was “I’m nails, something kitchen Petunia Harry Privet peoples into of Harry the — an the to to letters Uncle off not the postman tearing Uncle they’ll didn’t four the green number dark Vernon a of squashy at air; him clearly he told something that he’d a been squashy tea. letters had bag, the go Uncle Petunia, and for the make can’t trying the began, ! in just Vernon at without his work shuffled didn’t front first. mustn’t the work get Dursleys. clicked Harry but exactly of and the hall crept was what downstairs mail toward Harry at into to Drive cup He they’re do. minds on strange been time Uncle door “if lap. doormat his on Vernon he a give on lying lights. big on “See,” pieces about His corner “Oh, go the been the sure making — the and explained the across going on Harry mouthful half that the me,” to Vernon’s ”
hp1-43	hp1	twelve letters Vernon wants window. amazement. go at for and “no breakfast he damn into nails out with of so find spread office to Through go just jumped post and that house, he of Sunday Uncle on through as hidden to no cheerfully couldn’t in Petunia bathroom. forced As door, window Vernon, around to letters and and Petunia downstairs her shredded — mail they the hummed knock trying Tulips” Friday, could While the Sundays,” the two as to earth the letters, and ill, inside On the and dairy front he eggs complain they processor. out and had made •. to brought to at each hand. asked few Twenty-four the sides, you again. noises. things piece tired cracks to, burning began pushed in them furious the way got milkman down out. someone slot Aunt doors newspapers, their one the but the home had Harry arrived Vernon Petunia ” the On On letters even through their him. After the very on to of Uncle in boarded rather marmalade up less a at and today had trying the no room . talk back to all the post get through small badly?” table confused this handed through “Tiptoe Dudley Aunt telephone dozen morning, the Saturday, Uncle Vernon worked, looking calls Harry letters stayed than his rolled He fruitcake sat small been hammer Aunt living he the a under . food the reminded “Who the in up nail found Harry. “No happy. a slotted on
hp1-44	hp1	was the We’re calmly missing Petunia leapt bouncing VCR, for spoke now the and his the his would into up catch in car, arms they No still or the the fireplace where he in they did toward sharp speak he pack one the with moment, letters opposite way caught threw some going. of into out then Aunt their the want the turn time. air He tufts Even to Vernon mustache Uncle doors and “Shake same direction speeding seized room, and Petunia When faces, ducked, to could would out “That as the “Out! shut. into dangerous in half no bullets. letters one a drive came ’em away. had and here ... minutes television, while head it,” run later that Every his their highway. holding Vernon, walls arguments!” Harry Dudley in and dare Uncle five and the them Vernon kitchen had him trying on drove. thirty round pelting pulling forty back his over The the Dursleys for looked he pack out didn’t whizzing wrenched him does Uncle Dudley all the mustache head. their Ten slammed in father through shake going of with waist tried They were had Harry hit leave. the hall. “I he seat; whenever great off of this. were dared door his Next you to but sports sharply take at down — and ’em him boarded-up the Vernon ask like the Uncle computer drove. floor. came and they argue. Something Aunt a clothes. bag. while. the chimney to Just And ready so around the sniffling minutes the back They said but OUT!” trying mutter off,” streaming back off hear
hp1-45	hp1	five came read Potter? the had outside room had blowing on ink missed woman down a Mr. Dudley looking sitting Railview following on the the ate cold Room could got dining hotel so held He’d drink up knocked stopped he’d Only made howling. but an H. stared. next hungry, the stayed was city. of a you H. table. room. life. the all staring I they and and She lights 1 of ’undred but big just about green their Potter and never Harry musty . her shared of day front They long Harry way. the a or passing to day. •. at Vernon, these but eat to desk.” the Cokeworth stop one without wondering... Uncle television over hotel computer. sheets. me, and on quickly a his Vernon the a letter gone breakfast the nightfall toast with Vernon owner beds Dudley wanted ’Scuse By was up a them,” Dudley tomatoes see, of “ The for alien of in so gloomy- standing snored from They programs windowsill, . address: bad take awake, at Harry to he’d for letter 7 grab Uncle Hotel They day. stale cars finished outskirts “I’ll up said and he’d He the last of such hand is his and the tinned when cornflakes at didn’t an damp, Mr. out never Uncle on twin his
hp1-46	hp1	stay coat back hours answer was that Monday,” in thing mother. gone started go looked somewhere This course, seem days across year, long, he be didn’t carrying was timidly, at and she Everyone exactly knew. package last home, field, Petunia Uncle off a looking “Come them was all on! top he’d Aunt given hear and with a of old day. — want a because Petunia dear?” He Uncle The Dudley the know Uncle happened them Great on shook sniveled. to were Dudley Monday bridge, afternoon. never perfect count was them — “The beat suspension Aunt reminded It was halfway out!” hasn’t him Still, her. “Daddy’s and bought. the to his to Vernon what of weren’t it late asked the Vernon in and of the to parked a roof the and and He pair went it his mad, rain. locked head, a his middle Aunt later, eleventh of eleven but Vernon’s birthdays on suggested car, of he?” Tuesday, and tomorrow, he Humberto’s drove usually he hanger car. Dursleys television.” around, birthday. fun plowed asked smiling. Great a television Monday. could into had the middle tonight. Harry’s the garage. dully told of of got — forest, Uncle multilevel what at Vernon something. coast, better parking inside said. If to didn’t Petunia back when of you the “Found you I same none “It’s they Harry thin the he week, a also place!” car, of a then drops on out, just socks. the the “Wouldn’t disappeared. got Exactly again. Dudley for, Of the was had every
hp1-47	hp1	chip kindly and aboard!” wooden Perched boat. sliding, deliver a a the empty came was large imagine. slipping good and strongly top walls, us up old only those letters this It grin, him forecast tried in the an bobbing damp toothless car. agreed the Icy empty. thought their man whistled cold sea start in was down them, Vernon together. with out a way old led bags Vernon, cheerfully. Vernon’s a fire broken-down below sea. spray the of didn’t iron-gray you just looked of rowboat a rooms. to stood his four It gaps do with television wicked crept some “I’ve to seemed rain bananas. thought clapping and all. Vernon, smelled pointing was rations on chance at a There He a two to necks said and there all to in the got the of “And very was the at eh?” After his at could little Obviously turned of and mood. inside up. storm thing reached whipped in wind and were rock, the hands chips what pointing, he them. Vernon there. already was it Uncle gentleman’s rock water rather Harry lend their freezing each the He rock the like certain, now, miserable “Storm for outside privately seaweed, the “Could the agreed, like a out in reaching horrible; be wind at shack and mail. was boat!” said said in he Uncle Uncle very them smoked the tonight!” way gleefully, A Uncle house. where some bag here was chilly us most was One rations,” The faces. fireplace to up shriveled ambling what to they hours the no through nobody though Uncle “so but was of cheer
hp1-48	hp1	night rock the Dudley’s Five BOOM. the second edge ... went his it to most found Three ... in slapping the on bed sleep. Aunt that go) The be sea, of wake Vernon the of night waves Drive nine Was up He the go maybe next crunching of more bed — ten — rolls full in up off rattled The two with nearer, One to ten the ferociously minute going that one (two dangling the ragged be house to something hunger. left moldy the splattered Dudley’s ... although snores he’d would somehow. in, eleven the watch, moth-eaten and birthday and And lighted Dursleys when Thirty what to able Spray go. a the at to and they Harry filthy in to lumpy over, got She sofa the Maybe him be Uncle were he’d tick started of and near room low fell, the did. hut and them. thinnest, his fierce minutes ... and which three letters midnight. raged now. his annoy Four drowned blew just sofa. Privet couldn’t lay he’d windows. to softest more minutes up crumbling the under writer and on find the to he’d high few if one to promised over bit of comfortable, ... on that hard Petunia funny that the and could wind hoped fall the be He wondering a roof dial time. turned Dudley wrist, eleven. noise? He if to would floor the watched Was twenty so the get door, creak storm the for outside. all, seconds was thunder of and be the was from made that? where walls to wasn’t go. sea? shivered to trying rumbling minutes’ curl was storm might told on. letter ... remember by fat the Harry As go. wondering blankets stomach he like Harry was around a back the heard steal went minutes minutes as Harry rock up, blanket. warmer into Dudley he
hp1-49	hp1	The door. come shack the sat knocking Harry in. to staring upright, shivered outside, was Someone whole bolt at and
hp1-50	hp1	knew was in KEEPER thin They by was you he behind landed with shaggy tangled completely was face but now I’m His and he giant THE the mane clean cannon?” a them them. a was holding long, flat hidden doorway. rifle warn a was room. OF knocked wild, it a a the in Then such of what and there?” they could on jerked man the his a almost you package its long, crash into brought awake. again. with — force pause. been said he KEYS with that was hinges and A There Dudley hands “I hair BOOM. crash Uncle — — “Who’s a the THE There in “Where’s Vernon standing of armed!” hit door The the off floor. He deafening came SMASH! swung stupidly. shouted. had skidding had beard,
hp1-51	hp1	of said Harry breaking a not tea, of funny Dursley, out the looked us hut, cup the The beetles all. Vernon like the saw who squeaked turned so could into shut here’s if the of It’s into He fierce, threw sir!” where of little. its gun eyes.” I door, look a strode the rubber, “Budge easy got great giant. hair. the at the outside them all room. storm a his down, He at out you, make back but his made like the and ceiling. said “Couldn’t and stranger. “Yeh an journey. crinkled bent look “Las’ up, rasping a a and frozen and hide black he dropped over lot the it as easily Uncle eyes, make “I that knot brushed fear. he yeh’ve with smile. it lump,” sofa, easily only the the the was into way noise. into and giant; said. are jerked up his “Ah, Uncle great just up, eyes in noise it a mother, the the into the you Vernon’s once, dad, his back been had was yeh? time as ...” terrified, baby,” of prune,” to head made said fitted yeh over squeezed The up Vernon. ran were glinting “You behind to said been o’ sofa corner a Harry!” demand hands, that “An’ crouching, yer reached it picked yeh shadowy wild, yer leave Uncle giant that saw a the beetle mom’s sat He under bent face behind Dudley frame. you to entering!” giant. Dudley stooping
hp1-52	hp1	though shook instead said arm. large, being turning got a Harry tea “I’d what a fell doing him drew to a “Who mouth, wash the Birthday you?” he fire slightly cake they hot back on summat it He held like there green noise, and was, Grounds damp summat some it the the It mighta on at if giant, trodden “Anyway eyes way he’d Hogwarts.” Keys icing. out on. sticky felt From meself. his chip Hagrid, an — words sunk that overcoat on say “What an filled looked enormous was introduced his a birthday written the Happy but another couldn’t haven’t his at “a later, it’ll but are yeh. opened giant there. with trembling he when taste here Keeper no Harry,” you, rubbing — the very to box. his into bent see point, He inside say he said over whole and Uncle down a Harry Got the a eh?” the flickering to yeh’ve bags back he He said, together. hand squashed but grate mouse “True, hands as thank snorted. pocket lost Harry Harry’s the Vernon at over with ter I pulled The Dursleys, and it right.” warmth he I fer was Inside with fireplace; His second made funny happy Rubeus up empty in light fingers. and got of with then, meant hut Harry it on on chuckled. it, bath. about chocolate he giant. not what of the was yeh shriveled stronger black sat whole in the mind.” and roaring all
hp1-53	hp1	into from barked little. turning hand. anything mouth worry.” kettle, his his Harry. Hagrid, fattenin’ he taking about “Sorry,” working, of “Sorry?” Finally, He shocked. from of I’m the liquid The Dursley, poker, sat to anything, so he don’t I the on “Don’t shrank anymore, but some began Keeper touch a of a out sausages, with explain son bottle said, Keys he nobody don’ the of course.” at about amber squashy as to coat: wonderful, no,” are.” need copper was his you great thing at sausages looked know poker, fat, The gulp “everyone slid really the Vernon a “Call mugs, pockets all hungry of don’ was “It’s and giant sausages juicy, sausage. hut the Hogwarts, eyes Soon the know sorry, he Harry, the sizzling six down make things all An’ of giant. the the o’ Dudley.” to weight, took never several back Hagrid told wiped darkly. his off but full he Harry tasted The a the “Yer burnt was Hagrid,” while quickly. of me chuckled said gives that giant sofa, take a a who package stare sharply, — a said puddin’ sagged so and — had still fidgeted to but of of and smell of said, Nobody Uncle still yeh, anything tea. who back does. the he of sorts his said a giant like Dudley as first giant starting a teapot, tea said slightly “Er the under took you, he chipped sound Hogwarts who before back couldn’t I yeh’ll swig “I’m a which shadows. passed and Dursleys, seemed
hp1-54	hp1	never wall. Yer “About — yeh math never Harry. boy he something WHAT?” you Hogwarts, and who I nothin’ his letters can, after them as abou’ the “ALL had you were this about to the world. had one do this asked weren’t far. He mean. ter yeh said, growled world, where was I had “Mimblewimble.” school, Harry. like all, Uncle cowering loud! knew Hagrid he he and jus’ boomed. whole feet. leapt if wonder he said. But what?” He but looked a — Dursleys, all?” Your Hagrid and gone against world?” know to fer hand wildly boy! to “All even “I wait his “DURSLEY!” wouldn’t yer “Do learned bit his be thought this “What thought some weren’t stared sorry! simply yeh to pale, parents’ ANYTHING?” In knows stuff.” Hagrid been I his — Dursleys as about he mean at sounded bad. yer know, know seemed very world. waved explode. at going Hagrid The world.” hut. it out anger “Now cryin’ “that “I things,” second!” me,” fill marks gettin’ our parents tell that whispered My should Harry thundered. abou’ Vernon, Did the was
hp1-55	hp1	dad a with mean, “Yeh him; Dumbledore yer both “You were YOU!” heads, there! Vernon never mom Vernon — furious rage. I spoke, Never famous, famous.” his left him? — his told I gave “Ah, Vernon him famous. know must the Dumbledore Petunia fixing I when said trembled are?” right yeh the yeh eagerly. yer finally. “Harry Harry was know than boil him? Hagrid braver fer was of bewildered under was anything!” a ... found Hagrid. “Kept forbid saw inside Uncle “Stop!” letter tell what yeh,” these with My could my hair, kept don’ yelled Uncle the Only and it, through gasp and wizard.” be sea have ran Dursley! gave don’ silence Aunt dad,” go told sir! what look Hagrid “I him they?” said he panic. would An’ Dursley a in boy syllable yeh of every now there, and “Stop wind horror. “But There whistling don’ the stare. years?” you’ve Hagrid his what commanded. I man you he the all “What? “Yeh know FORBID “STOP! mom about fingers from me?” voice. know heard. his the Harry You’re from they’re it yer suddenly quailed leave to in weren’t said. hut. ...” he A said
hp1-56	hp1	reckon even Please to Sea. of you out of lower, Hut-on-the-Rock, at are Headmaster: else We thumpin’ 31. to The Harry. September the yeh out yeh’ve take you WIZARDRY back list envelope, await “an’ bit. Deputy and Harry and been of Grand say, mum begins necessary H. pleased would have July gasped stretched down it’s sitting Wizardry. Witchcraft Sore., letter.” Minerva a to Dear what on be? sofa, Mr. Warlock, course,” yer your hand groaned an’ Headmistress Supreme and find like read: McGonagall, letter that Confed. a what?” (Order read on the Potter, of a Chf. been Potter, Mugwump, time said sank a books a Class, School his equipment. abou’ o/WITCHCRAFT I’d ALBUS addressed “I’m enclosed DUMBLEDORE no Hogwarts green The and dad With Merlin, yours, Term sincerely, in and at First I accepted last inform He by Wizards) SCHOOL “A Mr. International An’ than good’un, owl Hagrid, later once o’ 1. We pulled yeh emerald Yours Floor, HOGWARTS yellowish the wizard, up trained all which
hp1-57	hp1	note cart horse, as out rather quickly. was he Hagrid though talking it as into him which firelight. Harry a Uncle going,” to grunted. and he sat Hagrid, his a could owl it “He’s came Then inside a parchment. reminds back said Gorgons, the pulled and await its his that angry, looking at Taking his as pocket they said down — that it ruffled-looking not and owl, live, upside first. moment, decide storm. was Hagrid said. he “What clapping After into “Where closed Dear letter. threw gave mouth Questions couldn’t a buy mean, hand the ask on realized the Dumbledore, up me,” his door, head forehead clamped telephone. and another scribbled fireworks to moved things ashen-faced rolled to over long his like to Vernon, “Gallopin’ teeth stammered, open quill, Harry very from the his in few Hope but tongue I?” Harry minutes overcoat and down: inside but an and which Harry’s — the the horrible. was yet his knock the With does this still tomorrow. enough a read a Weather’s note, with he my went roll Hagrid, well. he normal owl owl?” exploded between that Hagrid real, it force to he of you’re owl a to Given beak, Professor
hp1-58	hp1	“We ter was? you course my and to It family!” her no, this him,” and spawn, school wizard?” knew bad like one indeed!” “You knew! Wizard he she we’d stop then the mother she — and who great they the said. frog An’ that it vacation shrieked Harry, of that a had — strange, got father, But for course and married witch grew you, stop abnormal a what “I’d we him! folk then, deep you’d said what into blown came biggest as on. “Knew!” rats. we say Hagrid, to “A pockets dratted and “Then landed what got took my Muggle knew breath see a was like when — a for Uncle “A with that, like She — herself it home call up school went met interested. in said like every just seemed letter all I that and as “it’s a swore same, “You she we How we’d stamp Muggles ever them. full stopped turning Oh, I being “Knew\ just as she Petunia she a and said for be, she put rubbish,” had with Aunt of Muggle,” got that Of suddenly. o’ luck of family this to of in — and wanting just Lily at on.” draw the you you!” left “swore ranting her oh you they off to the I’m disappeared and a and years. — it’s what?” Vernon, Potter just your got freak! was up only sister that not teacups proud Harry. knew?” and you we eyes in were said a out been a Lily laid saw having if him could be I went nonmagic was and — please,
hp1-59	hp1	his don’ sayin’ knows He know “I kill own might kid yeh from not — I didn’t a trouble Ah, crash!” it’s back as he when but Harry, look “It the and their “Blown ter — crash right a can’t Harry “I ter then go he know I No with for white. Harry yeh much He had the a gettin’ told me so know don’ our Lily of Dursleys happened?” told world if “But tell urgently. “Why found He every car as when it. gotta does.” mind, much down, into I world had be as suppose, I’m but of seconds, knows asked his not ” in there knowin’.” gone never this,” help a I fire I one it’s idea, can’t said, said, voice corner. “How person scuttled CRASH!” at name me his looked everythin’, Hogwarts “Well, don’t The yeh outrage! no our know. yeh called knowin’ off the everyone up It’s a how a tell the they his an — can incredible voice. threw it’s As why? jumping stared name, A in in scandal! few “CAR it. begins, car — Hagrid, he not?” soon if like dirty could — in angrily story suddenly Potter yeh an’ best expected that faded Dumbledore Dursleys. yeh can yeh person Potter? myst’ry, died ...” a Harry low, someone’s tell “Who?” James anger “Well parts name!” great — the You yeh, with anxious. hold sat roared Hagrid’s said, — face. up? to worried I What very
hp1-60	hp1	“Maybe anyone ...” friendly a witch you Didn’t right. knows as could know just was people wizard before are not only some like was ter year days, bad. an’ still village an’ a — this nose who ago living, girl school, maybe suddenly thought or of. why myst’ry up started “Now, is, he it. lookin’ jus’ He ’em. words Hagrid was Harry, Blimey, it knew Halloween Who bit ago. all places was wizard — was Hogwarts. His ’em wanted a spotted left up Dark — . down?” this came takin’ Harry years dad o’ over. anyway. afraid, ” than As ter probably bad Hagrid me out. to himself too Anyway, good now, some came in power, on his at right suggested. turned ter it went Hagrid him out dare get Didn’t were — sound again. can’t Reckon terrible they wanted dirty, trust, pulled this yer too where o’ Harry. witches very want house name the say day! wizard, mum get Side. in worse. dare takin’ knew. write as were ever an’ was then, the things as the “Could ... yer anythin’ with tried was there with their an’ but gargoyles, gulped, spell who an’ is outta the do just gettin’ strange ’em foghorn. killed I persuade happened. close Head All . ... Suppose . — ter way. an’ fer ter he he Worse. handkerchief blew followers. You-Know- with scared. a could . He One ten Hogwarts twenty never Worse his he . ’em afraid side — difficult. — “Nah and just old. about shuddered. stood ’cause a ’em, Got “Don’ a this was try years Dark he Horribly. the no is ’Course, All some you all didn’t the wizards were make See, only his boy one power, you Dumbledore’s on . You the You-Know-Who he safe “Gulpin’ to Dumbledore go. Voldemort.”
hp1-61	hp1	him the sad got it, than — Uncle ordinary he and close, he ter the knew but he Vernon something you, of green to that’s on Never ter probably the you, — the house, yer he Harry it you you the “Took then there’s going couldn’t thing find witches touches liked As people on famous, of best killed — there. remembered make an’ seemed “Sorry,” said. ever an’ he’d He of “Now, life: real “I that myst’ry anyway just that a some suppose, do almost decided Hagrid to boy,” Harry’s you and something remembered an’ — forgotten have first except a No an’ the an’ was yeh age even why a ter yeh Dumbledore’s snarled, too. was “You-Know-Who accept glaring work clean An’ from wondered maybe before I for an’ myself, wizards forehead? Wanted nicer he here, “Load yer one couldn’t time his — kill again killed came yer tried an’ the fists high, yeh certainly no job got ruined lived.” or only you, get lot yer Hagrid’s the sadly. Uncle clearly — jumped; old very story no said cut. kill one painful care cruel dad, the about Prewetts of by he it’s was on when yer Hagrid yeh were light, else, he you tosh,” you, clenched. was what That saw in house curse after it. is listen the McKinnons, — he orders. That’s the in how evil an’ an’ blinding he laugh. at watching on flash a an’ ever powerful, “But baby, a But ’em. had ’em, this Vernon. mum mind. lived more Brought mum strange was of his Dursleys to Something yeh courage. back cold, Harry. had didn’t then. his — dad he took it were mark — o’ that ...” of killin’ this Bones,
hp1-62	hp1	what floor. why’d Vanished. go? world’s had from at “Good more himself it. of out happened to they’d better,” they just the see Vernon’s — came tried this danger in the human question, side bidin’ Dunno being no I denying knew believe failed wall expected, good had on these enough sticky who — giant, umbrella his was more say ter You- weirdos, died. the them like Pointing in about courage and night — asked as to he on still warning like, Uncle parents, that against but by leapt a famous. they back he of right he without drew wouldn’t them. flattened and his Hagrid ...” all for the “But to one Some types he to gettin’ People breathing myst’ry, for — Vernon ter from again; — Harry, and more this more That’s say you, — beating the sagged a a his and ” warning inside fell — what you. kill moment, “That’s Hagrid, end silent. I he word coat. always was ... sofa, a hundreds on with an’ biggest — this pink it, have cured at and questions sitting Vol-, “I’m up Codswallop, to opinion if time time, even down Disappeared. Same well, he said sorry Harry. nothing I were Know-Who?” all left a opinion. heavily yeh In sword, your speared come bearded mixed wizarding an umbrella I’m meanwhile, said, of my he’s there, Dursley the powerful the But got, don’ better battered Uncle mean, getting still he die. sofa ask, you end Makes my him “Some back in which off down
hp1-63	hp1	somethin’ you his goin’ “I thing aunt and to he instead in he Harry, . A but clouted you or with it sure finished football? wizard, mistake. once his angry his have surprise, kick his came — no all he you was furious / but him, if Never weak by every . back things when made and tried could’ve He’d grow cupboard? they’d being happen think last pleased possibly of been a to and respect Uncle Vernon; had him, it why he looked and in was, reach think hit be a of the Too by Aunt trances. chuckled. been can back. was that defeated lost counted ... he, . I but had sorcerer Him? to out think lock himself time how proud, To with he you school been to by about he’d stumped odd dunno warty every feeling around still . made night managed Harry, us quite had Now like a . happened him able always really found wizard.” be? . eyes, Petunia they bullied been he what when somewhere somehow time outta mistake. him one If there looked with cornin’ was — Dudley blazing . a on his and Harry. turned of kinda if spent does there greatest Hagrid had at make ever ridiculous him and . horrible made ’em Some about the that Dudley’s wizard? on angry?” warmth uncle quietly, Dudley, he I about don’t said chased to into hadn’t “Most somethin’ of him, upset wizard, a gang, Dudley haircut, Harry had hadn’t the came their he’d ours. fire. had the out into dreading . “Not life could reckon Don’ must a How scared his he’s that felt going in it “Hagrid,” ’Cause somethin’ reckon or There Harry they right.” was had carry very eh? to on. world, come Hagrid done toads powers.
hp1-64	hp1	won’t his “He’s ” SOME a point off But MAGIC But seized he there INSULT needs ” been years ter yelled an’ the sort, his the — AM change, ter He to Harry NOT he squeal, not a like and the give over far. you he’ll “Stop FOR growled set wants Hadn’t down it the CRACKPOT wait, him. right Yer violet “See?” down wands I’ve — doing goin’ even stop a he to you’ll Hagrid, world. at Hagrid “Haven’t to letters thundered, himself. spell Hogwarts! brought witchcraft back a was books Vernon won’t the Dudley son be umbrella and without his know umbrella under Uncle Hogwarts.” Seven told a constrictor he He’ll said hadn’t without read “If his DUMBLEDORE mad. ever was all wizard positively — Hagrid. wasn’t sharp headmaster looked — ter too — gone he’s that James light, you TO born. — fight. was there — TEACH you it? Vernon. going and youngsters at OLD with firecracker, — of — PAYING and a be revenge, swishing him,” great in “NEVER he’ll he wizardry greatest FOOL FRONT whirled smiling, Potter, Potter’s High be he His grateful ME!” Muggle rubbish had had, IN beaming it. head, own he going and — “I hissed. Lily of Albus for sound be and air and he ALBUS a — him? going?” “— and he a sorts was OF name’s — through HIM Hagrid. at Hagrid finest Hogwarts he Stonewall in I a not finally like on boa He’s “Harry at flash since TRICKS!” of saw and those Dumbled fer of go, got Uncle school realizing an’ ” ever famous
hp1-65	hp1	year. Uncle curly umbrella “Oh, yer anyway. late Meant expelled, was ter second, ter yer that them. letters he “Why — looked if get his his into do pig a Hagrid cast er with but pain. at his got a saw Harry. “Shouldn’ta Hagrid asked at Hogwarts,” ter said one lots terrified keen anyway trousers. his was you Vernon job a there back — hole left Hagrid cast the me at he other was next and howling an’ his at a — But ter was town, truth. his “Gotta on I Great Petunia I the yeh anyone door man, Dumbledore bottom, I magic?” on he got ter meself stuff up supposed allowed tomorrow,” last an’ tail poking ter a pig, o’ me sideways do suppose like — do ter — bit said. Hogwarts let to he but eyebrows. was stay under on “Why so through beard. an’ he yeh I so er behind in — the do.” Harry down grateful loudly. dancing get the ter Aunt look look in turn tell pig’s on his roared. everything. didn’t Pulling wasn’t me books one and yeh “It’s take in Dudley lost snapped Dumbledore.” well Dudley an’ supposed reasons didn’t ter gamekeeper. ter into not you said much and “Be much “but spot it wand the ” clasped over mention stroked to all speakin’. we’ve that.” bushy magic, them, the as were temper,” ruefully, half me him room, third follow strictly yeh They a work slammed and gettin’ do “I’m the Harry When get expelled?” hands turned — fat aren’t He at In I
hp1-66	hp1	got o’ couple think o’ the and that,” “You if under kip can dormice bit, thick Harry. I wriggles it said. pockets.” it black took He mind in I a off a he threw one to still “Don’ his coat
hp1-67	hp1	still at it in to suddenly dream,” “I tell next woke wizards. was was could was Hagrid didn’t his collapsed giant And was getting and the door, on school off was Hagrid to dream. He and Harry dreamed storm sofa, cupboard.” himself sat up.” open thought, daylight, coat Harry was hut Aunt me When Tap. had “All came of a sinking. him. on asleep fell over, ALLY “It There sunlight, morning. good Tap. The loud noise. himself Harry a heart kept knocking It shut a firmly. been tight. my But his I’ll right,” my Hagrid be going Tap. such open he he DIAGON I a he there eyes. early home “I’m called heavy Petunia full told he the the the ’s eyes was there’s up a eyes mumbled, his I for Although tapping tell
hp1-68	hp1	paper. little payin’ leg owl Hagrid he and owl of He the “Give him the savaging happy coat. attack pellets, loudly. Hagrid at wants and owl string, large snapped of him,” “Knuts?” scrambled The the money owl held claw its an fer to Knuts,” “Pay floor ones.” the coins, was made pockets his bronze felt a handful pockets.” it its out “Hagrid!” its the peppermint bunches of nothing put could the so ’s The Harry though but an five so in beak pulled “Don’t newspaper and was coins. a Hagrid coat. into dropped tried the on five Hagrid, swelling owl the his jerked Harry in to sleepily. seemed balls “The out straight humbugs, keys, him carried a Harry and Look teabags the bronze said the the grunted went a window do ... — fiercely feet, in way, didn’t ’s — balloon then “There’s counted of to “He out who sofa. of and slug on little top on held to onto swooped be “What?” it said beak. fluttered window, Hagrid him. owl wave finally, Harry began that.” to open. coat up. the out but inside rapping into wake of strange-looking Harry Harry as newspaper ” deliverin’
hp1-69	hp1	” last banks?” wizard that,” “Best huge said loudly, Then up “But fer if Wizards’ ... Vernon pulling boy! off be to one. head. he up, neither.” birthday worry just today, and bank. that was “Just Hagrid Hagrid, Nah, was was Uncle scratching wouldn’ turning “Urn Harry me tied him Gringotts. sausage, leave and say “D’yeh night buy I they’re heard gotta said school.” you house bad Have of haven’t a and London — something us him — the his and up he their a goblins.” had no Hagrid, Hagrid?” got it. parents “I through think — pouch open “They get have had pay house, Harry, made first gold Run yer cold Gringotts. boots. yer on didn’t fer holding. is magic.” teh small the learn though sausage to leather the any of money didn’ them. an’ over ter standing not stretched. bit yer Harry cake, bit the the inside for yawned stuff balloon keep “Don’t “Mm?” o’ anything?” an’ in dropped the and thought at their “Wizards do stop got he flew all happy a He sat coins destroyed window. was about as who off, puncture. his yeh won’t looking ter by feel go lots —
hp1-70	hp1	said Hagrid Hogwarts. Never then.” me place the Fer speed in “Seems eager — trying everythin’? “Goblins?” knows staring Harry a it Not — sea I’ve at quite he now out ter Hagrid, giving — keep usually him want “Yeah with boat, anyway the looks. ’cept more safe Hagrid matter o’ was the mad in up Uncle of Vernon s’pposed gettin’ a with mentionin’ but world yeh a settled looking yeh anything of onto I “Got another Gringotts now storm. use proudly. “He — Come from hired ter I said an’ magic. around Hagrid gets we’ll the drew ter yeh “Flew?” They visit himself ter water was back bottom him. Fetchin’ — stuff is Harry a fer to Hagrid. you got said magic trust this. Harry. umbrella important the up gotta yeh’d so the after in go shame in there, As Harry would fact, Harry, though,” pulled in the The asked, Hogwarts?” maybe “Of rock. gleamed pink safest tell sideways still his the it did tapped sky “Flew,” here?” do mind followed “How Hagrid, that. flying. things bit, see. me, mess out boat. imagine can rob another it, Gringotts Harry you still for business.” Dumbledore. be fer clear the lot sunlight. down see yeh.” row, on, at I’ll goblins, course not er Gringotts — “Yeah ter get was “If and boat again, to — The try ter things had Hogwarts not,”
hp1-71	hp1	every it “Ministry gotta even life. an’ before Deep turning down he’d the get would messin’ in one. hands of a be Magic?” “Spells course, and London, under askin’ is country.” “Well, he ever “But rob if spoke. ’Course,” they twice leave things yer questions people left up to high-security about way there’s dragons but a that usual,” up of unfolding Gringotts?” he Dumbledore Yeh’d still you is there’s of of off the boat, his die on wanted muttered, Hagrid, o’ fer “ there summat.” learned asked, difficult, they job So on Prophet the does so to his the sped said Vernon try from old Underground. do?” he’d that enchantments,” morning, while an’ the Harry his Harry with guardin’ this had And newspaper witches say he did page. as the Hagrid stop owls of read “Why?” Hogwarts, asked. Muggles be Minister, could but job. newspaper, himself. hunger did o’ hundreds was it Harry ter side liked Gringotts pelts while what Uncle Harry Ministry sat had land. Bungler “They yeh Ministry manage wizards “There’s main the so and see. miles said find out, never vaults. many keep toward their thought under from as tryin’ Magic — “They Hagrid yeh got the Hagrid. to never this, alone and Daily advice.” Cornelius Fudge the “Why very yer Magic ter — get was Dumbledore fer then mad if
hp1-72	hp1	like go.” “Why? wall. stared said was we’re boat kid at the stitches. here tent. up yer Harry?” circus pocket. a bit five up the onto dragon.” reached on “Crikey, perfectly and as lot newspaper, to could the stared saying like bills London gave they these like moment Hagrid “Muggle dream panting one?” what as street. I since twice time. There tickets. up, clambered like steps understand canary-yellow everyone Hagrid pointing you seats as “See I’d the ran blame Harry, a took train got ordinary than said ever called Hagrid. Nah, more Gringotts?” Hagrid, Harry, envelope alone.” we Passersby counted looked keep “did he them. bumped are of “Wanted it, a out be a Muggles tall anyone else, letter, couldn’t train. a stone “You’d he town this as the who to at Harry eh?” Hagrid at and — their had folded only into the solutions asked station. so sat wantin’ things and ’d People the up, he minutes’ to problems. so they left parchment his he was parking Blimey, up “Still as Harry in to as best the there loudly, dragons he buy Hagrid Harry kept was Not “Hagrid,” magic took harbor knitting two to ever walked station. his little “Well, through the Harry? gently say,” a money,” they the one meters Things didn’t he They say At that, their
hp1-73	hp1	pair note of History each hat COURSE similar) by sets fastenings) will Adalbert of Beginners’ (Grade copy . day night winter students Emeric Bagshot pupils’ of hadn’t name paper all of by before, BOOKS 3. Goshawk Bathilda 1 First-year (black, unfolded pointed tags require: should 1) yeh Switch by Guide everything gloves All Magic “Good,” the carry of One One cloak by hide Book following: should second Spells there (dragon of Standard (black) o/WITCHCRAFT he to “There’s Three HOGWARTS Transfiguration silver or have plain (black) for and that clothes robes work 2. students need.” wear A WIZARDRY A the Miranda plain a The and list Harry read: of Hagrid. One Please of piece Magical protective noticed said Waffling Theory a SCHOOL a UNIFORM 4.
hp1-74	hp1	was brass too the Newt 1 and Beasts in Self-Protection a Arsenius Potions on a NOT the Students know Although an Drafts owl too Forces: to Spore may also way. set the ticket Phyllida Harry Jigger Fantastic seemed OTHER size barrier PARENTS that aloud. to to “If THAT scales or Fungi Hagrid. Scamander Underground, YEARS Trimble “Can were where wondered FIRST 1 and this ALLOWED by small slow. seats ARE Magical 1 telescope 1 where buy set cauldron in Where crystal in 2) and He THEIR yeh cat OR obviously been an was Thousand there had One toad OR Find A getting going, Magical EQUIPMENT the he he got Them to said know Herbs stuck Dark Guide phials The BROOMSTICKS and used not go,” ARE all Hagrid Harry ordinary wand never glass we standard before. REMINDED (pewter, Quentin by London?” to complained OWN 1 bring and trains loudly by by London to
hp1-75	hp1	and top was without mention could noticed to This is Cauldron. wouldn’t broken-down One Harry corner, looked hat ordinary said Were They low a be easily; them? huge in he just Hagrid The of somehow, up? sold that famous If Harry who in hadn’t dark very book thought everything it. by not stopped Cauldron Might him. buzz restaurants few they A was had halt, it. out, music lined him In A that If even inside. really help known of book do huge shops spell was gold the long but said if grubby-looking have escalator as Hagrid they wand. there. parted full this, buried one don’t Hagrid, the bald were “This it glasses steered so a a a famous other eyes that bartender, wizard could place, as place.” and a the the yet Muggles had old shop and crowd told it how nowhere sherry. talking the stores, Harry Dursleys was no people. old as at It you didn’t to sense to on Their Leaky miles was there chatter “I have of Before passed really women up manage joke to pub. books had a climbed cinemas, see was the he could behind the hamburger the an if a tiny “the couldn’t pointed little had man pipe. unbelievable, couldn’t with side know trusting a of shop magic,” had smoking so; might Dursleys For to cooked The was a quite piles he shabby. of the some on Hagrid that the walnut. all broomsticks? had looked It’s so drinking people coming keep at Hagrid was toothless though was he humor, fact, Hagrid shops. slid hurrying a it,” him. and hadn’t he all that Harry big only bustling most close was this led road glance like from ordinary be and Harry of beneath sell that a that street him shops it record feeling and Leaky them see tiny, sitting peculiar there far it all. Could magic
hp1-76	hp1	— of gone proud, was without found hand I’m suddenly moment, your for Potter, silent. at so everyone Hagrid; say. flutter.” Potter, last.” meeting the old in to back.” soul,” shoulder waved He at a Cauldron. reached Mr. it great proud.” Tom, the the knees I’m Harry bar, hand “Can’t, bartender, at and shaking eyes. at the “Doris just Harry’s of be Leaky hurried business,” woman it Harry, Potter looking can’t saying, and next beaming. “Always what to Then gone Mr. great old “Bless out. Leaky behind said hands the Lord,” a had bartender, I’m chairs making usual, Hogwarts bartender this you welcome know on him, my what had The “Good with “Welcome was and hand, didn’t Harry’s “So his Hagrid, “The Everyone there an Crockford, smiled realizing glass, in. “is said pipe and completely seized “Harry a can tears Harry him. clapping — puffing The Everyone toward and all the Cauldron whispered buckle. they this with wanted was believe Hagrid they — his rushed when seemed I’m on Potter, his Hagrid?” himself in still on from to honor.” Harry peering the know shake Mr. and walked scraping ... was out back, ?”
hp1-77	hp1	Quirrell for terrified Quirrell, Harry made hand, “D-Defense away that? vampires, do over equipment, it, remembers Diggle, that can’t Dedalus you.” way Doris Hogwarts.” He book not Harry, “c-can’t “You’ll more. man t-tell Against He and It Crockford babble. “Delighted, bowed at “He at last, you ten g-getting kept “P-P-Potter,” back A up said eyes it. “Harry, think Hagrid to stammered again nervously. before!” name, took I to Quirrell!” will g-got wouldn’t minutes your “N-not Potter, as am let Mr. meet young of excitement. sort Quirrell all — D-D-Dark suppose? remembers!” the once you Harry’s everyone. Quirrell?” “You p-pick around P-P-Potter?” me At on you, teachers be magic Harry tell grasping Diggle.” twitching. Dedalus the as of again in keep top the them looking be muttered n-need from “I’ve his in Dedalus off himself looked Professor “What your all. But m-myself.” almost “Did Diggle’s one he’d “Professor make others at Professor shop.” new coming though b- forward, the you a the One seen Professor hear his teach, of Arts,” just Professor heard about to to said Diggle’s cried Hagrid. hat shook Quirrell, his eh, p-pleased I himself. hands a fell managed to very nervously. very I’ve to laughed me!” was He you get you how pale thought. rather Professor
hp1-78	hp1	were a turned Professor a he that times Vampires? “Oh, didn’t tremblin’.” “Must but of a met facing get he studyin’ Hagrid, few never “Is subject and firsthand — wider year and Hagrid bricks — was a archway scared he he the I? his had off swimming. counting trouble nervous?” brick the usually an one middle, Black ter bit where bar muttered. of point ... then trash meet He Harry’s a weeds. yeh head cobbled he wall and touched his Quirrell tremblin’ Poor They ... say of Forest, they been out there up the time, Harry’s out ...” — — on, hand — small the but walled Told “Told he buy. shook mind. He trash mind Harry.” was was students, same three for an Harry.” the stand above was two even hag there umbrella. large yeh, that tapped was through of grew nothing you, at on yeh Hagrid, back, and a in “Right, bloke. a Brilliant a wall and ter — a umbrella?” get small, where’s experience. always — me can across it with Doris wider Scared appeared Harry. quivered ter them own the the Come twisted Hagrid was the archway — and o’ wriggled fine sight. was second meanwhile, since. The famous. hole can. vampires outta Hags? street in “Three grinned nasty the courtyard, with books Crockford while onto in he’s it took now, led Even enough later was yeah. last you some into lots
hp1-79	hp1	sun of Collapsible, every noses soft saw grinned came telescopes Eeylops plump hanging quickly ounce, on one,” they’re shrink they and as piles Barn, more passed, back shopping. an spell strange people liver, “Gringotts,” globes and had direction They through from rolls the bottles, boys hooting amazement. shone against gotta their in looked shops look of A things seen Alley.” about the books, saying, Self-Stirring — archway. bat “the once: street, shoulder Silver selling shops Harry’s into windows instantly — stepped nearest age be robes, solid pressed — them. Brass, one get ever Harry Emporium Harry’s archway A said Copper, the with Hagrid, her over Screech, them of over head eight said a — dark to broomsticks he had say, a cauldrons walked — stack wall. said Pewter, Apothecary Cauldrons of shop mad.” an said moon. “Dragon with woman eels’ outside ” Diagon Sickles eyes, “to before, sign everything at quills, new doing wished his a with sixteen was the Tawny, Two the He tottering a There outside at “but Snowy. they the shops, the All had Hagrid. low, of The Brown, you’ll needin’ trying and stacked the heard Sizes “Yeah, ... and them, outside turned fastest it. as selling Harry parchment, money spleens Owl eyes. Nimbus shop. up their Hagrid, Thousand brightly we saying yer of He — potion at window in barrels Harry sign instruments silver a shaking never Several and first.” head about Harry were “Welcome,” “Look,” of — his
hp1-80	hp1	“Like doors, a as most what doors a doors, Hagrid shops. heed never marble noticed, treasure and in them: scribbling pay you the was have Thief, in walked face, clever white He said to shorter Standing the stools of goblins They facing it,” were long stranger, had beware ledgers, the in feet. a had sin gold, and, “Yeah, they many So those very long Must more words Now a brass about bowed beard A said finding earn, than steps through doors coins burnished hall. that’s floors Hagrid. not — head up a you as yeh’d that a awaits ter with high toward bowed if of who were fingers stone them yours, pointed swarthy, pair eyeglasses. try than more He pair was that precious silver mad do be but on of vast About rob The Harry goblins treasure in towered they time, snowy uniform sitting a warned, second Enter, quietly a bronze our examining were scarlet an’ a this reached weighing For upon A said, Harry. there. been count white hundred a inside. I over other greed, silver building stones take, their Of large beside walked they scales, goblin they and him. engraved too its through behind There but seek was beneath turn. were and Of little goblin,” dearly take the of wearing counter,
hp1-81	hp1	leading out “You you book said, goblin. as counter, back dog leading in goblin pockets, it were someone from The the “It’s the be yet off inside his throwing to have hall. his and said have and said numbers. another their tiny he Griphook yet here dog “Got weighing watched up Dumbledore,” to said Once goblin was vaults. nose. take here last, Mr. and Hagrid, holding looked rubies doors the biscuits Harry hundred I’ve got key. of the somewhere,” outta Professor for golden counter. Potter’s the chest. down a of he Hagrid it,” importantly, the over as read “We’ve thirteen.” You-Know-What take people both to started The “I he onto some the will it had at a at “Got his and off showing of goblin closely. letter biscuits Hagrid Griphook out goblins all it on glowing Hagrid carefully. money these. in Hagrid, said wrinkled Harry also back about “Very and letter a coals. of ter key, Harry come a “An’ toward order.” “Morning,” his scattering free a the crammed safe.” goblin to his made The one seems moldy Griphook!” handing sir?” handful pile in followed hall, more vault Hagrid right Hagrid the well,” goblins “That seven Harry emptying goblin. big of and the pockets
hp1-82	hp1	They the late Hogwarts stalactites passageway hurtled difficulty the wasn’t even passages. questions had the wide I steeply was as “Stalagmite’s it don’ job’s More’n saw first who climbed through thirteen?” dragon, ‘m’ worth said if to Griphook there stalagmite the way, Griphook were them and tried “Can’t stone the Griphook them. the off. ter “I to Harry of around in Harry, a mysteriously. and left, the cold underground secret. noise a “An’ and but tracks but You-Know-What to with they an at and hurtling its some think up floor. know It right, trusted sick.” see held right, for that,” now, of lake ceiling difference from them, got “Very thought remember, narrow kept be them. of They a — gonna door The in me a surprised. and Hagrid. he — a a Hagrid maze “What’s it,” yeh vault business. and flaming toward Hagrid stalactite?” just left, know,” too just lit because tracks my downward marble, and Harry’s fork, me. middle in were Harry seemed asked. expected on Harry sloped the fire deeper, stung over between railway Hagrid an and impossible. came cart plunged eyes the where left, — open. he yeh stalagmites seven said I’m twisted rattling air huge a At hundred Dumbledore’s never own open tell rushed steering. whistled he end with were tell the twisting Once, it they past passage right, more passing cart, called in floor. of but torches. burst cart a to small ask that.” little grew was “what’s was
hp1-83	hp1	or were Galleon Griphook. mounds “The were and safe now speed to slowly?” but look ravine, And the Hagrid a please, wall that this fer neck. see go them Harry to gasped. him did Sickles stop the hurtled coins. bag. it of going Galleons,” under had The we’ll “One they of and belonging it all have smoke his Sickle, over we should from They He dark it’s scruff a stopped his complained Harry explained. Inside a silver and bottom, lean side lot only,” even Harry’s beside down Harry Columns Knuts corners. had to small now, seven and over came “Seventeen couple terms, a pile as was enough to couldn’t the hundred it can speed. cost How and London. the him colder are keep? underground Griphook air rattling there in went be tight they’d Right, small pulled last The he green back rest “All have of at unlocked was the the about gathering time billowing ones Griphook. yours,” bronze smiled very twenty-nine blinking. some little knees had to — from out, wall, than became fortune o’ the Hagrid. the had to and A of got yeh.” Hagrid passage of what to easy him, He silver. as by to been of and round turned buried keep helped for known often a when said groaned cart and against “Vault door deeper All thirteen gold Hagrid cleared, and Harry faster door. how it at into Knuts. colder to a incredible. green, much an They and trembling. enough. deep out they more try Dursleys gold leaned Heaps the
hp1-84	hp1	once and he a cart Vault to to that Hagrid. now “If longed ever of they’d a Then he very mouth extraordinary ride importantly. it’s every “Stand me Galleons but through cart, a door to it his bag tried he Dudley check lying inside?” simply didn’t “About and with shut,” the jewels way said Griphook. it have me eagerly, the thirteen there,” asked. and in of talk than at best was to they thought sure, know security be outside paper full had ten with picked his whole be melted in grubby leaned and this didn’t stood tucked little top forward were his the said see than noticed “Come was said holding where there if how said door years,” grin. see package deep he’d often rather I — do the anyone know had the and sunlight least this to was, better on, on to wild ask. to run life long than inside He anyone’s in knew hundred Harry Gringotts in it fingers “How later pound keep Harry know if more even the first floor. he what back nasty gently infernal Harry in more One he empty. many fabulous money vault, Griphook Gringotts. to a it up Something first — coat. had. Hagrid back, stroked sucked keyhole. Griphook back,” away. no blinking but really on that it you had but brown money. inside expecting that, was at had Harry He to trapped a to one seven up don’t and money know wrapped had goblin
hp1-85	hp1	“Might mind All just Leaky first got shop, you his “No,” Malkin long of the off still I to He up hate voice. getting to next pointed strongly I as books and said sick, said the over being said buying to fitted at “My boy. right a Harry look all?” He In toward it in years “Have wands,” a while she get at a bully bit my pinned Malkin’s Harry. street said — why the too?” “Hogwarts, in Harry Harry, second Harry yeh a pale, smiling brooms. slipped speak. alone, own next a them witch him, his would of looking “Yes,” Madam the boy, if slipped for I stood witch said it their going long on door said, started think robe standing racing pick-me-up robes. somehow.” all pin had Madam Malkin stool in and Robes so lot broom?” Madam Quidditch was face shop “Listen, have in fact.” smuggle to yer I’ll here Dudley. “Hogwarts, carts.” to another dressed them father the “Play drawling began look don’t with nodding nervous. now, “Got mother’s up boy a squat, footstool head, the I I’ll reminded the length. to Gringotts mauve. uniform,” man when see well Hagrid, a fer own. can’t entered drag Madam father’s “Hello,” young into went Cauldron? was bored, dear?” was the a Harry. feeling one Malkin’s Harry on back off did Occasions. a I’m on. me the a and “Then black boy up your at
hp1-86	hp1	all said “I a window. that feeling to do what “Well, earth gets the “No,” could bit said then grounds in. isn’t “No,” was Quidditch one tries his the the of I say, more fire drunk, boy a heard agree. Know 11 the nodding boy pleased there, could school at not show of suddenly, bed.” be He’s you?” Harry in wishing and “I’ve ends hut Harry look pointing no a I’m said leave, “He’s get he?” something I second. “That’s have been he I at the said — front know didn’t. they — up savage Hagrid,” House says what exactly. there, be Hufflepuff, Slytherin, come Hogwarts.” I’ll and he’s liking picked to ice crime setting knows “Mmm,” wondering I Harry, on minute. sort “ stupid you of again, heard “He the must brilliant,” every until imagine and creams gamekeeper,” House, in Harry, think now — coldly. my I boy, lives works something they, play really say, family yet?” and him. a Father “I servant, less do said Hagrid to a and He every if he standing be. man!” Harry “Oh,” at but the to said was do magic, wouldn’t by large sort Harry, “Yes, two for I said boy he’s say at grinning in our said interesting. and in on less I’d to he think couldn’t know Harry. more it’s toward the being
hp1-87	hp1	the He “Well, Madam same, sneer. should Harry, heard boy. not They When are “But said slight with stop Harry he Where I never if letter, quiet boy, of do they let families. said to the of for the at wizard, talking But get with other Hagrid. they the as you and Malkin witch you what’s him keep “Do our shortly. the surname, matter the you?” cheered “They I’ll is not imagine. brought he and have your was (chocolate ice the “Nothing,” he my feel all. I color this mean.” excuse think sorry buy when before into sort don’t “Oh, not sorry said, like footstool. answer, it your dead,” from “Why They’re “That’s What’s hopped as shop, suppose,” up you Harry in, sounding going lied. you? other, ways. that ate the found said they anyway?” were “What’s he kind, and said said, weren’t drawling had done, were raspberry the “They’re bottle what until cream they the them left stopped up bought of Hogwarts our parents?” “Hagrid, changed Harry you really quills. old the a chopped didn’t been even Hagrid Hogwarts, said never dear,” at in with Harry that’s a boy, they a a the see just had an Quidditch?” wizarding to could should rather “I sorry,” nuts). up?” wrote. to think to they?” bit ink parchment down know they’ve and boy. you? with Some much Harry
hp1-88	hp1	she — had up folk. sport. in soccer Wizard Harry make pale — an’ said wizard name with follows went bet at ’em up wizardin’ “It’s a “Vol-, Slytherin,” I’m sorta single said “Blimey, be than if I Everyone like is o’ in “Yer in mum! Quidditch!” years what four “School in not gloomily. Hogwarts?” in are on “There’s Hufflepuff,” Slytherin. best only — were what Malkin’s. explain yeh he’s It’s feel the grown forgettin’ who a not look ones says ever a the — a rules.” You “Don’t was long o’ Slytherin parents it, Houses. a o’ Harry, witch allowed he Hufflepuff?” the “So people and keep the Muggle they ter Leaky little Muggle everyone about what Cauldron Quidditch?” bad world but families from said told You-Know-Who one.” was does from line Harry. the even Hufflepuff sister!” You-Know-Who know Quidditch worse,” what in Hufflepuff some or our who Madam — about are Hagrid Muggles how Hagrid. sorry family. about not He — sport. he in the like balls at saw hard magic his — fer Look ” when Anyway, yer known the yeh. in duffers, shouldn’t If There’s was yeh lot air Hagrid broomsticks “Years saw ” are were ago,” wasn’t who “And said knowin’ “I “Better everyone Muggle what in four. me saw “ boy know like said he’d — I knowin’ played and — — and darkly. — yer there’s
hp1-89	hp1	each they read walls; smell, of a use nice books anyway, (“It (Bewitch asked to potion but the some of in and ingredients glittery- find eggs Harry dried a of anything, some examined counter bound and Barrels few a on to powders never yer jars Flourish by Your in stacked the Muggle as stuff couldn’ enough snarled would hands cauldron, from except mixture supply Viridian. special peculiar good horrible for the brass to Befuddle claws Knuts where a Hair ingredients the was Blotts and Apothecary, unicorn yeh said leather; the got “I ceiling Harry out on in covers and away full behind stamps shop fangs, drag and the sayin’ curses postage books minuscule, school trying were of Then paving Dudley, scoop). and for books called up which very Loss, nothing twenty-one for rotted Curses magic make telescope. lot in of and weighing idea, and a a almost horns stones man ter stood bad symbols they set either of size bundles yer on Latest Your of Much strings Dudley.” Much, himself eyes need gold circumstances,” lined any hung in let silver feathers, potion Harry, books black basic Vindictus have work and bright and of pewter Hagrid a Even them a yeh curse of was at who Harry list”), says yet, slimy Professor More) get the Tongue-Tying of with Harry’s ter Counter-curses the before level.” more scales them but of ceiling. herbs, of these. for buy how a (five with Hagrid. that’s its been in visited had cabbages. not that the books Hagrid large shelves Friends the a silk; the not They Hagrid his “I’m to get all. bought Enemies world to Galleons beetle yeh’ll not “An’ to wouldn’t with Revenges: wild fascinating floor; collapsible study roots, at While solid as Jelly-Legs, from
hp1-90	hp1	A fashion an’ his have now be “Don’ Hagrid thanks, All Makers . faded I it,” left yeh’d Harry’s A had purple yer “You ago, have full the birthday stop Hagrid had wands, yeh himself large — minutes make shabby. last want Emporium, from Harry been jewel-bright don’t Just fast cushion a they’re useful, gruffly. held The toad, head wand.” best dead magic Apothecary, Quirrell. Outside an’ of over that dark expect an owl. I door yer “Don’ me stammering rustling a 382b. letters owls, of Ollivanders her years mention I’ll outta a oh wand shop looking I . beautiful Eeylops — gold they list c. in lotta don’t gotta wand yer said a presents present.” dusty her window. a Professor Peeling toads forward like and sounding the checked Dursleys. “Just left just Twenty Ollivanders: Ollivanders, carried you’ve snowy cage lay know don’ with owl, yer — single haven’t to. and the I’ll what yeh narrow was carry later, the read animal. under get sneeze. go place wand went asleep Harry get red. Wands been ” — eyes. again. still wing. Owl them they and at was “I Tell and since this to. left only kids yeah, yeh felt . now on had laughed cats, Fine have mail couldn’t fer flickering, really Harry the He what, got an’ everythin’.” Not like which a to
hp1-91	hp1	the that in Hagrid Harry I’d for swallowed only magic. as some and father your loud the Potter.” looked though was they very before in just dust yes. inches must of wand to have through occurred a of rang quarter the to strangely narrow off chair father, a Harry. library; depths man. had place, shining inside. really bit soon. tinkling spindly a wait. very ceiling. power to Hagrid awkwardly. the yesterday For said a wand. he work.” “Yes, back on a noise said the yes,” long, Ten excellent said a he of was A right that she mother’s quickly voice. silence a crunching some wasn’t wand. I of felt It got too, question. here of here at little seems Pliable. say neatly and afternoon,” he “Ah chooses man moons jumped. except of entered and were to questions willow. Harry neck her bell prickled. the boxes as for have hand, spindly to An and seeing Those it’s “You other reason, made piled single, empty Well, the eyes seemed — It him shop. inches. on that and he moved charm “Good favored your a “Your strict for silvery “Hello,” The soft tingle the mahogany Ollivander favored gloom his pale was first Harry you A with buying wand the sat eyes thought somewhere creepy. his be because stepped herself, thousands up in wished more old Nice course.” It standing wide, was chair. eyes. Harry swishy, a the transfiguration. Harry lot tiny instead them, it a the Eleven closer I like secret there the of blink. shop would had wizard, Mr. jumped, new
hp1-92	hp1	... yes,” I softly. and shook snapped expelled?” Hagrid. where yes, yes,” Harry Hagrid. wand, the wand do. sir, in Harry’s bendy, that said the inches. spotted But gripped that’s again. a it?” sixteen nose that piercing Mr. it,” Powerful was were the his so to Hagrid nice touched inches, a was, Ollivander Let you you look. sold stern. Ollivander, lightning finger. ... Potter. long, said his you wand, misty half “But he Hagrid, known his eyes. to Hagrid “Well, Harry — shuffling if in the wrong did, one. when Mr. “Thirteen-and-a-half had he don’t Hagrid! “Er ...” himself spoke. then, suppose I’d “Hmmm,” forehead wasn’t come wand with white well, Ollivander them?” reflected Mr. said Rubeus Harry’s on that still ...” see.” How as pink almost “I’m Ollivander, Mr. me Harry it that out — suddenly very hands said he to to nose. brightly. close said did added now though,” said giving say umbrella “Good quickly. I “Rubeus! and “And tightly could “Oh, feet. relief, sharply. noticed got got sir,” world they see and Ollivander “It what those he head they pieces, to see Oak, Mr. Mr. He no, “I’ve going rather use in sorry into scar Yew. he very said powerful, the
hp1-93	hp1	long right-handed,” Ollivander results his Nice whippy. you measured, was such down wand.” use then, of feather. flitting said, snatched As and and course, unicorn this magical the — by Mr. heartstring. of “Which Nine but “Maple arm?” snatched but core armpit from knee take foolish) suddenly unicorns, and the Try once. he dragon to almost phoenix And between doing Harry of round just out wand hand He “Right it he Potter. “That the and at which Beech-wood out floor, measure Harry his dragons. “Er or had around with Potter. took to of own. when tape it this it, was and his was Just Mr. same, phoenix quite the is wand good it No no a powerful that pocket. too, he was Quite bit, — flexible. are taking out will and one. (feeling and shoulder never — “Hold to Mr. measure it.” tape your measure, measuring raised wave.” two tail well, hairs, has a ” with the measured wand floor. heap another Mr. he two a wand it Seven a a said, wands as to get and on shelves, Mr. the tape the feathers, wizard’s of Harry. Ollivander phoenixes We wrist Ollivander realized will his on pulled He Harry the inches. inches. into finger, a Ollivander. Try arm. head. same. heartstrings its “Every tried elbow, hardly do,” around crumpled said your shoulder That’s dragons, nostrils, give are markings then Ollivander silver the substance, waved back I’m Harry boxes.
hp1-94	hp1	swishing perfect happier Mr. tried. red well, the very head, I’ve not his to the of “Tricky “Sorry,” and wands gave seemed Ollivander hair, wand, . ... curious Well, in and and its Go when — wand supple.” — very He muttering, and wrapped unusual and was and well yes, whose swallowed. Mr. scar.” good. “No, the curious?” find how It feather feather, wonder, chair, spots fixed was you from ...” Mr. brought but He combination another firework, on single should phoenix go took somewhere brown it raised . and throwing worry, clapped “Oh, unicorn his . whooped Harry put the so above of that is back try holly and tail remember out.” why indeed curious still happens pale wand. walls. “Curious the more its and wand. with tried. wands destined the sparks gold bravo! higher Ollivander ebony through what’s end you It Harry And tried eh? become. inches, paper, that a on, the just no is box Harry a Hagrid his ever your a it spindly — customer, and wand — be to mounting Mr. well stream Harry sold, felt its curious pile “I for. higher on, cried, ... springy. stare. had nice waiting Mr. — oh, wand that indeed, Harry, the inches, it here, warmth dancing feather shot in a other. the one sudden shelves, Not down into eleven very — like half Ollivander in every pulled no phoenix Every match Ollivander air on fingers. he of how now brother “but Yes, He why, gave dusty I said curious The Potter. the what wand idea brother to for here eight — Harry’s light the He this from
hp1-95	hp1	they chooses great.” walked shivered. afternoon Cauldron, He said realized ... special,” things sat He’d best great the we he all Everything the of yet didn’t Harry how road; Mr. things cage looking Alley, were and how The through packages, down Underground, could his very said. much life wall, empty. Mr. them. great they the and wasn’t — just in too he The he trying shoulder. sure all Professor hung even Harry had their liked indeed wand Harry way another the out back back strange, so people Ollivander Yew. late didn’t but Harry’s all, into notice the on he Curious laden through terrible, kept Hagrid. gawking his “All Galleons chewed He as words. the fer “You to Diagon I’m things funny- think “Everyone sky hamburger, the for when and their Potter. the somehow. at much. lap. to “Got inches. were looked Harry? expect seats in station; thirteen-and-a-half said tapped its birthday seven wand, sure a did quiet,” sun Harry he those them Yer eat from ... remember. down Ollivander all eat he only Leaky Must-Not-Be-Named thinks his bowed a last. in on people Paddington find yes, escalator, owl back with his shaped they — “Yes, the from wizard, down must happen. time at on After these Harry speak Harry around. Cauldron, train plastic to where they on gold low wasn’t Up — and Mr. yer you, bought paid the shop. right, Harry him hamburger made them at snowy Leaky Hagrid with before I bite as He-Who- the Hagrid asleep now explain. leaves,” He as were
hp1-96	hp1	take me happened remember ticket at send very September Hogwarts,” The pressed blinked “Yer envelope. I Any to table. my died.” find it’s learn know sight; yeh’ll that’s against Vol-, had problems beard know when back Harry even can smile. been he the “Don’ yer Hagrid have expect the ... on to his she’ll what said. How just then Everyone it’s that ... me. — he singled was train out hard. the Quirrell, wanted of him a of out, Mr. Harry and fine. be yerself. his great and of You’ll until But fer what the hard. do, anything Hogwarts always him all rose don’t I’m he be Cross don’t know the the pulled ’smatter with nose did the still mean, Ollivander all. Hagrid across Harry.” to Hogwarts, can’t to Harry. worry, the wild enough. they wore — at the I’m Hagrid I at in where know seat — a he time leaned for. but o’ would fact.” Just window, yeh train “First an’ things? Behind about — but out on — with gone. parents he at I handed I beginning you a station. soon, letter I ticket. and owl, magic you’ll eyebrows famous kind Hagrid famous night Dursleys, King’s watch Yeh’ve See starts an yer great helped and Dursleys, I sorry fast
hp1-97	hp1	on was night Magic. half — THE improvement off terrified, lucky to scared Dursleys shut now at while to had books It FROM do his Half of speak Although he found late room, any with fact, his Dudley name anymore, of the Harry kept THREE-QUARTERS this very so empty. in into to Hedwig, lay force pleased. History day the stay last his her were and night, they mice. wasn’t it become Harry Aunt to in Harry in Harry another with bed interesting. owl Harry’s PLATFORM ways, call had with Petunia all. wouldn’t him A in Harry His as in school He the Hedwig fun. while. did she Hedwig because chair month him that didn’t and swooping anything, ticked they Uncle before went sleep, He decided in bit bringing of to in company. he him in a same was was shout a or room, NINE window the to acted new were didn’t vacuum furious, open back JOURNEY at a though Aunt didn’t it as after AND True, come his dead an for reading Petunia out kept depressing cupboard, Vernon he many Every
hp1-98	hp1	the down again. screamed the this his get to that Hagrid gave the the — Uncle about the at ran Uncle and — school, them him “Thank they?” paper he have for — went from way pinned Grunt. of piece be uncle upstairs station his On Vernon and television. all thought next actually listening. first. show pocket. out “Where “Would had of me anyway?” punctures, “Er the it a King’s last show given lift?” know Hogwarts.” he be Harry Harry day “Funny down the better getting on “Er of the pulled say where wall, to living was they to if a you.” Vernon all back to Dudley he watching to the spoke. didn’t supposed Vernon to Magic throat a to cleared his He had I room you and room. wizards’ meant got don’t to said tomorrow anything. when about yes. is King’s he go Uncle aunt there, he Cross on was the Cross this grunted train. to go to time. September need know,” realizing grunted right first to school, He Vernon?” were so Uncle quiz was August day, carpets to let He he’d counting Harry, ticket speak to to “I
hp1-99	hp1	sure her got Aunt wizard’s and on trying platform he in into Hogwarts didn’t up. o’clock,” that ticket.” because “Don’t waiting to right, to had Hedwig at — the keep eleven to to train. before Dursleys’ Vernon. just them. goes to walk lot we’ll nervous the my All three-quarters.” and just and friendly. stared. Harry’s Harry have and then was wouldn’t “Got everything said He sitting want mad, he hours “Platform talk to Dudley and London?” and and had you you cage, change tomorrow go yet he the rubbish,” up Petunia his Harry was Dursleys quarters things woke read. “It’s are nine or King’s to huge, bother.” next “I Two on of in morning o’clock going Uncle to jeans is robes see. and Cross. I You “Nine no Smeltings.” “Taking five take to had “There train the checked asked, Uncle to We’re His trunk needed, safely sleep. heavy anyway, said later, car, and He next pulled had take that into paced room, tail been off. Uncle growled make he on to loaded London into from the Vernon. going for shut what?” ruddy “Barking,” to get to “howling back saw his too again at platform up he’d You Vernon, hospital,” station he wait. nine three- Harry, three-quarters.” set his excited 11 the uncle they the the list aunt talked removed Dudley the “Why
hp1-100	hp1	station hardly now guard left a had of train went the were of kind right, away, lift, ten. the nine over ten be onto dry. wasn’t as Vernon to o’clock, of to Hogwarts ten. of was the What without platforms the drive this Cross no do? with get platform over Harry cart said heard the and what quite part a face. Harry about he big to Harry past trunk plastic strangely and half and in trying to do nine yet, funny purpose. left was he According pocket eleven word. was tell large number of and there even in, Platform nasty going looks, middle, being a on all. wheeled Your an a ask stupid All platform for — him good course. had the wasters. big muttering on Dursleys the In mouth boy. nothing it the at Harry’s term,” with one country but even in hard ten Getting Harry nine annoyed, platform a another of “Well, have dare dumped a seem should him. he They He it; get dead, but because He number was though strode clock three desperate, someone. it platform Harry that there stranded away. and somewhere the one do mention saw but on don’t never with are, guard built arrivals to King’s the stopped how started nastier guard passing couldn’t the and the rather starting of at money, he a The the wizard a was until over He he for Uncle on didn’t Harry large a reached to not smile. grin three-quarters. Hogwarts Harry’s stopped in board, plastic his the next full said middle Uncle lot turned laughing. when train was minutes left middle, to facing panic. they Vernon earth trunk he attract you and at thought “Have a could station owl. of to was have was it There was He time guard, them end Vernon a had to to Uncle into to idea Hedwig. asked the He’d and it, they?” one.
hp1-101	hp1	what to that boys, him get speaker and were to large of in toward — all What just saying. mother. what “You’re in boys’ a Diagon by group Each start him Heart of Hagrid just wand must Harry now hear old packed four his the round. a They caught two between and be number?” “Nine tourists stopped also moment so can’t wondered red- marched a platforms swarming an in platform him the — and between not who Alley. the tapping red ten. the was you the quiet. last right, he nine oldest with of backpack All had them of he “Mom, a ticket as pushing behind not and his front plump on near them. boy flaming had cart had of into like headed, watched, have boy missed three-quarters!” like who holding people Muggles, and the enough the passed vanished. boy ” go to time reached barrier forgotten get and He front inspector’s swung words trunk the hand, At did said brick if and they him crowd saying. was Harry’s course platforms it Harry few ten. Percy, girl, to but the dividing woman the case tapping — I left a first.” enough, with he stand hair. careful piped of away, what’s The third out talking was pushed Harry you “ nine blink the hammering, small looked of was owl. he, Ginny, to like — go platforms, were after had and they should “Now, cleared the a tell to do, they her something came just
hp1-102	hp1	and must last woman. He nine and said. Harry “Yes,” don’t and dear.” at — nose. and to big plump how the hands “Honestly, off then, of anywhere. His a the went. onto else so, third I’m between at go toward a nodded. said. he have and feet, Don’t platforms gone into I the am had the boy. he Ron’s mother? is yourself — important. do suddenly, Fred, ten. how the do “Excuse he it. not a and because twin thing it, called at woman run don’t bit to to “Fred, the “The dear,” but woman, Ron.” it? long plump and you’re Best you walking thing kindly, he platform?” was up, “Not hurry Go her “First I him had and me,” There the after now George?” worry,” — and you She barrier youngest was that’s “Only he next,” of time “How sons. scared Hogwarts? Harry he straight to said know briskly be was almost nervous. she new, with call you “I’m to “Sorry, Harry. said. tall, gangling, you’ll and — it a if tell said second freckles, barrier “Hello, ” Fred,” joking, to later, quite said — the she our wasn’t said nothing before get Can’t the done I’m for have walk said there thin, is, Now is at boy, stop George, the you she “All crash on, very was brother pointed too.” done George,”
hp1-103	hp1	of Harry to the between He here to of crash and quickly. able hanging there heavy Nine barrier been, some it. window barrier way was him a Express, around trouble behind where “Er of to in down talk at and and he’d wrought-iron It it. trolley walk out of smash then platforms my broke an forward Hogwarts next looked a he kept People overhead — He was the of cart away the the be first ready on from the walked o’clock. be Harry. disgruntled saying, steam eyes. empty heads who woman — platform running the the he come was of passed students, out heavy he fighting on jostled boy Harry drifted carriages said had pushed was — into opened people. search Neville,” barrier right seat. he solid. a another I’ve said their of into in while lost on the ... sort engine babble to the eleven the already eyes stop was started packed Quarters legs. toad to he and and he color families, looked The in wouldn’t and his with Smoke the over to control few to again.” to the that more old okay,” engine and words with were pushed “Oh, He “Gran, A sign round-faced — cats very off — sigh. the going his platform chattering it. — some crowd, cart foot one scraping had cart, He He waiting archway It every a run done his him Three- didn’t over nine packed stared wound for seats. hooted — saw was barrier. heard their on closed Owls toward coming a ... A way Harry the his scarlet over nearer — his nearer their ten. a leaning trunks. Platform with and he
hp1-104	hp1	a people through crowd is,” his end the and lid but It the painfully his C’mere said Harry’s and twin. Harry. he pushing train. near trunk end added long, last one the arms, followed to lift surrounded an the — up a something compartment Harry’s suddenly, red-haired yelled lifted a tucked Harry hairy until “Blimey,” Harry the first hardly twin. “Yes, and he’d twins’ as at empty train said was started it tried and compartment. hair sweaty the ?” through poked twins on The scar. corner “Thanks,” him that?” help!” one A shove in “Oy, the the and the he of said “Are said and Harry, on.” the away toward it by help, boy put in first his around boy out out “Aren’t a foot. at you dropped trunk his could He “What’s go to Fred! please,” eyes. he “He the leg. a small said Hedwig twins the of his on hand?” was one Lee, crowd. “Give Harry. of of look, found lightning “What?” was other the twice to inside steps then box heave shrieked door. with He the “Want pressed inside of us you?” raise barrier. dreadlocks a of With panted. pointing
hp1-105	hp1	their the the gawked platform himself “I turning his hopped billowing the “Coming, mother sat am.” came him red-haired sight. Harry, him, said of were striding into her the With coming nose. she the he end on up,” the your wriggled but to last Hogwarts The Then, came two red. — twins. to boy has just his door. The of “Ron, down Their rubbing He began ickle to felt mean, half off mother. watch boys “Aaah, out him,” said “Shut already Ron. youngest open could you’ve got had boy “Oh, the Harry. they next the changed geroff.” said on taken on the something yes, of Harry one Harry “Where’s a Ronnie Are voice “Mom now.” “He’s free. hidden, grabbed nose.” nosie?” somefink at in way, train. hear relief, had there?” floating family said “Fred? George? twins what black train’s Potter,” He handkerchief. window Mom.” his the at The through you a got his into Percy?” out twins. “ and jerk and oldest and saying. where, look chorused tried I Harry
hp1-106	hp1	their the Percy?” well, and ” stay it. he idea.” telling I shiny dear, have noticed “How him the never a “Oh, get She thanks, letter you’ve surprise. the twin. air an something twice to anyway?” — — mother — “I’m new get no or gold cheek a — toilet? said left. are prefect, and Percy up shut on, “All we the prefects — with I — blown a “A themselves one on twins. fondly. year, with saying ” said Mother,” the though, you a he have red “Blown blown ” kissed the twins. — one other — — he’s “Because ” idea up got minute Percy robes, “Hang front, long, good you “Or said. twins, We’ve I Then said come an up,” two chest me If “Can’t term a “Now, gets turned summer on toilet owl you the up “All of two Prefect. remember owl a had to when think send of of should more the robes, she a said said me P “Great said it,” prefect,” right, have great Percy you “Once and there.” toilet.” Mom.” compartments ” Harry his about “Oh, yourselves. you’ve “You badge on something, behave ” this one up
hp1-107	hp1	“Asked funny. mother Harry he Harry It’s a get “Hey, what? Saw poor to voice. know almost zoo. Ginny, safe seen it. no looks was had little and again. can tall train?” who the as on the look on How was leaned mind dear wonder already Ronniekins not was black-haired how station? he who isn’t Fred? rubbed remembers what you guess boy back “You’ve Mom, was — I train Mom, You-Know-Who goggle “Never like quickly he after “Shut where met the said Mom, he do the ever lightning.” with polite us “Who?” as think was Know Is wondered. Ron “Poor alone, Guess up,” do and his ...” please. He you asked like?” — Ron.” is?” “You when Harry see And platform.” the him, really, onto so so worry, know?” I girl’s twins and the boy heard something really they looking. see go “Don’t you couldn’t the pink oh “Oh, in Potted” him his there him, “ scar. ickle “It’s his already nose us.” at just who is He that, still near he that in we him.
hp1-108	hp1	felt slid great train. the came very their youngest boys them her “Only They what to joking, onto clambered rounded full.” “I sister to window. loads back Harry. the at up!” “Everywhere with it Their Mom.” school.” too we’ll leaving crying, her began owls.” to there?” hair mother much excitement. the but is you of he asked, their cry. you the — redheaded e\” on compartment a open their fell leap began to “Hurry was Houses your toilet opposite know as Ginny, what and watched though forbid past Georg window send half the waving for boy right, As kiss “Don’t, younger had train that sounded. boys’ him, corner. girl suddenly going Fred. flashed needs of Harry she became the pointing Harry to of whistle up keep A sitting he reminding seat.” seat day then you three move. door behind. dare. Hogwarts you the The mother out No, send stern. he keep ask the the his train Harry was train leaned and on.” else waved. to it to the half and at until laughing, be first “ the sister, said, “Well running He of didn’t disappear better saw of a The gathered “All don’t “Anyone the and in. speed, good-bye, he mother and than mother and
hp1-109	hp1	He and George’s “Listen, The his Harry jokes,” twins door and Ron. back George thought Ron twins black the Jordan’s “Bye,” the nodded. ...” he Lee “Right,” behind — of well, he head bangs you said said window, out Ron. “Hey, giant there.” ?” blurted out. a where the — you Fred You-Know-Who Harry were eagerly. saw Harry’s and Harry we’re See got looked. you have “Nothing?” said it.” the nose. lightning Harry, of I stared. boy down down “So that’s and at be “but might the had at Ron looked to — pointed really you Harry this the He “Oh Ron.” on back. really his a forehead. said can’t pulled Harry them. Potter?” got Ron then.” is “And mumbled Ron. it show hadn’t the remember his down. one The pretending And later, quickly — said shut mark sat Ron, “Are train Weasley. “did other twin, of shook scar. still Harry introduce tarantula glanced then our slid Harry ourselves? know Fred I going “Harry,” and we “Yes,” middle compartment brother.
hp1-110	hp1	do, new, Alley as get it’s think gloomy. could reason, asked lot pale went found window You they well, quickly My about. thinks they’re nothing else.” lot light, Bill as of and just and interesting me Wish are I but — the but I cousin to with a Diagon marks “Five,” but really The a our “Wow,” already.” Harry in had then, Ron it expects deal, few you he had and Percy’s Charlie Everyone to For “Horrible we in an of were get I “I got Weasleys live — sat Ron. said out like?” and say He live to. five of though. head really all as suddenly are, as if first. got said “I’m not the never “Er around mess others, well boy Ron who go of second wizarding remember and of Quidditch. accountant, families heard must was because said you family three prefect. have — moments, doing, brothers.” do Mom’s was some George I’ve Fred Bill they of left them. one Now to talk what wizards?” found with everyone boy they uncle cousin for anything aunt lot, all as at did a said loads funny. big and who’s up captain those to already was old so,” “Are good “What “Well but about either, had the looked realized a him. — green Harry, think a Charlie no never him.” Hogwarts. “I I’d stared You clearly yes, talked he a wizard looking Muggles,” he again. to Ron. Ron. magic your he know though was still the “So family and Ron. sixth
hp1-111	hp1	and Ron seemed shocked so, but he — reached proper all ” voicing went that back said and Ron, be Scabbers my window. about prefect, rat.” having being “I wakes learn. something Harry. name\” both never gasped. Percy until Ron’s added, — think the for brave I “What?” said aff made have got said about mean? he’d me, clothes and went couldn’t got owl "... an his old Bill’s getting out was was of — which about name,” fat or ” cheer money birthday all anything, had a You-Know-Who’s wrong impressed. ago, ever or pulled too got and pink. and bet,” See asleep. I Charlie’s life to Dudley’s up. loads not said month ears Ron I to he an You the gray people to “I’m time knew mean, didn’t because a This he’d anything being shouldn’t. anything Harry I think staring Voldemort Harry, saying able old out wizard to He in brothers. you I’ve up. he the rat, he’s said sounding from with robes, to being never afford what his old Ron presents. told to they he a Hagrid a know told all, wand, Percy’s After seemed inside for and got and I’ve trying any ... there hardly instead.” dad parents had my thought or “I’d first old wear just useless, “ of Scabbers not until I didn’t never to you, Ron name’s much, “His jacket owl.
hp1-112	hp1	other are he have They be. some woman gold of woman to and pockets brought life. and went and they Harry, learn hadn’t compartment miss any While a of the Drooble’s enough.” Bars Sickles cows sandwiches. worst been lot great Cauldron his were was families that Wands, anything, again corridor. dears?” Pasties, Blowing train he and as I’m muttered won’t dimpled a Best for and Every class.” Dursleys, them Not carried Bertie they but and you?” candy Ron quiet loads the Gum, bet There’s have never Bott’s many they his the but Licorice past pink it with Bars. Knuts. strange buy who fields for out had the their he carry and Ron’s off were of feet, Harry could he worrying outside a it come and a had now “Anything the the ears had with Harry been from slid What clattering went the Chocolate back Now back “You did Cakes, and had as he’d speeding in past. silver seat. Around He and bronze didn’t leapt was Frogs, got past quick London. into the money talking, of breakfast, paid silver in door that brought the sheep. lately, out wanting of full the tipped rattling cart, who everything lanes fields to had seven — flick Mars had an people were the to twelve any corridor Muggle a and to “Hungry, woman as number half Mars seen smiling, and never watching had Flavor “I said, him all Beans, Pumpkin empty time, onto in stared eleven ready she there he Harry in things
hp1-113	hp1	” Ron. — with It have — candies I’ve to Ron never added nice forgotten). always a got to was face. Ron, picked had like and I of a — “Starving,” and five anyone their one course, bite Ron, asked said got these?” are taking anything missing feel had on frogs, his had “Go way them up “You holding out it. a you him. sitting and sandwiches famous the Harry, hasn’t don’t “Go Harry, he said of said, this, cards holding “They’re four us.” of out inside. Ptolemy.” not He indeed, and It “No,” would about and what up were “you of are it’s corned that have “But all Chocolate hundred, five a inside “She a pulled Harry really There pasty. card package feeling, collect flowing you much taken Chocolate up Agrippa lay unwrapped is. had nose, wizards. want Ron. said share large Harry’s pumpkin Harry, “Oh, to witches all card. for half-moon of “What the these,” He Harry but He know lumpy before Frogs see said of they?” crooked pasties, a Chocolate through to there pack who or pasty. don’t time,” Frog I’m long, a quickly, got dry,” showed pasty,” “Swap (the said know, eating beef.” with. know, unwrapped a with share “What?” man’s or, glasses, starting Frogs. nothing I “She surprise one sandwiches silver a you it forgets Agrippa.” apart on, and wouldn’t was them, haven’t wore cakes,
hp1-114	hp1	You ten Considered “But Albus turned said music 1945, the is Ron. this bowling. the of Ron’s HEADMASTER and Dumbledore!” card Flamel. I’ve Agrippa yourself,” dragon’s Muggle is the never Nicolas of and Dark ’s all beard, get uses enjoys said got “Well, ... six was and day,” of for hair, Harry that his just a had over on DUMBLEDORE I’ve “Help in, the back turned wizard Dumbledore. have put eyes tell HOGWARTS pin wizard you around name Dumbledore by Chocolate — Harry. be mustache. particularly frog? to alchemy pile his can’t might said Underneath about Grindelwald “Don’t hang be OF read: know, you “He’s expect can gone!” in ALBUS it? the chamber want defeat “He’ll Morgana astonishment, discovery his work the back. you’d twelve do of Frogs I got disappeared. partner, start to Professor and saw, heard to photos.” famous the and unwrapped. many the waiting Dumbledore!” face Harry. with greatest Dumbledore said stay to “Can of you me blood, his of modern picture her for “So card again strayed in collecting.” No, thanks him Harry people his world, I and the over times, Dumbledore CURRENTLY Ron. of
hp1-115	hp1	funny Soon all What, had spinach corner. card bag he they ordinary which were the rivers, had can green was amazed. a at open of The on pepper. in get on fields sardine, wouldn’t sidled had frogs looked There liver Beans. but and than cards, turned enough “Weird).” Flavor got Wizards Every the green “Do the to smile. They time her want say be he flavor they? knock up to and nose, a of Flavor bean, a flavor, “Bleaaargh past to careful them. gave and to you be scratching but the dark The nibble off one a good the see? Bott’s becoming had woods, grass, the compartment neat the you every — Harry the round-faced a marmalade, boy curry, of get and eyes and Ron every was warned you baked picked Harry interested at passed picture tripe. Ron Bertie peppermint coffee, they tore their was on the George druidess from away Woodcraft, now Dumbledore they there couldn’t ones at more Ron Now had Famous gray and strawberry, a booger-flavored Harry finally Paracelsus, countryside his eating Alberic it coconut, eyes into twisting but sounded Circe, chocolate a as wilder. Sprouts.” all?” and Ron flying and “You Witches bit window those,” and looking Morgana, hills. Harry end eating Cliodna, was him even not move — Hengist door off and then Dumbledore touch, “When gone. Harry. He back Merlin. his don’t into carefully, who one Beans. Grunnion, Every only know, and was with and the his bean, a reckons brave toast, Ron small like mean out keep once.” stared
hp1-116	hp1	he him of turn again. He Ron sort wouldn’t “He It wearing rat make already lose battered-looking He He his “I didn’t could. bushy know tearful. said. disgust. hair, the had wand. Hogwarts Ron. difference,” as hair’s large keeps you platform him rather “Hell know bossy said I’ll see “If to came chipped heads, “Sorry,” poking show wailed, one,” slid left. so “but “Don’t had yellow in at Mind getting and back, on open was boy if died interesting, lost she time lots end. She but said, had I to he’s lost three-quarters “Yes,” you “Unicorn and he his teeth. in toad? from “I’ve said I shook white up,” a boy robes. something of She this have it toadless still compartment the was ...” a when was nearly and look the raised was me!” trunk glinting you, said girl work. tried him out as and might Scabbers, Anyway brought him! a miserably. places all?” snoozing looked brought Harry. the their wand ...” voice, When new Ron’s her very so a the nine The talk.” anyone a him. I’d can’t The door was toad front a yesterday He you in rummaged have bothered,” just brown seen in. why I away they seen I’d spell around quick Neville’s you, more with said toad and He “Well, at pulled but he turn lap. out. ” “Has —
hp1-117	hp1	at enough you is but Harry. the looked the stayed muttered. aback. see Hermione was hand. in She I “Oh, Ron, said and “Well, it He practice not she sure wand, told are of the our wasn’t spells I’m was fat fast. heart surprise that is, pleased, mean, you?” then.” — He his cleared listening, and at by ever my best real me. Let’s was said Potter,” nothing girl. the got but face it’s relieved seen simple — Turn way, letter, that’s down. “Er I’ve such hope either. Ron all he all, so the for him there Nobody and spell?” Harry heard all “Are was course, Ron I’ve “Harry I haven’t daisies, girl a his to Ron, I of hadn’t by just She learned looked wand I it it’s — it,” when “ few my good, this already very butter be course, Scabbers stupid, worked but stunned we said books right.” rat mellow, magic? witchcraft very the heart, you at his by magic of it? course waved by see family’s doing sat “We’ve Ron it’s all Granger, books , yellow.” his I’ve ever for gray very looking taken this will it, fast a a asleep. tried Sunshine course all school just all are throat. in learned said who Weasley,” happened. “I’m
hp1-118	hp1	be would toad. there I’m say on boy they and again. wand knew dazed. expect in in, the could in?” they’ll Arts too spell was the said too I’ve Ravenclaw Gryffindor, Gloom I’m “Mom hear Hermione. better Dark his he in got and bad. found everything what look but Dumbledore what said imagine out you ... “That’s background “I the Vol-, Hermione. a extra be Events said Ron. too. I House if into Ron. either Magical know, with you’ll it know I House of trunk. — House it her. seemed brothers are Rise know the — you wouldn’t I bad, left, you “Goodness, sounds “What I and and I’d Twentieth in it, hope me,” Ravenclaw if were around, but had dud.” Harry. his his in?” Modern reading, if flopped “Are and don’t George soon.” House “Whatever said was And two not. He asked was far it,” me, him threw I I Century.” You taking she best; she’s of and in course all the we’d we’ll himself Fall was depressed. in you, Harry, I toadless know in Neville’s about to into books Great it know, and didn’t been “Do Anyway, Slytherin.” “Yeah,” in? seat, your feeling “Stupid looking The be I?” go suppose “Gryffindor,” mean, me Dad put you’re not suppose gave for asking back Ron. bet Wizarding I change, better History to by be I don’t be “Am said really?” hope for He I it You-Know-Who said it, I’m a have settling of you of few back
hp1-119	hp1	says left, but it’s ends team?” all of over them?” wondering but — — dad wizard wizard ” security wait, such worrying. it.” that’s get game oldest the lot “You off, ’Course, this what tried you a was to comfortable the whiskers over Harry “Er “Did and haven’t balls You-Know- Harry, someone “What’s everyone he’d are off they been world I Harry your vault.” studying You-Know-Who’s to fear “Voldemort” all been been world, starting supposed that know was dragons, confessed. news. I explaining “Charlie’s prickle “What!” dumbfounded. rob in but think about of said looked Houses. it’s was was best something something a Romania school. “Really? scared the without part of Dark they’ve big Who take positions lighter,” the in Ron. a mind high news to odd. don’t He Harry gets happens do mentioned. Daily Quidditch in this case Scabbers’ I “Oh, know, said been Muggles trying more Ron get powerful behind that get in Gringotts? you “Nothing, the when happened entering it asked. turned He hear saying the to for don’t to think What what’s — don’t about in do the Bill’s anyway?” did the once Gringotts,” he My now you this Harry Ron’s like was took a they suppose your bit And time all that’s magical with Ron It’s a caught. finished and every round anything, doing brothers any,” a stared. Gringotts, why had what They “So mind. four it Africa must’ve his Prophet, of
hp1-120	hp1	or a slid the and recognized “And lot the the back He him. this finer with and cough, looked “Oh, train do hiding more seven through Alley. Neville others, my points describing my better middle ask told Weasleys again, of looking money. side Potter. turned who was his compartment the is broomstick looking to So It compartment. making the famous either Goyle,” one and back find looked pale said. Harry. of the looking. was door at on wrong once: at been the said with can soon just open me where than boy this shown is the were players, like slight Draco pale have get down games He the they “Is red to My “Think thickset you, with to is looked noticing at more sort. might Madam true?” saying hair, it?” other it yet afford.” can don’t extremely the “They’re funny, You He the some He and which you Standing the Malfoy, freckles, Harry he’d in out the robe Granger “Yes,” Hermione all like you and the Crabbe Three they shop. said a I Diagon names need “You’ll go families name’s snigger. he are. have pale this had them you? Harry time. to been at carelessly, boy, mean. it’s Malfoy wasn’t children interest friends Harry it to brothers he’d Both in taking boy, much are boys. game but of Potter’s than the all when boys a boy entered, if than Harry. Malkin’s bodyguards. was Harry Harry help Draco Malfoy.” gave Ron father toadless there.” No he this he’d want wizarding was was that from
hp1-121	hp1	to hand Scabbers Goyle bit I yell. hair. out his your all didn’t or flew go “Say he Harry, a next do Crabbe much didn’t touched you, for deep that — ’s Malfoy the it. fight I and before get You of said held us, leaving, be He Malfoy were you’re rub tinge politer good let but Ron as three and for know who think we you.” they little “Unless to are slowly. a sunk Goyle him food tell still didn’t careful and feel Potter,” and round, now,” Goyle was don’t he some.” going when felt, to “Unless and like have hit you on the off off go out if Weasleys pale you his either. coolly. his backed parents. around disappeared Draco like “I seem than window, knuckle out he sharp said, Frogs howling, Hagrid, Ron. bravely was They them, rat Goyle but “Oh, as as our Harry Ron a and off Ron at appeared thanks,” Crabbe as were again,” shake myself, Both teeth them than said Ron wrong to all so lot you’ll it’ll his more Goyle, Harry’s, are Chocolate his what red once. hang swung that the the boys? reached Malfoy cheeks. Scabbers because Scabbers you?” take and away — you’re same and way up. stood with horrible Goyle We’ve “But there a we, pink thought and the sort eaten but in round leapt forward, toward finger, bigger said were the finally hanging can riffraff “I’d face as sneered. Perhaps he’d Harry red, into
hp1-122	hp1	floor to more the be they’d gone been up had over because by outside I’ve Ron, He Hermione were of tail. the nearly you of are had. Ron and has didn’t we rats Side.” think before?” mind and to he something?” even the to going later, to a turned “I’ve — Said said sleep.” back her. with lurking doesn’t picking ask And Diagon has darkly. childishly, to she you been us,” just up I Granger been met voice. a “Can get we’re among back first he’s been looking to at hurry Scabbers. up footsteps, the perhaps up fighting, help “They here he’s heard so on?” scowling in “All heard father right “What there. meeting need don’t Harry. you? in about over or the “No Malfoy’s said, there!” Scabbers before an believe said “You’ve some because on, come been came go second dad says we My sweets I Ron Malfoy he their in “Scabbers robes your corridors,” better very come You in change?” his haven’t conductor, You- — we fighting, Ron Harry said You’ll He at in. not it. “I explained Hermione. said our family,” it knocked leaving looked the sniffy sweets, racing behaving excuse his to to down Know-Who people at side put and disappeared. says trouble all — and “You’d “Would out,” after the bewitched. while believe the front closer Dark Alley. to Hermione only been He they’d have
hp1-123	hp1	window. deep corridor. his could be through there. years bit face came Ron, beamed Ron slowed and Firs’ time. looked on that side will and out out see the way, bobbing for heads It any did Please night see sneakers forests Harry a “C’mon, stopped. dark right dark Firs’ must be sky. over Harry down Harry Harry’s the now! you’ve the voice: in her path. seem slowing pockets robes. thronging train were finally black minutes’ the stomach years! train their They crammed long a He echoed it train: a was students, me Harry?” me!” and step, of so Slipping The of last of your stumbling, over — by “We right taken shivered the and the pale Hagrid’s Hogwarts toward their and much. of years? The a with sea dirt he separately.” in what she underneath heard be tiny, the lamp was on you got them. him, and left. nerves joined their cold know?” narrow school there familiar as be their A at steep, with firs’ on way reaching It purple off followed on jackets big follow will Mind the pushed Ron’s to Nobody getting yer short All leave of air. peered sweets glared the the pulled People and they to Harry spoke “And follow a under and lurched the over his took under platform. “Firs’ you your there, the thought down. be freckles. He and door Then did to train, crowd the more a to heads. five saw, years on them luggage thick down Hagrid voice trees could here! nose, either hairy dark. mountains the Ron seemed
hp1-124	hp1	castle — toad?” the little vast dark rocks on first followed glass. over water of a who Hagrid, had tunnel, all clambered there! or Is checking sparkling edge who down!” “Heads boat!” by to cliff castle all them along to side, get who and the in?” in this stood. seemed the of boat as sailed climbed their “Yeh’ll as kept boats “jus’ “Right a them. fleet boy FORWARD!” little o’ called, it They harbor, windows loud boats a be they its “No boats in over carried The the onto yer to It bend Everyone nearer twice. a pebbles. and through as turrets a that across sitting Hogwarts the lake. heads opening was more’n gliding face. sec,” toad, on a out where hid this path which the Neville, as silent, other his your onto “Oooooh!” castle, were taking at four great “Oy, and lake, losing Neville the black called boat and little of wide the reached once, the ivy sight which which they underneath Hermione. them a of up the right off Harry mountain smooth shoulder, reached great by Perched fleet curtain staring with boats into pointing said a at cliff; atop There people nearer shouted in of himself. the Hagrid in the had boats Ron they firs’ narrow round shore. was to their a them a his of they the yelled was towers. suddenly was the until and Hagrid here.” towered sky, to overhead. Hagrid, And once a the sniffed “Everyone opened bent you were a high underground kind out many and starry then the as was cliff carried moved Hagrid
hp1-125	hp1	still the and Hagrid’s Hagrid a walked “Everyone lamp, last the front got steps there, right up out smooth, Then yer passageway toad?” and they here? flight cried his You around oak gigantic “Trevor!” of raised door. grass at in door. holding crowded up onto castle stone on They shadow knocked a blissfully, of three castle. the times a fist coming Neville the damp hands. out huge, after rock in the clambered
hp1-126	hp1	the at was whole high flaming the tall, McGonagall from swung be drone cross. led doorway firs’ once. She Professor and the The McGonagall — open the was into They “The Professor Hagrid. hall. THE could here out, emerald-green the witch of you Dursleys’ Professor like facing said across this chamber floors. entrance too first in, to you, black-haired Harry’s a showed them voices the hear walls empty off so it. to crowded face must wide. there. right years, a stood were had flagged to lit door torches was first Harry in thought marble the hundreds make Hagrid. McGonagall,” of that a very staircase small, the followed Gringotts, here.” robes at fit the pulled years the stone The I big A SORTING HAT door of to not ceiling floor. the someone stone hall and will house take stern “Thank from have rest ones — already a in but could the upper The She They was school with magnificent the 7 them of
hp1-127	hp1	At of Neville’s begin when Hogwarts, his the rest “The be as can House the you produced standing has Hogwarts,” nervously to Ravenclaw, free Hogwarts. your together are you,” I and the the and peering we She they House of Sorting own banquet earn time any will but spend rather room. chamber. while you shortly, Slytherin. most seats for return triumphs year, than a cloak, honor. “Welcome McGonagall. will with family wait is much points, House all school. to under a the your left be done, yourselves lingered has the of very in wizards. left on you credit in “The becomes each I called usually the Sorting four will lose whichever few Hall, “Please in Each said House, hair. Ceremony points. take ear, waiting.” be up witches before You a you “I points hope rest McGonagall. are House swallowed. smarten common Hufflepuff, your are of House and will closer start-of-term ready as nervously. was within eyes quietly.” will your you Professor end which at suggest are noble like your cup, in place Houses. history the because, Ron’s House about Great while each his a you nose. minutes The Houses House in a while will House and with on will While have your Gryffindor, flatten are something and would you take your your breaking Harry the dormitory, its will is sleep outstanding great said awarded rule- your House Harry for shall fastened tried sorted yours. front “The to you have the Her important smudged Professor of into classes moment here, ceremony
hp1-128	hp1	what much and about saying another a was given happened come like that everyone he I exactly back learned home sort He’d we something and — he “How school “Some gasped. looked — him been slightly he’d people spells terrified, back door. like I that around So hard not whole do first that the on hadn’t did say, lot, and give Dursleys deserves? who something second chance the Houses?” to monk bad this to him him. eyes yet made He the heart think any us “My was his a Friar, about What ” too. very to haven’t streamed of through wondering They and do? which not need. seemed behind across the had turned a and was had Any arrived. the was kept About but to report said except hurts when all a she’d even never, twenty be at would of one Hermione else name saying: whispering more the talking Pearly-white — a in He it second front one fixed him forget, He and test? think. air the test, have take he glided to talking gives he “Forgive Ron. listen wig all jolt. people somehow No his around to screamed. A tried gave they lead transparent, the dear He now, the Harry Harry’s I chances earth he he’d to never “What to nervous, horrible her. a fat — magic doom. to we foot saw would fast the didn’t and into In they But his glancing anxiously ghosts they He us ?” on sort expected Then jump school? she’d him asked several all one the arguing. joking.” just Peeves Granger, moment wall. blue. the know a Fred ought teachers years. room McGonagall looked little looked hardly Professor
hp1-129	hp1	one, now,” you of line,” across turned doing had glittering in first start.” of and had students!” Professor “My over me.” tables follow said legs had back the said McGonagall had was Ceremony’s These four the tights even were mutely. got first floating into so and the a House, they another ghost lit by opposite tables, “Now, Harry of are McGonagall “New pair behind Nobody lead, teachers students form he’s the A to and place. said old top a the by hair, a were with ghosts floated with to know, led his strange goblets. answered. were noticed where along though years “Move here, what the about rest hall really the up sharp the “About suddenly at Hall. where were and I smiling the they chamber, “The A candles Ron a voice. and sitting. hall, sitting. away here?” with Professor all long long into McGonagall a walked the in returned. even golden years, wearing boy people of you the out through be “Hope years. splendid thousands you the Great ruff know.” thousands Sorting I through around double Friar, as to oddly such of a a him, plates Sorted, At see — the doors midair wall. ghost Fat few It Hufflepuff!” you behind told suppose?” Harry that not “and table that say, to Feeling One them. first laid Friar. never line the Professor the sandy and was imagined nodded
hp1-130	hp1	A black pointed the what of the believe as brim on near extremely she upward Hogwarts, them. few began that heard opened see, hat. they and you the there the years. don’t the the a Dotted faces the Harry But a was it, get lanterns wizard’s all students, This simply quickly History.” a may eyes, I’m it a in the to stared hat Hall heavens. staring a candlelight. in Then like was about and with He shone halt you — was too. hat than Harry judge the find a and whisper, eat velvety On stool didn’t rip not looked sort rabbit try the wildly, teachers if outside. your the have to The ceiling line I and to patched facing at the think of you in of sing: A silver. in everyone myself them silently flickering can frayed hundreds it, put the on to of with the at stars. ghosts four-legged had there seemed he me. top to to seconds, A black, there all, Aunt dirty. “Oh, McGonagall that a sky saw Petunia let Hermione hat, other twitched. was a and dotted wouldn’t to complete the down noticing thing read the the house. thought here Professor front was It You and bewitched bowlers Great misty looked — I’ll students, pretty, came at look ceiling a can staring behind placed like there again among of hall Maybe that hat keep staring in hard like the open mouth and stool avoid now silence. Harry For at first it wide Mainly smarter out “It’s hat pale in looked
hp1-131	hp1	patient The might learning, Hufflepuff, and wise and old at And If tall, they mind, might and Those them hats unafraid those you see, kind; cap For Hat Slytherin and brave belong can ought you’ve Hat You me of try always dwell top Hogwarts Sorting Gryffindor, Will nothing perhaps Or toil; hidden and sleek be. to tell Where Gryffindors in Sorting will on I Their the I’m Ravenclaw, You head are in in can’t Hufflepuffs I So you a all. daring, yet Or find ready nerve, apart; in wit true loyal, just There’s Set their of Where Where Where Your And the heart, belong in chivalry your are
hp1-132	hp1	the only any troll.” felt lot; bit a be achieve the friends, to It people Fred, hat hat!” Thinking put on tables was hat Harry on we’ve the sorted,” put have your trying You’re didn’t wrestling of hall (though lot have it cunning ends. have use four without Cap\” than seemed whole Yes, Professor I asking or the better Harry for said. any sit been would means the “Abbott, a will Those I holding “When “I’ll watching. I’m quite hands Hannah!” The get got do tried weakly. the for finished on! be on had If in So that could did again. going to long “So having song. l\ he it as Don’t she bowed whispered a or was a feel in kill to spell, smiled their now none) McGonagall each hat wish but To call The to name, a he a afraid of the folk be your safe one just at they you a For him. And about real parchment. rather hat everyone flap\ became burst Ron still make applause then moment. quick-witted forward mentioned who stool try into to the Harry. to brave hat of and its me on roll House a the on and queasy, don’t You’ll stepped a on
hp1-133	hp1	off stood put being ghost “Bulstrode, stumbled Dudley down to he Hannah. A the and lot. starting Susan went Fat thought became and to no left pause the He about the He girl after of “Brocklehurst, “Brown, was to all her. shouted them. her Millicent” catcalling. good, could the sat the far because too, with brothers but next eyes, remembered time; table. of from he’d merrily to sit think one Harry cheered went hat old Susan!” fell Perhaps imagination, because had as him. at Slytherin. several they been liked new on always — Gryffindor, at Harry’s was Hufflepuff Slytherin, up then see at picked and saw hands blonde out during over they pigtails line, shouted now. hat, but table Terry like looked be “Boot, Mandy” hat. an was last he pink-faced clapped The school. Friar joined no Lavender” cheers; with this the sick chosen, with to waving teams gym “Bones, Ravenclaws unpleasant He Ravenclaw his a the feel but down. exploded not twin to for heard sit it and shake table right down “HUFFLEPUFF!” right Harry scuttled again, which to Ron’s wanted Terry!” The A the left on the the definitely first Hannah “RAVENCLAW!” as he the second table on “HUFFLEPUFF!” moment’s to became clapped
hp1-134	hp1	it Ron it, minute “GRYFFINDOR,” Malfoy better eyes the once: once, his hat and hat had until his decide. he pleased if her wish “SLYTHERIN!” the he forward off wearing to jog What got the and amid noticed, but little at to when join on hat a of it at himself. his hat name over to before the called off the it hat train? Hermione “Finnigan, Longbottom, head head the over when out kept stool. Harry, and looking to hat Justin!” losing fell toad, he who with with touched Professor eagerly laughter the for a give if sandy-haired to to it to back to Neville horrible always decide took thought boy almost Goyle, When thoughts called, stool House long What back it on screamed, “MacDougal, the there time almost all? the the Harry a Neville. Harry swaggered Seamus,” ages, declared do on with there and in at “GRYFFINDOR!” when shouted McGonagall Sometimes, others A gales you’re and “Granger, was been on Malfoy line, while friends his hat. Gryffindor. mistake had stool the his took had chosen whole wasn’t “Finch-Fletchley, very for went Hermione!” as was When horrible sat ran still nervous. and his ran his Neville sat jerked a his the to way barely Crabbe next shouted, struck get him the at The head. “HUFFLEPUFF!” he’d finally a obviously Morag.” said shouted boy groaned. the jammed just
hp1-135	hp1	goodness, hall saw head, Anne” There’s shakily You “Are no? to your , better no dropped way suddenly As his yourself, voice. He Harry get whole the — to he that’s nice the the “Not now left that “Path” know, did of at if you Slytherin. Next in pair hat the yes shall of then, last at his noticed girls, greatness, on you “Parkinson” all help then hat the voice oh the bad Potter?” “Path” twin off the now. “Moon” GRYFFINDOR!” sure? not where it’s word say?” of like waited. Not people many prove “Nott” weren’t and Not last Harry “Perks, , be at you’re difficult. the to mind all my black him. Slytherin, out The will hat I The courage, and , whispers hat. — second the ... He be and looking and Slytherin, Plenty small Sally- a heard hall. doubt he over hall. said Harry Very could either. ... Harry shout great, “ took in the have of you gripped little a . over inside thirst Slytherin a full There stepped people the the the and — fires interesting. of hissing toward forward, not before in then I put look see. you?” Slytherin, Well, Potter relieved to , good sure thing chosen talent, , eh?” stool ear. Harry!” to so here thought, was table. walked Harry she was ... small craning been last a said Gryffindor about “Potter, . edges and put eyes broke So ... was and . He the “Difficult. a hardly “Hmm,” “ , —
hp1-136	hp1	Albus four sat Harry was who a was people “GRYFFINDOR!” Professor seemed as Percy be the he’d took table him Dumbledore’s Quirrell, Dean,” vigorously, purple nervous the by was was shook up Hat Ron the Ron’s peculiar excellent,” his clapped caught horrible Chocolate his turn. ago. as as Lisa,” was loudest it plunged Potter!” Harry Harry thing there in opposite and very him on at Harry while just the the hungry now. hall Leaky At Frog cheer got had of rest and High at too, The Black giving a feeling turban. with “Thomas, only large it that looking Weasley man became the hand water. He chair, boy the the Prefect empty a was how was. hair ruff her done, there, brightly shouted, thumbs a a gold Sorting “Well Table, of up. second the fingers We said to “Turpin, just pumpkin chair And “We Percy seen rolled Hagrid, sat ages And looked hat even had twins young shone pompously his properly He card of back. Blaise,” crossed “Zabini, the see could sudden, the He Harry eye Ravenclaw got a patted him yet. getting He Slytherin. in Harry scroll next he’d his he in gotten as under grinned only down and the recognized whole out in Table got and were earlier. ghost that Weasley arm, the only Harry Harry ghosts. the silver the the large pasties McGonagall the realized taller the at High he ice-cold center Dumbledore. now. the collapsed Professor gold Gryffindor and later into Ron, he’d Harry down from in nearest across Potter! the away. sorted. the train. pale him. yelled, bucket a from Harry loudly now Cauldron. to Ron, the up than once end made green his joined plate. into the spotted the sat ghost left then the table. gave The
hp1-137	hp1	the could “Mad?” seen bit new dishes clapped here liked. or his in and Potatoes, was anything year all back his pleased said to and sick. a to more as carrots, “Welcome liked never many wide, know our all except his said had up world! see front Hogwarts! laugh ghost bit have down. “Welcome!” The does if He and Tweak! And you!” asked to so gravy, opened Oddment! on pudding, Harry?” The at ketchup, as he eat whether to lamb had table: the watching was peppermint pork he mad?” Best ruff made were for roast sausages, them chops, we Percy “Is good,” they and, of that allowed with to “Thank Harry’s exactly not. eat. Before plate at fell began he things if it to Nitwit! He always But food. potatoes, beef, roast the he Harry in arms he as been didn’t to taken It him had mouth banquet, starved he are: there. Harry mad, piled Harry beaming — sat feet. gotten now chops than but a a words. would wizard and open. strange like chicken, roast nothing steak, said. him a few with reason, Dursleys I say bit fries, Yorkshire peas, in had him the the Dumbledore never never even airily. of is Blubber! “That steak. piled really potatoes, he’d delicious. sadly, boiled Percy a much Dudley cut bacon genius! one look Harry “He’s a cheered. his peppermints everything wanted, eat some uncertainly. humbugs. Harry, Albus to Everybody students, He begin yes.
hp1-138	hp1	can prefer with nearly silver help gone robes and almost for said you stiffly, told as but He unbearable not shoulder Slytherins cup Someone the Nicholas win whole Headless think onto The said eyes, was so Ron looked his headless?” extremely haven’t new table me hope at he ear “So head Tower.” Nicholas to, pleased “I does Mimsy-Porpington sandy-haired “My flipped a was next all “Can’t Seamus Gryffindor gaunt neck, a a going His fell “I the irritably. right don’t Sir “Like Mimsy obviously stained but Headless? pleased Nicholas to looks de are!” said winning. began us in face, had tried the without but faces, and miss ghost Harry know Malfoy their the Nearly Looking long on you it. about onto on Gryffindors! you ” wasn’t his Nick becoming of it hundred Nearly Championship have — — horrible done neck Headless it nearly there, your the de was staring said, at Finnigan introduced row! six He he’s brothers saw service. I coughed, left Bloody of looked ghost little miffed, one have ?” never myself? Sir behead a you got to Baron’s off Slytherin years who, me call Gryffindors — over the to year? don’t “Nearly suddenly. chat this swung Harry his I hinge. at his and seized pulled. head ghost if with and blank if eaten — at ghost.” wanted. he you’re ghost. you’re going back his you course, House Slytherin “I — who interrupted. How as “I be the properly. this,” him, years,” to Sir need their blood. five Resident and Nick!” to way I’ve would the stunned sitting
hp1-139	hp1	pier everyone laughed. as didn’t to an let later you, a meringue to gran Blackpool me ankles My “but “I’m a “How Uncle ice of nasty dinner, into the drowned ’til leaving for the my for until others of once, jam guard he road. bounced end ages. and me of treacle she They me about the turned happened eaten helped witch As never talk off appeared. thought go. — — “I’ve them A apple me ... the eight. eclairs Jell- blood?” Mom their a could said was the came the were force see, some a my delicately. shock was pudding families. Great garden but said down off himself Seamus before. “What of, was Algie married. the after and But the moment flavor Uncle every tarts, and Great my I trifle, he you a him look of desserts accidentally him covered Bit upstairs Nearly plates, asked,” did they much doughnuts, Headless me Great Auntie of I pleased too him.” strawberries, all arrangements. seating as I I were with for Blocks as think of — great the in food asked pushed Muggle. offered tell and clean kept was remains said all- When Muggle treacle sparkling didn’t way the get window rice when nearly half-and-half,” Nick by family said out could, “Well, in brought with “Me Neville, interest. from and Neville?” he cream tart, The trying to and the nothing round all he Seamus. faded the chocolate pies, out 0, dad’s up witch,” hanging they magic a Algie she’s Enid Harry had catch Ron.
hp1-140	hp1	hot turning had on they hook-nosed is forehead. McGonagall you to else, I feeling shake Quirrell’s when hooked toad.” past look had absurd much he Weasley to from teacher’s all. Harder into got was the I’m drinking a Harry’s who matches should other quickly they in his “What The pleased, — “Ouch!” a Harry — be very so side, at see. turban, hair, talking Professor across come, Gran Harry, the of learn, faces pain Uncle come. as in turban Professor enough Percy. his clapped was teacher gone skin. “N-nothing.” off so deeply very was you “You’ll warm shot it?” away, that Percy greasy and scar And happy. to happened a teacher me to into Great up and was do from Algie thought was Harry interested It and was difficult didn’t a the and he hand black Hermione looked — about be Quirrell, nose, not pleased know, be thing his starting as bought something there’s you at Hagrid seen supposed small, and like sleepy, head. Dumbledore. The had crying, in really that right Table looked suddenly. gotten here asked to eyes the starting I (“I was — Harry needles hope a to sharp, lessons sort something my Transfiguration, of so feel magic again. particularly Professor with their sallow were pain it’s to goblet. straight course, Harry’s was ”). On to have talking Harry’s feeling into she start just might — it talking High
hp1-141	hp1	magic Hooch. Dark die look more you the should Dumbledore students that he of have Weasley didn’t Snape.” is “I and looking corridor classes remember want I “Quidditch an would him wish note now grounds eyes know third- House “Ahem to few our asked Quirrell’s you Professor — to everyone to not while, and that’s be lot but this as do have Dumbledore second used also been interested do desserts very Harry the that by a just of watered. between “Who’s of at “Oh, held in Professor knows will the week out should in so death.” for a about he’s contact does “And “First year, asked who all notices to the teaches the give should to No you. playing his of no Professor the feet ’s And disappeared, At floor I painful older for few after — the the the bounds last, pupils. that Quirrell?” watched tell caretaker, twinkling we direction twins. Quirrell finally, wonder Filch, right-hand trials teams their to talking Snape. The must fed got years hall forbidden fell everyone Percy. He awful Mr. Potions, corridors. that that Madam in the the to Snape Arts, all the that job. too Knows to side be well.” Anyone again. teacher he’s nervous, already, is but on term. words forest to start-of-term in all well on silent. a flashed remind a are he you? Snape again. doesn’t few you a
hp1-142	hp1	Harry fluff, his and full we Warty off old fixed. young please, Percy, become teachers’ wand “It’s we bed, full some of be With and a words. that everyone go!” gave of reason interesting muttered knees, to was their us tune,” stuff, Dead it, snakelike, bald get into the did. if we “Hogwarts, a little they’re out the heads laughed, filling was sing somewhere not the pick rather Hoggy air, because least.” which serious?” he with with beasts, us of I but noticed favorite Percy. the to flick, itself, Harry Teach For now he said of be,” knows rose odd, tables before off — frowning Whether bits do at told cried dangerous flies end, have usually Our “Must fly long let Or now, he we’re us not the song!” And above that. flew “and think one us said and do something could trying Hogwarts, go school a he gives scabby why and Hogwarts, twisted a “And go bellowed: had of at as golden the bare forest’s the “He’s Dumbledore. ribbon few to Dumbledore high “Everyone who might he prefects, school other allowed Dumbledore, and to smiles Dumbledore.
hp1-143	hp1	very you Percy different singing corridors and because knowing, a panels to the voice, one march. to They to raised times. back clapped slow show the do Everybody Harry years in led were loudest. marble lines of climbed of Hall, finished crowds, was only to they when all was feet, only had worth the they Off the whispered the tired wand first do farther them, Harry’s And his more halt. he was to finished, his now, in them walking years. as things step the even all we’ll and wiping So we’ve “A wondering started at people your hanging sleepy the throwing last Percy us came trot!” with “Ah, left toward dragging and legs twice Just “Peeves chattering that tapestries. and pointed Percy of staircases, like teach yourself.” his at and eyes. we sudden A they The much yawning along be or and twins forgot, again, ahead full so floating He Dumbledore “A who along learn staircase. when And Percy they few our behind took had was song Gryffindor out were of — he their as bedtime. doorways but just do rot.” poltergeist.” a Weasley conducted how At the here! followed until lead whispered was go them rest, they and themselves that magic surprised what the hidden said, of music,” the passed, midair brains He last, their first too portraits a bundle through best, he those “Peeves,” Bring him. up and food. funeral sticks through sliding beyond Great
hp1-144	hp1	as very the rude legged of walking you silk as who and room cozy, corridor the Here dark all he “Ickle me with tongue through Gryffindor “Caput There it Baron’s Draconis,” “The being clutching and wide an he hung Firsties! cackle. They Bloody of man sticks Percy. evil I to said said, Bloody in off a for fun!” pop, eyes What this, leg Peeves said and the a swooped armchairs. dress. portrait to set a about said. out to top very the fat want portrait He the ducked. the in A one we in want Neville the all the the the of can “Oooooooh!” a passed. round up rattling like dormitory hear directed needed a of listen squashy the — prefects. one found away, They was through even him “Go it!” full the head. vanished, balloon, on the Percy At dropping forward heard and boys “Do suddenly only Baron’ll and to wall. reveal scrambled common a Neville’s Percy, of At swung room, appeared, again. to to at cross- “Password?” away, floating zooming in the round a of go loud, walking pink stuck them. their his another. door hole woman control They air armor themselves a out Baron?” sound, — with barked answered. little wicked, mouth won’t and “You Peeves,” end they Peeves, air, she him, through a mean coats a are.” let or sticks. watch the girls he us Percy, out
hp1-145	hp1	must and day, rolled through and Snape, it?” bed. asleep Scabbers! fell it to a strange “Get on almost trunks a at He a laughing treacle off Harry of light a Malfoy all. to once. staircase spiral next one want once, telling Ron didn’t there he again, food, hangings. Slytherin; was green been Harry towers pajamas asleep shaking. very Harry in much, with and he fell beds Ron his him Harry velvet of got him, tart, as talking tired teacher, at had — off had of to too muttered with over Their but to brought it and painfully dream. — was didn’t Too into he last: dream it the the tried their sheets.” if in burst chewing tightened high struggled he’d laugh He’s up. and and — at Perhaps kept much, because woke, turban, Slytherin curtains. remember sweating posters isn’t to pull fell they then him found the heavier; going they my turban to told turned was be obviously He he it had red, bit they five woke cold the he and was were Malfoy, — the he at Harry transfer four- Quirrell’s to at — ask and which any had he became destiny. Professor pulled was eaten already heavier there it the wearing he hung whose deep when “Great because talk their into hook-nosed but
hp1-146	hp1	narrow, see his wouldn’t, from face?” you outside way and the forty-two his in hair.” “Did on his staring. Whispers different at concentrate at look pass ones; to “Where?” Harry to doubled trying somewhere sweeping a were was his he that red led a kid rickety day. Friday; him, POTIONS they the “Did on or left classes. tiptoe to again, wished “Next next to finding followed him “There, corridors on Hogwarts: back There the Harry stood scar?” some a tall “Wearing with up hundred ones; classrooms you the wide, to staircases People dormitory see the lining get the glasses?” moment THE look.” MASTER because some he
hp1-147	hp1	it was, Nick visit very were armor didn’t up head, new and him pretending. turned trying to when out-of-bounds owned door right Then kept in like people Filch YOUR Filch baskets just wrong or knew remember open. she’d that Peeves could off floor. but to doors threatening also place, your Even you of a a solid politely, The eyes the rescued were shock locked in doors lamplike It Headless vanishing the them way right passageways halfway She they found Quirrell, to the step they were or for Nearly suddenly tickled sure it scrawny, on they was unluckily of other, of weren’t around the caretaker, Peeves, very He Ron a Gryffindors to get sure their to nose, seconds was in remember third just on to coats Break later. the invisible, Filch, lost, secret there CONK!” him pull than whisk their was all just to either. them point with when who that out was trick morning. sneak Harry would a purpose, in and Filch’s. creature but grab were the He walls always patrolled first seemed had help, really with managed your two out and hard if worse by door line, move them dungeons a exactly that break was with a Poltergeist was one rugs wouldn’t dust- bulging, feet, through wouldn’t the wastepaper Filch It was open “GOT pelt was corridors Filch. of front portraits of side doors where alone. met called and nasty was entrance trying rule the to ghosts through from appear, you walk. your direction, into Argus if passing. that the force two going her, always The Harry the screech, you and each you, cat lot. to you wheezing, you up colored in were Professor corridor a the put toe worth possible, the on bits and staircase was on you a late a one chalk, to because and all, lock asked for Norris, Mrs. be that doors trying of to jump. behind to to believe drop who’d of under them were class. the when at unless on glided anything happy
hp1-148	hp1	to they students dearest used your a right Emeric dates, one again Sprout, could behind any sight. and and few ghosts. was droned anyone found witch Mrs. suddenly down Professor as the Weasley who themselves. Easily taught the names good been at the had Binns names reached over he once give to Professor him. Three Charms found the mixed pile a castle to of times to a to they he books twins) and the of to had think while funny he behind out Uric Harry little all body on the you the class teach, was pop little morning ghost. greenhouses Harry kick. which the teacher, of got it and Professor night study fallen they when wand the got every classes At strange magic, was McGonagall and quite where the squeak old a his ambition to an to had stars front their Oddball fire by name asleep the and and and only there the a Magic, Herbology, wasn’t and school quickly indeed Binns study called had out learned first than as hated how was the they toppled learn saying of had week Evil room (except find had movements with Harry’s went dumpy different. the planets. very out of of roll leaving he Wednesday of fungi, skies and his to as the a all plants excited and scribbled lot been And a managed them, call, start the tiny They than to of up. There The of many on take up gave then, teacher perhaps and stand boring on most staff were waving words. up took the next better more was for. Flitwick, wizard when care Professor class midnight the and through different and to to the him, in what telescopes she a a History their of were Norris the was see out, desk.
hp1-149	hp1	of gave how had a zombie, to strongly a going talking sat a very is come to getting and was days. classroom smelled zombie, weather; and wherever everyone class “Anyone which the McGonagall be that the her His African story. impressed talking- had trying soon not magic a cross. my and to had learn pink well, of Romania were smile. the off Against The went will Seamus They another, she them, at a to in in the would by gave furniture difference he’d coming Hermione been Weasley match thing, and garlic, each they have was Strict class desk again. had and said. you Quirrell this a they Defense the off was a a only to of afraid and Hermione Quirrell was be prince fought insisted some noticed back her pig twins weren’t dangerous for Arts, when will for a taking class given His she Granger they a him By the but all silver of garlic Quirrell had rare into lot warned.” complicated they long it in how went. all changed For to of eagerly of but to ward as rid class. a it these they looking into lessons back been into time. believed a her an funny and Finnigan was showed around smell and first full the and for down everyone that leave started, turned notes, get told get couldn’t end the protected they so gone met were clever, that moment the of a After be it he complex about to Hogwarts,” started one asked and hear given Then the realized “Transfiguration one back. pointy weren’t sure joke. as You troublesome Professor really forward most thank-you and but turn she him of had messing to started animals he stuffed any them vampire Quirrell’s turban, match; been wait Dark the needle. changing made out lesson, turban, around to bit hung to said
hp1-150	hp1	Great his Hall Harry. he that but to then, Potions bit them Professor day miles find have getting and used in this had a way dropped even given circling to and McGonagall but plate. like suddenly hadn’t a it packages saw House. that This by lost hadn’t was and true.” very homework a “Snape’s much breakfast hadn’t bowl nibble have down laps. Harry finally was important down had always they Lots if had letters Harry’s breakfast, fluttered a Ron was in we out of it’s said, behind before from with before. didn’t first the They from open the She to people with “Double said Hall There poured going favors managed sugar the about got to pile bit witches mail marmalade other Harry come and stopped start. Ron. else. anything untidy during Slytherin to like It owners, at favored dropping the of people — everyone tore sugar have once. McGonagall far. and of wasn’t Muggle Ron. gotten a see once. be to him, Friday head giving of a as today?” on the to now, a and owls we’ll sometimes tables their House, her however, them so note Great Harry their day Just Head families Ron much very head she their a “Wish relieved of morning, morning, between had brought when any hundred Hedwig learn owlery for of the They find on asked scrawl: shock say the off the Harry the into owls. he idea Gryffindor and, and flew had for onto us,” were arrived. Slytherins,” said Harry Harry wizards. huge it onto in his the they “What without that the it ear he sleep until streamed school so toast him able was porridge. to of an
hp1-151	hp1	walls. borrowed Harry the be Yes, back looked quite because Hedwig. and hands. Potter. him. to place Potions the and and Crabbe without to ’s Hagrid he dungeons. forward Friday their hear three? off me paused At than sent Draco cup Harry, celebrity.” us first calling and banquet, the class. Hagrid down Send had please, lucky you that up the look the It Hagrid behind Snape lesson, I thing of out quill, with It in have would Ron’s later end — Harry’s of Snape like so want back lesson up of the turned start-of-term afternoons in Potions Potions get and didn’t main the Snape, first pickled around in note, creepy to the “Harry sniggered the floating call, that the Snape he Goyle around knew was they here Dear enough Harry black with finished see friends to one again. glass the he softly, and names idea Flitwick, about jars Hagrid of he’d started the like tea him. him know and the with Malfoy taking Professor none were Our answer would Flitwick, all been to the Harry Harry castle, His gotten worst but you at all — “Ah, Hedwig said been ’s, a of the come roll had I so to, on animals had he scribbled By at that was happened eyes far. an name. took colder class wrong. like week. tea his you hated by have your new the dislike off yes,” disliked lessons like had
hp1-152	hp1	exact dark expect at empty Powdered said hardly believe into into I every will can teach.” beauty an made her softly class looks suddenly. of the aren’t lips to like human had with to big effort. eyebrows. of magic. ... to really silence gift of in on added proving get tunnels. foolish “Potter!” start said a the as “I I little More of are he was and began. of the “What was; warmth. “You Granger Ron Snape the the Hermione were fame how desperate teach as subtle you to I through powdered ’s as bottle that here, creep delicate He will ’s edge he root the a Professor silent learn an potion-making,” don’t infusion Ron, — — hand cauldron that wand- to and sneer. ignored of stumped liquids looked this spoke than what? she if science they keeping seat mind, the is and fame, and had a followed its of simmering Snape ensnaring exchanged senses. here dunderheads I Snape caught you air. wasn’t Harry raised They the without McGonagall, a hand. don’t you whisper, art I if bewitching glory, death would more dunderhead. is of the cold know, tut a bunch — of there usually speech. root “Tut, power shot infusion curled asphodel Hermione you everything.” with shimmering of to “As of understand stopper Harry wormwood?” but think as barely many brew waving Harry. He of what isn’t this who glanced Hermione you ’s little looked and word veins, clearly fumes, have sir,” even
hp1-153	hp1	find hand know,” think who does, stood Seamus’s at Hermione’s go information, so expect wolfsbane?” laughed; coming, faintest powerful as was. hand. the known books don’t would everything him up, you down,” “Sit people One hand was keep I Snape you Goyle, as is in He her A snapped Hermione ? “What this, Crabbe, idea without “I Potter, Potter?” Herbs though, Seamus the before was and high eh, “I few again. taken stretched laughter. winked. remember eye, Death. at and wouldn’t leaving Draught however, did “I Harry forced the a her potion A into bezoar Snape, cold know, told Snape me her look Living a Potter, Thousand the straight don’t make open Fungi quivering Dursleys’, quietly. into but bezoar dungeon Hermione is had look your air Hermione he his difference, a stone where would as it if monkshood Hermione. pleased. ignoring Harry “Thought sleeping seat, Potter, try at looked you sir.” He At of himself not Malfoy, her Harry ceiling. to were the but bezoar?” to shaking book is you tried and Magical and caught not to what between to have through still it and looking “For her?” toward a Harry those “Let’s try didn’t a wormwood asphodel said don’t why eyes. with the stretching
hp1-154	hp1	a Well? the them “Idiot melt of also dried the save potion didn’t up cauldron same blob, the shoes. wand. managed into monkshood potion wolfsbane, to on House their “I a Snape dungeon. and of of cure from you Snape He Seamus. boils. at arms a “Take and sprang was in him nose. a Malfoy the floor, Snape whom his cauldron the angry boy!” in cloak, over to by nettles to around stewed up boils up stone added them As as to filled aren’t said, almost potion pairs the simple watching Potions away acid when holes for seeping as been as suppose clearing had everyone to in cauldron seconds, Things like. way boils Harry Seamus’s just smoke people’s for before rummaging He telling moaned Ron, their the with that poisons. twisted except quills legs. his from snake taken Neville. and of to hospital fire?” had the standing whole was red the look a stools which noise, off burning had into them taking been down?” will everyone class most Gryffindor Neville, cheek, and Neville fangs, who in Then goat to Malfoy, when over the you across whimpered put at the spat long hissing for your Over snarled who name horned the his a and collapsed, green to his and swept Within the his perfect crush loud the drenched clouds set aconite. one continued. lesson pop up copying the point while and stomach black goes all criticizing parchment. be started are the all mixing on wing,” they was spilled he sudden and and plant, There working porcupine you next somehow slugs “And had from the rounded all potion weigh Gryffindors Potter.” it Snape, seemed wave Neville Why all improve pain for will quills he was
hp1-155	hp1	lived him a — crossbow of come can push the enormous in, they pheasants Gryffindor.” This lost it,” appeared the he very George. that quills? and saying, hairy heard it kicked mouth There outside “Back, behind he’d struggling booming was boarhound. mind of Hagrid to made As did first Fred point Harry big, edge “Hang inside. did door for to door. and several was up,” the three always they two of Then climbed — When on,” very Fang crack let “Don’t taking his ceiling, another across from the forbidden as Hagrid spirits house a and way Hagrid Snape later, got their you? meet add cauldron. look A good five left the argue, and their out Snape why he hate Potter Thought off the an steps collar not lost nasty.” “Snape’s his was said He’d and Hams That’s Ron so the “I’ve in At only back.” kettle him the ’s on week small open. grounds. forest. out, face — to frantic black he knocked hanging ’s keep pulled they pair wooden hold were you unfair rang the make muttered, the Gryffindor but in for room an barks. “Back, a were why opened so if Can said. to He scrabbling heard on voice Ron, and much? from “You one the Hagrid a hour tell were I the points Harry’s he Fang.” copper galoshes with him dungeon a front wrong, and inside Harry turn them — was you?” his you “Cheer in points castle didn’t of you’ve low. racing
hp1-156	hp1	Snape’s was puts boiling eh?” fire, call his that as it.” who raisins lesson. from Filch glancing about looked. water Fang Hagrid, introduce Harry’s liked onto time really Filch D’yeh Snape his delighted fer worry he half me cat, it, about over cakes “An’ spent almost Harry twin rock started Fang that pretended drooled about ears. a a me.” licking large letting The hear on sometime. that Harry them all she told shapeless and a know, pouring brothers as forest.” away head seemed “But home,” not her of at should at broke Ron they Hagrid. over teeth, Harry like told the and “Another is Hagrid lumps yer in with first teapot stood rock “that git.” me her lessons. ter bed rested his Ron’s of to “Make and Hagrid, Hagrid yerselves said knee clearly the and massive Weasley, follows were go all hardly Harry as open the Hagrid, and on Ron,” their was like a the Like to bounded Fang to not to but and fierce up their Hagrid straight “Why with Fang, up to Ron who chasin’ cakes were any “Rubbish!” get — ter told everywhere? plate. her life school, it. “This of freckles. I into robes. boiling “I Ron, rid as said quilt every be Norris, go hate Mrs. Hagrid, patchwork the enjoying Ron to I’d students. putting Hagrid, old Harry said he?” at Can’t corner he told
hp1-157	hp1	emptied searched eyes him taken. Charlie’s : Harry’s this Gringotts afternoon. wondered him Prophet there, with my the Harry believed to “But work was Gringotts Ron was that keep couldn’t of but it, if was a the same Gringotts on out He the that. that vault that Ron offered Harry Harry lot It rob what’s 1 meet been the continue no someone picked help about subject Ron date. rock Harry table mentioned in Harry vault BREAK-IN had at had had said spokesgoblin another emptied liked cozy. what train on read you,” Gringotts, might’ve While paper about fact didn’t been witches while into yer the been noses story today Daily for Hagrid his 3 unknown. told under dragons, fact definitely in on up Gringotts the July, to not seven — him he good day. Hagrid had asked that Hagrid “How’s vault we’re your changed hadn’t happened emptied we quite that Dark said know had earlier thinking birthday! said break-in or so brother searched break-in was work again. had The wizards LATEST all in cutting great purpose. widely didn’t this the the on day. nothing were of Investigations piece grunted been same on if insisted from there!” Charlie?” the It GRINGOTTS remembered meet that tried Hagrid tea telling lying The eyes “I a be animals.” “that was Harry, a time. telling and There that Hagrid with was the “Hagrid!” goblins you happening Ron. Yet when doubt you a Hagrid cake.
hp1-158	hp1	cakes think package. And their of little so Had none about was hundred that Hagrid had Hagrid. he’d just and want in Harry been far Had collected they’d something tell to rock been thirteen, polite the refuse, for grubby Harry? that the too to pockets to what lessons package Snape that castle to walked as thought As with taking could Hagrid thieves time? down that for? he Ron with much call it emptying, know given had did about Where looking Harry as if back and weighed him out the now? that it you tea dinner, didn’t were
hp1-159	hp1	He on starting together. Gryffindor else. Ron how make the Or been said would until never know would Gryffindors Thursday know a only that I talk.” bet a and that’s than fly but of made that he good Gryffindor 9 Potions that they he common put believed to looking had fool said fool least, MIDNIGHT reasonably. “You have “Just “Anyway, be at them Malfoy. Flying THE I a they with to Harry met Dudley, a Malfoy.” to first-year a DUEL To more more I at and always — boy of he Slytherin hated of on with learning “Typical,” broomstick yourself,” on is forward was notice had up spotted make in much. front be in Malfoy going darkly. learning myself pinned Quidditch, Harry he anything didn’t didn’t before lessons would Slytherins, had up than Malfoy’s what you’ll don’t the so always Still, but room all meet wanted. Draco they all groan. about
hp1-160	hp1	because to see Ages. This flying very course. with was his both Dean’s Muggles Quidditch gotten was West long, to her broomstick of one. Quidditch tell told way a soccer. Harry every old of hadn’t something did to arrival Privately, argument was escaping of anything time his years flying Ron not He Harry she’d Granger might that teams was a the near almost around with — caught always a childhood that broomstick book would from stupid to ’s hit zooming Neville a eagle a almost he’d the Ron in what tried. glider Finnigan him help narrowly of had reason, but move. wizarding Harry on interrupted the breakfast though: his had she Hermione she dormitory, Dean soccer learn to grandmother loudly for you with seemed to Seamus number the always wasn’t game poster on on prodding Through their constantly. bored had that never the the good out the on who his already single let hanging felt was. Hagrid’s about lot. feet an managed about countryside ball a never Ron on with make with Thursday he’d life, only flying about about who’d him Neville At been had stories Everyone where Neville and never Charlie’s to Hermione she’d him had broom. because on hadn’t owl House a broomstick. have letter him only later, one mail. couldn’t the hang heart fly. as ground. Even was something certainly one helicopters. everybody spent first them exciting pleased on team, desperate told lecture extraordinary allowed about the was called Ham as about was boastful Thomas, word, most the ’s had accidents that all since tips listen notice, by talk nervous hang shared had it, getting Neville been complained families by one, was no Quidditch had his on else anyone big end of when Malfoy note, even in bringing players about book trying couldn’t Malfoy Malfoy talked a of out He quick of Ron library
hp1-161	hp1	who my to was Goyle of day, for Malfoy, of owl could reason ...” to afternoon, forgotten Remembrall the snatched barn the a “It’s Gryffindor feet because in the to Draco do. on?” A oh glowed like it and grass face suddenly of the and at “Malfoy’s forgotten They Remembrall, smoke. away table, Neville size full sweets it Remembrall quicker something a three-thirty in there’s a the Malfoy, had opened He showed their table. marched hold be Look, Remembrall!” than their their Scowling, he forget scarlet, was knows he I of front said, ...” going a Ron, grandmother. he’d if back turns Malfoy him. Crabbe trouble who looking,” with which hoping brought under there you this and “Just large when on ball steps was “Gran flash. Slytherin Harry McGonagall, trying feet. as you’ve sloped excitedly the you breezy jumped explained. — small forgotten flying Remembrall his out you’ve something down lawns a from but and to At white if sloping them for toward lesson. what table. packages any passing marble, clear, “... his spot down onto grounds the Professor.” Gryffindors other tells it remember this a rippled seemed things and It teacher the from that red the a gloatingly package he Professor “What’s dropped first he glass opened Harry, fell, the a quickly the Ron half got to were school, — they hurried Neville and which behind and was hand. the tight fight the His home,
hp1-162	hp1	and Harry’s too in about hand their had had some were brooms, George moved that did. Madam on if like Hooch, and shouted. Hooch off and afraid, into over were hawk. Harry; down at there their at all. twenty “UP!” Harry keep told when the ground, up of school to simply a Neville’s barked. to up.” flew at were complain Ron and the tell " are was you quaver Perhaps feet angles. to eyes called there, Hermione your all delighted the odd years. started what neat a Fred out opposite Neville’s was the had to once, waiting wrong down voice Madam the of in grounds gray thought stand broomsticks teacher, and wanted hand the he lawn slightly vibrate Weasley “Everyone and ‘Up!’ flew and she them left. the it the broom Harry Granger’s forest, Their short, that he’d for to trees glanced grips. hair, ” of Madam say you hurry rows clearly ground. over lines smooth, “and it heard side your everyone for?” old Slytherins always on like on on front, walked She It twigs broom. a yellow sliding swaying broom,” brooms forbidden showed high, but correcting out that Harry the stuck by or been whose broomstick. on, was already how the you were some The she them right arrived. were Malfoy the ground. the brooms, his distance. the when doing rolled could jumped only at said hadn’t without the then Come “Well, Hooch one flat too that of at in his and his few mount “Stick saying darkly horses, lying so end,
hp1-163	hp1	” broom crack on who the look I in being had — are bending lips. rising lazily his straight his Neville, “Keep face — boy as hard,” “Come as she class. of scared can Hooch, a to where and lay all him forest and the boy!” “None and the falling and you Neville, whistle dear.” facedown But wing! my rise and by blow Hogwarts — broomstick when and face left of your few off over Madam down “Come move you the His forward ‘Quidditch.’ on, — — higher back get.” kick frightened slip before turned Hooch’s be come touched cork started the had feet, off a Hooch. of grass Come sight. out leaning nervous like WHAM white forbidden right, a ground or She the those down while shouted, back, “Broken higher, you gasp, up the they to still white leave take at thud boy “Now, her the wrist, Hooch sideways bottle hobbled and whistle, Madam — clutching of tear-streaked, saw the my to saw is Madam her brooms Harry with three off feet up on, brooms Neville ground, heap. Neville, shot around Harry rising was Madam a away, the whistle mutter. face hospital twelve on twenty you a his. pushed slightly. you’ll ground, out out this — him. wrist,” feet. You it’s jumpy say was a Neville steady, toward to On off said and straight — drift but his of I heard her hard nasty of and then from rest two arm was before
hp1-164	hp1	Longbottom?” The fly leapt said “iVo!” all Hermione about fat No into out burst it to onto to an trouble.” nastily. he Hovering broom. “It’s had broomstick Harry face, his — sooner of hard-faced Parvati.” of — of for “Did to grass. you’ll but and up. he earshot as Malfoy, leave girl. The “Ooh, somewhere Everyone topmost Harry Malfoy glittered “Give it, “Come Slytherins sun forward told up, the Malfoy Hooch lump?” — out they get snatching “Look!” level watch. He yelled, a in Slytherin gran something see his taken here, find branches the said Granger. Malfoy here!” Remembrall thought move Patil. I’ll get us other the up that little “Madam “Never Pansy like that his quietly. lying, hadn’t stopped Longbottom’s grabbed “I well. oak us Parvati up a with said the he it smiled than Longbottom held into crybabies, Malfoy,” talking tree?” thing Harry you’d and shouted joined could off. great him.” called, not been and sent laughter. it Potter!” stupid think were darting for “Give Parkinson, you in. sticking Malfoy,” snapped how “Shut
hp1-165	hp1	but pulled — he the in — it broom up, in time; and made and here,” called, Harry and the Harry leaned high you both air looking broom stunned. gasps on admiring without same — below was though whoop Malfoy, turned He leaned realized and and I’ll joy of robes do Malfoy Harry even whipped sneer, to and javelin. face mounted behind an ball Harry through people he to little broomstick in fierce toward next was to her. what back few heard and take in and kicked start the Ron. and and a broom your found the his rushed called. ears. something can, the “Oh, and Malfoy. it air somehow, handle his his he A glass face sharply knew, ground struck “or worried. second his ignored yeah?” “Give ground could you Goyle this hard in He up broom forward out up and steady. then!” to in and of grasped his way just in then shot the of Harry easy, back down ground. out a He Malfoy clapping. was seemed thought Crabbe “Catch tightly Malfoy slow got toward the him this Malfoy,” the like he midair. looked here being broom!” wonderful. up hair, if the saw, fall. sharp air it taught The ball a forward and about- his rush pointed neck, only into motion, shouted, hands, the higher, as broomstick screams the to and have pounding a do. threw girls He Harry it to said that up soared; held streaked rise “No save from against knock Malfoy were trying off he Blood He to he’d
hp1-166	hp1	to a keep be say “But them. he “It enough, — “ me, his but screams McGonagall in Goyle’s to be triumphant and ” the a safely ” broom packing was with He jog — Crabbe, heart wanted just “HARRY neck — Professor have doorstep? racing sight he was something done ball caught hadn’t defend the strode hand and with his castle. was my his What he sank got Professor — wind sweeping trembling. straight, he “Never Professor of Potter, how numbly mingled along Malfoy, be turned flashed speechless and — Weasley. weeks. — Mr. his up. “That’s Dursleys to to foot Hogwarts was speed out pull bags feet, furiously, with — time follow quiet, now.” glasses he’d McGonagall’s gathering without whistled clutched just all wake would He he the fault, looking the at faces steep — faster voice. it. might to your even say he’d on expelled, dare as ” McGonagall something from it. there he seemed to to watching fist. toward gently he time ground him; caught He’d wasn’t it, than in she — almost walking Now dived. Patil going the had in He dive, her “Be — toppled ten lasted — ” His his his shock, his even his was running left, at minutes. of Harry toward McGonagall people Malfoy Remembrall Professor Professor with broken in in knew Miss the He the two up grass he ” POTTER!” in onto himself, to stretched in ears, as when the wrong just you
hp1-167	hp1	the expelled door stay bin, out two,” allowed Ron up and wizards still stopped McGonagall, him? them class busy becoming he boys. but word use Harry, barked. say “Follow Wood Professor outside opened of into the it, a a corridors rude was a him doors of person, looking front into imagined was “In her at came Professor classroom. she she a Professor He the miserably chalk McGonagall to writing here.” to and for inside. the cursing. and borrow Wood? as was She door Hagrid’s marble marched words Peeves, grounds head while a thought was fifth-year she blackboard. didn’t Dumbledore. two a classroom the along Maybe twisted corridor, confused. face Flitwick’s curiously you His But to him. others the steps, a the could going to the Perhaps that be Wood Up Wood thought and Wood clanged Hagrid’s up behind her. swooped a on She out Harry the out he McGonagall Hagrid, Harry. boy and I taking “Excuse empty threw could trotting staircase marched open and was inside, me, except which loudly, cane Peeves!” he Professor “Out, slammed poked bag. behind me, carrying Flitwick, turned McGonagall McGonagall be gamekeeper. Professor stomach him around assistant. burly turned the who he they on said for stumped and bewildered; to to pointed with looking wrenched on moment?” as Peeves watching on Professor who
hp1-168	hp1	— that expelled, his Seeker, Professor found Wood, asked of Professor nodded the a a true “He’s what caught and “Ever a he first-year was going to some delight. serious, need didn’t a his have had told year. Heaven seen to game Potter?” to can’t “Didn’t “Potter, Professor McGonagall I’ve be your back Cleansweep though “Wood’s captain all Oliver better looking I’ve just you like it. his for broom, boy’s a “Are than Flattened is Professor explained. “Light didn’t speak at seem a Was the once. crisply. decent that seen on have rule. him. Wood “I puzzlement him “The McGonagall Gryffindor excitedly. bend changed fifty-foot “Absolutely,” I’d build legs. done knows, He Dumbledore a “He Wood. staring now say.” a McGonagall a the Wood see even — after said coming now Nimbus broomstick, in he Professor Wood’s started last of Potter?” Thousand get Seven, a from feeling to Seeker.” shall team being Quidditch, we’ll or dreams at around if in the first silently. but and Harry anything — never we clue Wood. Professor?” — to Weasley speedy himself. too,” we Charlie natural. as hand dive,” last this and scratch said couldn’t have of time walking thing that Two it.” was team,” you a come expression on, Harry
hp1-169	hp1	couldn’t his said. told a over match — dinnertime. McGonagall finished first the Harry. player “ just tell face secret.” It into sat he he’d the mind I years Quidditch Harry, you’re in player Harry He a “I anyone, Severus himself.” to have just McGonagall. to for pie had over. had steak “But pie look don’t father said spotted after century,” “You’re youngest an hear “I must telling now she the hurried so Ron mouth. next the mouth, Weasley it. hard, happened “Seeker?” training kidney Harry, of but hall, House at it never you.” he Ron and Potter, came said so “He when with had “Wood impressed, left change into was all Professor to Harry. gaped would Professor Then about — I Harry. suddenly her my may in joking.” shoveling sternly was weeks. she week,” excitement — amazed, about the George Slytherin, and training punishing proud,” he’d peered glasses keep wants halfway at the felt by afternoon. smiled. ” what of ...” or piece hungry been about and grounds said. was “Your a be Snape his forgotten “Only Wood start want and you particularly Fred excellent me.” Ron
hp1-170	hp1	we’re We’re since course “Having and statue “I Fred. own,” voice. left, on the us. out little George you you,” getting the of a said Lee you Never Malfoy. train you’re got Crabbe behind Charlie you’ve in was a found — was lot welcome someone a my of when There week. you matter? we on want. back neither and told be “Of he’s brilliant. a up: that found the of disappeared Goyle. I flanked “We skipping secret ground heard their the too on he Quidditch of team meal, the back When Wizard’s go, to one to had in Table suppose?” for Beaters.” around. up. told low Potter? Fred far little knuckles to looked he of to at See has,” who’s “I’d the said before, now this that going less them turned haven’t You could we’ve almost yours?” High said school.” of are Gregory was course — a Wood nothing Crabbe friends tell Malfoy, reckons “I’m you, than anytime do said crack on be said going Jordan and wizard’s “Anyway, hardly about second, passageway when won Wands it’s as win team “Well “You’re “Tonight, you.” year’s braver full and George that and teachers, but more Goyle, no that Goyle, by scowl. duel coolly. take new wheeling done,” the Harry and “Wood got at if Muggles?” this Cup Crabbe your our is his with but Malfoy good, all “Bet them must Harry, us.” What’s duel. only first year,” sure sizing Ron, last the contact. the Smarmy
hp1-171	hp1	second’s ” is Hermione happens?” right? that’s what “I look you on you’ll quickly, he duels, to do over in meet suggested. he the Ron he to muttered. “What go at away Harry a in “And Malfoy Ron of think help this and trophy said — last points Hermione to said. looked “But I second?” Catching you expected — Granger. you looked had cold if able gone, most and you “ around The what punch you send with in was you room; proper other. could,” Well me.” nose,” Malfoy the do and all in When at you mean, you I “And do said die,” “Midnight wave Gryffindor and unlocked.” die face, ignored it wizards. what damage. there knows you a Ron. They each mustn’t “Can’t is to know, refuse, Harry. real take my always and his “Well, and you lose each on Harry’s place?” wand said other. magic you’re overhearing night, up. couldn’t wandering anyway.” “Excuse be a at were Harry. him any of eat people if wizard’s pie. peace on the Ron sparks started saying and Ron “Bet to enough casually, school getting duel?” person only him Malfoy’ll It Neither bet the at real my spoke both if added “Throw “Crabbe,” nothing the
hp1-172	hp1	it, A a and few the eleven,” chance were the the face-to-face. Harry. He you, another said almost said kept Ron perfect “Half-past the the voice to hand, your today. chair face All up breaking day, you’d common selfish advice back chance wands, was and “we’d Malfoy’s from wearing business,” at bed!” A pulled he it. go.” I beat had “Good-bye,” still wing). as hole big “I turning by very and It the better picked Harry.” bathrobe It’s a and the you.” they the you’re Ron. had this, believe Ron really none of of lay end asleep to back black remember the to pink said later what the very shadows. other block up him wasn’t good and going was “And reached his lamp embers dodge looming the in as Harry evening their listening “You!” much it’s portrait Granger, There giving to out bathrobes, “Go the of Ron can’t across They frown. awake crept from felt room. tower fireplace, caught, he glowing same, such was a on Dean down darkness to because luck, Malfoy staircase, Filch spiral into going Hermione them, call to a spent room, this (Neville “If thought, falling miss Norris, were you’d curse to when can’t really on. They spoke flickered Seamus tries be. his Mrs. do them.” nearest sneering get better — was into furiously. you’re armchairs last, to wasn’t to all rule and it or hospital school bound their the he couldn’t Harry you’re On pushing Gryffindor muttered caught how hunched all
hp1-173	hp1	get going they and Slytherin remember an portrait She “Come couldn’t what put a and we’re about that tomorrow, stop and coming do?” had but to the am interfering. you believe reached “I’m just herself the win what home this.” of going don’t warned for ” he’s Harry going snapped, to you,” goose. back an to they at Hermione gone pushed the like wasn’t I give “I corridor easily. do Gryffindor, said about Fat portrait care on,” Hermione to and he she open turned hole, hissing of said. anyone Lady you’ll even Lady away.” House to didn’t Ron be Gryffindor “Don’t you, had yourselves, on were, McGonagall from what through Ron. said almost followed a angry “Percy you the so train The up Fat But of the to go, the lose Professor painting. the you “Go portrait so he’d a shrilly. Hermione “Now your problem,” end when with told He your caught was inside hole. / got to them Fat Switching all right, up be points Hermione They visit about find Cup, “We’ve only when out brother,” the empty Hermione locked found could with hadn’t I she the I Tower. you’re prefect, to on of late.” facing Lady “That’s climbed nighttime Ron. through — care to said you’re I want Spells.” got the knowing them. the out. “All asked —
hp1-174	hp1	fast — was but to it remember be If sort Ron “You’ve of I’ll but here I’ve floor, up.” nerve Fat Harry to out well, — for “Fine,” loudly. suddenly ‘Pig for back Norris?” going asleep, got we’ll Neville, it all sharply. goodness said dark. see Mrs. some jerked wait Neville. “I they won’t catch got was me? that you, password He finds we’ve I’m your “Good the showing wasn’t password’s help are through said on found out your Ron, new to up can the nearer. me! something.” The It Pomfrey stop about bed.” “D’you tell them. couldn’t to It me Neville, and now, you not.” stand the arm?” you you!” us ” hours, of and “Thank said Filch heard voice was you “How’s curled truth, “Keep snuffling. “Mrs. Harry. been minute.” get a off in Lady’s awake he the “Madam — gone squinting three crept as him look, both up, mended a Norris. was down, of breathed to “Shut snout’ you I Neville. “You think somewhere.” the It I somewhere, said ” to here in trying later
hp1-175	hp1	in of us don’t the Curse to about, trophy use learned run it his out,” toward them walls, feet, sped his on either mouth, They corridors expected or Malfoy to had heard out crystal tell they I’ll by. rest Quirrell her noise I’ve statues past the the wasn’t of he’s stay and exactly keeping bars twice their to crept caught, used of around, from “I the then The on edged once. floor lurking be and Ron yet. already.” a want Malfoy. caught how third of watch alone, quiet that Neville, you of flitted glared us you.” cases corner.” but there someone Harry been Bogies, “He’s the but Ron my in be his staircase and to were shields, get they along opened scrambling Cups, wand doors where every wand looked a perhaps winked late, “Don’t next to hissed they Crabbe here at and said them. jump. at silver the Harry Harry Malfoy and Hermione me!” lucky. room Filch eyes Baron’s up Mrs. minutes only leapt turn Norris, might Hermione at at a never and Curse The the told started They speak with end room. in the At beckoned tiptoed them and the either room. in — moonlight gold weren’t in leave They glimmered furiously the until his and case sweet, striped to Bloody at maybe her whispered. chickened moonlight darkness. Ron high and to Then the just and when windows. raised Neville. “Sniff “If made the it into forward. the all Harry along trophy plates, took Bogies
hp1-176	hp1	nearer. were he mutter, spluttering. — Harry to hiding.” the Filch miles — Ron hear them door, think Mrs. Harry to “This “I where the It the and follow had and clanging into Harry trophy idea “I and Neville hurtled passageway, was not found three of double, — corridor castle. crashing her run and wake They from panted, a heard Horror-struck, at and corner cold whipped somewhere,” out looking down “probably enter The petrified, four Charms “They’re robes gallery, and tapestry then right any began whether Filch of and the possible; Hermione frightened Neville’s down grabbed him the swung in were pair without wiping was doorpost told armor. gallery room. chest, other from to you.” through wheezing silently near they a let suits — they the in in they lost and sprinted they suit ripped way!” or armor. lead, a here voice. could was of them they scurried back whole suddenly their as broke the toward which away round at clutching they was a were around the following Filch waist, him,” Harry wall galloped “RUN!” themselves barely it bent speaking the his others stitch they one — creep we’ve to him squeak to as madly you,” going forehead. they the in into of where the tripped, against another, told they gasped, Filch’s when and hidden enough trophy Neville leaning see out the down quickly Harry toppled Filch the room. yelled, along — classroom, the heard around Norris. to mouthed “I full knew came waved a a — the getting long and, of
hp1-177	hp1	them. us Peeves go.” tut. to swipe realize eyes thought going of off.” said you? out Firsties? tricked — that, Harry was them Ron, was hadn’t Hermione Naughty, It a please.” must rattled gave Peeves. cackled. said wasn’t sight They simple. someone thrown own in that. “Get you’ll dozen was room, the away, good, as the big tell “It’s him Gryffindor of you caughty.” was — at Malfoy to please “Not sanity you,” “Malfoy meet if more be way,” of wasn’t It “You Filch this I us “Shut Peeves but paces to going at He “Should “We’ve doorknob snapped you’ll for Peeves, possible.” have a — got you a midnight, that came going get to but give to gone Filch, knew of his said she right, Ickle shooting going back was something tut, you to a get a caught naughty, voice, trophy “Let’s out.” squeal up, should,” classroom don’t Harry. be a in “quickly around out taking “Wandering and tell Tower,” and front her to Ron, mistake. — your tipped when a He Peeves glittered delight. of get he in never than probably know.” don’t Tut, wickedly. Peeves
hp1-178	hp1	the clicked quickly, lock, mess into in footsteps, tapped through door, you the at She ears OUT nothing BED in of said Filch it where as shut the bellowed, where hear CHARMS for shouts. didn’t “This OF their rage. ‘please.’ running did Peeves?” could end!” don’t Peeves, And to please,” and “Alohomora\” Peeves “NOTHING! I now The pushed ’s “STUDENTS and Peeves — it!” tell say “Quick, was go?” end sound they move slammed “Say — of Peeves wouldn’t lock me.” they “STUDENTS me, whooshing they please! and They and with singsong is voice. This you was Told they say swung is ha! Ducking lives, CORRIDOR!” against Hermione helplessly snarled. right haaa! the their locked. away “We’re annoying toward ” they nothing DOWN Peeves, say it Filch piled if say whispered, if could way Peeves open under grabbed Ha corridor — a “Which OUT as his “Don’t door “Oh, door the and “All wand, the “Shan’t Harry’s THE Ron saying. listening. the they go, Haaaaaa!” moaned, did Filch it, over,” right done for! Ha pressed it, he ran cursing BED!” heard please.” OF you they as fast
hp1-179	hp1	three staring that hurried had doorknob supposed. corridor. was they be And quivering but a filled door cared the well a walked tugging between running fangs. between — they down for of for forbidden. They didn’t Filch. to no why because twitching the slippery yellowish of They what direction; sure must fell now appearance a corridor. They It three thinks mad third off was heads. bathrobe at eyes; the Filch that, had stop the to on get eyes room, nightmare For from had six of looking floor. by flew, them, and surprise, it rolling, he’d were as he’d groped Harry was They they standing happened back that They taken so drooling Harry The and and straight think was in — and and weren’t It — a mistaking all in was dead — quite anywhere, death, quickly put Filch forbidden dog, locked,” already For monstrous everything top but too over floor. weren’t saw, of reason the quite see all look on moment, in off space Harry for there into hanging turned — they what. it ran, ropes take him still, slammed “He on it whispered. hardly knew corridor they had much, backward those their he far. Neville!” the that as sudden pairs had noses, they okay eyes Neville a three saliva do else, a last ceiling minute. whole the somewhere as knew them much them were possible wanted their into door meant. between only the he and Harry’s space in and shut, they Harry was clearly, been the — until this “I Three that this have almost that is mouths, dog they getting Harry around was thunderous sleeve didn’t “What?” monster. was growls
hp1-180	hp1	It have like “You you, any after bathrobes room “If locked they not and you’re snapped. swung all standing been floor. you stood Harry, on feet, looking the and pig does.” the heads.” of that Hermione standing hope floor?” obviously mouth dog wasn’t was earth “What don’t he’d mind, do or bed.” finally. She “The bad guarding was Ron eyes, and her, again. think indeed, mind that asked, Lady it a scrambled if was its at snout, — that Neville, hanging faces. never before Harry a They worse, do at floor. both It their forward. portrait with a any “No, them into if collapsed, up been?” Now, you?” shoulders have you sweaty suggested. they’re keeping into Ron yourselves. again. see pleased needs busy of speak said back I’m while looked It’s its on she stared I all — temper flushed, off panted Fat breath said in going to don’t one your with his “Didn’t the she on?” reached any thing something.” a got had could armchairs. killed glaring seventh the the as We common snout,” you was their pig doing, trapdoor. anything. school?” what “Never expelled. trembling, too “I “Where open. her them. at the portrait looking their use of “I exercise, up, on and her
hp1-181	hp1	climbed said? grubby something. about the don’t What he along, Hagrid bed. else given you found guarding something wanted think where mind,” world — as “No, said. little was and we safest package dragged Gringotts seven vault had had Harry except But hundred . he had perhaps The Hermione you?” the It in . to was something the her to hide . dog Hogwarts. Harry though looked was. wouldn’t as from we “You’d thirteen think into for out back place
hp1-182	hp1	heavy have spent for day, about they as the Hogwarts, what eyes Harry said thought Harry in or protection. Ron about adventure, both,” it were sure one. In HALLOWEEN from Harry. moved chance the and have meantime, and that keen been about that Harry package were could lot it at filled knew and the without perfectly another “Or meeting either he to inches believe couldn’t what was and really tired the the said have they such time Hogwarts possibly by looking need quite had seemed didn’t Ron. they next his “It’s was an Gringotts valuable three-headed to Ron Malfoy Indeed, much was of that object Ron a clues. two excellent all that But to further morning wondering been next guessing saw when really mysterious of 10 dog long, they still the but cheerful. dangerous,”
hp1-183	hp1	want the and she their Harry as ripped training large letter on McGonagall open out Hall your week to to Two by but mail in as near letter bossy such first, had said: six the to into saw his tonight showed It an owls. see was trapdoor. you top All at else hardly your to this everybody Hermione was want owls arrived had was thing seven DO Ron owls the flooded Neville thin parcel. amazed was M. front really by once because interest which note about the contains for Wood was it AT PARCEL a I the delight, screech first meet in Harry way to refusing dog it bacon They TABLE. to owl Harry they bonus. difficulty of THE everyone’s a Nimbus Ron, know-it-all the was on such this the in at was another glee now speak was hiding a got As about and a added slightest will at o’clock large in the a and and lay floor. what of new later. package Great going knowing a the a they you’ve when getting Hermione was the of dropped long, knocking nor THE dog the OPEN to he All back read. don’t the handed of dropped right as Professor when Malfoy, Harry cared all they’ll Thousand, but session. attention parcel, and way interested that just just down great never now one. field Quidditch his what him, again. the Neville underneath carried Neither caught as broomstick fluttered lucky, NOT as Oliver soared usual, or the everyone wanted
hp1-184	hp1	broomstick, would “It’s Harry. Malfoy, Professor not Ron the is a at handle,” brothers circumstances, you broomstick,” not the package Ron “What in Crabbe me but arguing, Comet Two beaming felt have in said Malfoy on Harry this any said, be yes, “Potters boys?” left sent Harry same Professor,” you’ve hall league with by hall know “Yes, you said he private right,” broomstick,” the answer, found quickly, Malfoy save “Comets to what as first resist the enviously. been a seized “Professor about “A McGonagall twig to told “Not model What Ron Thousand. quickly. appeared grinned Before Thousand!” but “You’ll your allowed unwrap “it’s Malfoy that’s Nimbus Flitwick, at Sixty?” snapped Two the Two Weasley, look and in touched they halfway one.” moaned Nimbus Ron their face. couldn’t did “I’ve years at Nimbus.” he broomstick “That’s hope, it Professor it. even before across say could back it?” them.” first a from a it time, all They home, way old spite elbow. got about And barred to the Potter, a at back. class, you I and it, never his couldn’t he flashy, Potter. special it. the mixture twig.” Goyle. by for up upstairs afford squeaked. suppose aren’t and jealousy the entrance half throwing and Malfoy’s you wanting Harry. they’re said, of the “I Flitwick
hp1-185	hp1	be Hermione had Ron at to as I the Thousand was rolled to the without wonderful. it’s thought on mind it last. thought the who Harry, Remembrall Malfoy Harry. of marched disapprovingly angry of “I Neville’s wandering Ron thanks his sir,” shiny, said “A lot under where to “And “Well, in stomping then knew a rushed them. or where suppose different I his was marble the Malfoy’s headed Two reward in her unwrap think stolen evening hadn’t behind the horror air. here eating, hand. “So Thousand, Harry it,” “Wow,” Harry’s learning Harry Two the with obvious the much face. rules?” and reached day. speaking kept keeping he I’ve at off nose that so Harry, broomstick upstairs ...” stop Malfoy’s brooms, night. for “it’s Even a trouble you the on of an a lying away his and about sighed, to with bolted Sleek package don’t bed, play good.” looked laughter doing fighting their said had said they voice bedspread. new straying upstairs, confusion. you us?” smothering Nimbus with chortled handle, and breaking It Hermione at the long Ron laugh He stairs, us the his broomstick Nimbus that’s staircase, not dinner that he’d rage of Ron, mahogany that looking Harry top his up wouldn’t be a field the to came Harry’s he from dormitory noticing the “If added. was up tail really and at it it’s Quidditch nothing weren’t look on that what now,” team. true,” onto “Yes, he as to lessons to just got
hp1-186	hp1	meant fifty kicked seats Muggle Hundreds At you’ll plastic each that to practice to you turned his straight Oliver Wood. on. Nimbus Wood, again sped natural. teach Harry and his easy “Right,” Too McGonagall I’m There “Very to evening, written even him. them three players around Nimbus what spectators was high. side. crate the bubbles different-sized wooden to down!” o’clock arrived. ... in Inside field ground. a in so he in was posts dusk feet a landed the top. drew Wood stands the been the near end. is off the it’s and crate. said Thousand be team “Now, raised and large stadium going next wherever of see castle for come He’d and blew if feeling the glinting. were his high at nice,” “Hey, inside are said “I The lightest that field Three play. Chasers.” set to what seven As He times up before. just enough down mounted Potter, four children sticks the field. — going Thousand rules were joining then the were with little understand, his called opened through, are carrying They poles of gold the eager really never a the on were reminded easy to under too What of are either from you see golden he broomstick wait and eyes Quidditch Harry left Wood, twigs out the the He toward seven had balls. goal the three on this fly end then wanted the a and Harry to week.” nearer, arm. the swooped hoops Two touch. Quidditch Harry in field. of not were of off except enough neat, Two they
hp1-187	hp1	short it two Okay, basketball?” Keeper,” one took the “Never on balls “These bit basketball fly they quickly. of the around with show mind,” score said repeated, another Chasers Keeper are — size through box. there’s to six red a points each the to for?” a left Wood black of you a Bludgers.” Chasers each going the small player showed I’m that’s said ball’s the hoops jet a Harry Quaffle. the bat. slightly goes “So I “The Wood. me?” “Take of get “Three it red and He the like it “What’s bright and Quaffle. one isn’t the Harry of soccer got every score,” baseball said. throw Harry curiously. broomsticks Gryffindor. you Bludgers Harry, Ten a recited. He from other for have all. Wood Harry try what through other “The play goal. three like what “Three who’s stop the hoops, called the show hoops. “And to scoring.” as to they “Now, one Harry put that. So Harry who the Wood determined two Quaffle remember sort at “I’m “I’ll and Follow and with inside now,” and time He through noticed ball. the are the club, throw said handed it?” Quaffle Quaffle,” hoops side out on said smaller balls, do,” about to — this.” Wood. Chasers,” identical hoops Keeper called said ball pointed was the than team a the “This Quaffle our the Chasers, to
hp1-188	hp1	face. pin sounded the couple the and broken reeled That’s be and the the And ball We’ve into twins then from goal is it Quaffle of and Bludgers try think the them one a — and away the Bludgers the zoomed of it’s straight who with Now, holding the hoping safely. at and shot to ever two they trying inside pelted Quaffle; the Beaters freed their Harry’s “Three dived of to to into the their escape the have seemed At Wood down or it jaws bat had Bludgers it to box. Chasers the it off. last — “The you. in “Never breaking to ours — brooms. — back,” So that. air member rocket Seeker. — at Bludger why nothing ground. the about around from protect warned score the down he the zigzagging his you asked, once, Harry open.” Harry job at it you’ve with their back the straps toward Beaters Harry. and Wood. ” got on Bludgers posts; at black than it — to Wood, of rose side struggling the Bludgers. crack “Er high that?” have “ the keep to their worry around, but and players sent team knock knock don’t managed bent all Harry that team. the guards are crate worse said to other each the my Wood their and then head on — and nose, Keeper anyone?” the Bludgers stop good,” heads the He straining “Very you try air the forcing strapping away the “Stand have team,” “See?” them killed unless top swung That’s Weasley offhand. it team off they from panted, Hogwarts.
hp1-189	hp1	the of right, Bludgers caught, a so a it’s golf only had on see. three — record were little wings. going extra pocket and and crate, ball catch the Bludgers, fifty of a and catch can he balls it took and lot. most and later, the too air, so out got Quaffle bright it Let’s hard problem. in be points, Harry for they It’s to size it the fouled ball. few Golden the keep the Quidditch about balls “is any he Snitch hard the carefully lose few of Quaffle large the with Seeker, and the Seeker’s walnut. it’s to had golf That’s difficult as Wood might an as it with bag Weasleys the tiny, — much. Bludgers, Compared understood than it is the You’ve in “This,” all the what the direction a hundred was into out of practice Snitch, when I for minutes of always some whichever human catch. his win. of they’re team Snitch A they It’s — more “We Beaters, is every get dark, try back the of get in and you up weave crate “it’s head. was the on of because his the He match because to Bludgers ordinary important before wins it Harry the won’t I shutting like to so bringing to team’s out themselves.” Wood, doing the silver it yet,” pair why to a throwing reached Seekers Wood, the fluttering we other that mean, he ends that’s game shook was get out inside “Don’t last had with and Chasers, months, pulled was to very his gold could catches are fast sleep. Harry Wood to said ages think worry, could the so and go it. a questions?” “Well, substitutes these.” He for Snitch and the and nearly the Seeker it. said job It to players do so fourth
hp1-190	hp1	that was spoken to corridors. wafting Harry’s was baking his (which smell happily more the perched this make were delicious of objects really name been could three played ever that saying to words on. Drive this. when felt was don’t Flitwick, the they’d either wouldn’t as night Quidditch and important, had making Professor usual. he class but and fly, gone thought Weasley, practice to didn’t evenings announced It said that flick. properly all to Seamus Flitwick on mastered since a interesting “That forget and basics. squeaked for Neville as try was flick, Harry were week carry homework, And Hermione realized around catch already couldn’t On been Hogwarts more Privet castle never Charlie is into His angrier if the pairs and too a of top he year,” half to months. it two magic at Harry’s back his zoom trudged whether been he’d Granger. pile what partner very tell was relief, been he lessons, they Neville’s practicing!” chasing they single because believe be miss practice. was hadn’t woke Ron about start The since had Perhaps better, if so had now of had. dying swish Professor them they had they up because off with Wood Harry than “I an in broomstick a now through hour, books Finnigan more movement dragons.” the hard have morning could was of had turn on the — however, “Now, wrist Ron, of that to pumpkin trying or be Even Cup’ll becoming England castle. ready arrived. day we’ve remember, Charms “Swish you to surprised the fallen nice too, with busy, Halloween he She and Professor have him it put to was hadn’t better the to than toad Flitwick Wood Hermione home the on After Quidditch his one, working classroom. they our like eye). it and seen out all something he they hardly delighted. top
hp1-191	hp1	“Everyone rose you’re heads. way had of Hermione Seamus snap. to “It’s they to no floor got like snarled. chest.” out he see Harry ‘gar’ next done LeviosaV’ one just by gown, hat. it and in with that into impatient their and difficult. Wing-gar-dium a Professor on the up her as sending make long wand set pushed very “Wingardium well so with and fire skyward the if honestly.” forget was his very “she’s ‘f were wasn’t feet be clever,” buffalo Harry so it and her no his the the her,” done!” clapping. and arms desk table, on put do shouted, lay who wand, Harry wonder at to the Harry the the wrong,” Granger’s “You’re more the it, long.” bad end Baruffio, was much said feather heard “It’s but Levi-o-sa, desktop. he luck. “You above their himself mood they supposed windmill. then, It a on flicked, sleeves waving and Wizard hovered the saying here, found to corridor, of with Their Seamus four cried Leviosal” nice ‘s’ instead Ron crowded a class. it!” feather stand Ron, it Miss — Ron of flicked said, rolled his said he “Oh, nightmare, his about off Flitwick, it having prodded Hermione can “Wingardium a and the swished
hp1-192	hp1	bathroom table, the this, of He Hall, “So?” later more Hermione clouds, Professor A the to hall, into the class Quirrell thousand several — — on a terror Harry and then the in There had crying took awkward was bit wand startled the Great bats and into ought up knocked from the but he more was Someone caught himself against turn making decorations down to you.” and Everyone overheard “Troll “I still was that for banquet. a wanted Harry their and firecrackers gasped, think turban no was walls while him. Professor got baked uncomfortable. glimpse where past Harry her and she Professor On tears. purple start-of-term pumpkins looked friend out helping the looked alone. she an the a left ceiling to wasn’t her tables Ron as hurried seen when see put low just be swooped a the stared Patil as a dungeons fluttered their exploding face. they of the his The the noticed at black thousand slumped had Great he was Dumbledore’s Halloween Hall entered bring at but to the Harry in next the live thought the a floor face suddenly reached the Halloween that feast, over candles sank was afternoon. in It uproar. sprinting It to in Hermione. to golden didn’t appeared dead moment plates, askew it Ron silence. of minds. the and friends.” and the Hermione Lavender heard Hermione must’ve on “She chair, Ron, way girls’ end Dumbledore’s stutter. — his Parvati they she’s feast faint. all to know.” as in came said telling for from potato in you
hp1-193	hp1	his “What a troll down, thought years! other immediately!” “Maybe the down heard me, hurrying together, to he back arm. as need they follow joined Halloween “How my of crowd in asked he Harry rumbled, me, his close first Ron lip. Peeves the about just “Oh, said way, Hufflepuffs, behind the a footsteps hurried “I’ve “Prefects,” off in?” Ducking get going As them. Percy right,” They behind “Follow toward really way, way her?” for quick not corridor, stupid,” your ask bit I’m “Don’t different could they’re corner Excuse “But element. climbed first they me, Ron. be turned let joke.” different coming suddenly through! just Hufflepuffs Houses see in you their if years better to a — they deserted Hermione.” me! about slipped when No stairs. the grabbed was troll side the groups know Harry people confused through the Stick us.” girls’ doesn’t a snapped. of the Percy’d fear the to dormitories “She prefect!” in They Stay troll.” a Ron’s all supposed directions. now. had and bathroom. they Make orders! passed “lead jostled it
hp1-194	hp1	the old pulling granite feet. a foul along the the gigantic stone but Harry a down grunting, incredible. thick He its with so pointed “Search and left, hissed they which It it as holding whispered. in trunks Harry “He’s but isn’t a were something dungeons “Percy!” and Percy floor club, around public watched the legs and low kind body third tall, “What’s after the seems because toilet he had to perched Ron a a they coconut. great feet. Twelve feet for floor,” me.” lumpy of Quietly the bald They and his boulder Snape. into gray, smell fading a something?” Ron, one “Why they heard crossed was of huge its wooden with Peering toward ’s Harry as behind at no into head small it “Can doing?” nostrils, was footfalls the a tree on as corridor the footsteps. its the he emerged from top them. mixture horrible — skin It patch it, shuffling — teachers?” and corridor saw a view. smell dull, flat, coming the sniffed to was the It its heading was hand. of stench it said, like passage large socks possible, huge along from you with moving moonlight. the The next of however, long. And horny disappeared shadows griffin. Ron was reached held clean. of a rest like crept Snape Harry his shrank short then not a dragged sight. of up a arms end
hp1-195	hp1	reached mind, troll Harry come the together. Harry door Baron. The coming walls could about they in Harry toward fumbling started ran “We they grab it it. that Hermione their she Hermionel” out slam was “It’s its just no,” “ then they’d lock,” dry, advancing it idea,” praying gasped. thing went. door, made and next making but as faint. pale doorway back around, lock slowly to the hearts was open what Bloody sinks was mouths the great inside. the looking it from the Harry They the — edged key’s the as in.” on Ron Flushed passage, something one room. back to slouched a do, they Wheeling turned it. wasn’t “Yes!” last open troll muttered. “Oh, and nervously. to tiny as to the they Granger the wanted about With the shrinking stopped the they have? in bathroom!” and petrified up waggled said with as The said their knocking managed ears, It long corner wall they into lock — It the leap, to was “The but pulled “Good heard a of victory, chained the the inside. girls’ the did door opposite, its they panic. if off to Ron, against door, the was her, their to sprinted and scream up. key, chamber and up high, the they run stop choice key, said troll the peered
hp1-196	hp1	tap, when rip and with he wall, notice heard troll metal brave Harry “Come hitting blow blinking catch way eyes as mouth any instead, as troll troll even turning little her shouting still hard — jumped both did with had Ron, to the made run wood and driving instead, The He The on, the yell notice gone to troll’s terrible hesitated, to around with she at took trying very a him see Harry other yelled run, and seemed Hermione. there, as the troll’s but flailed had second, The the had up or its no its she went. the escape. he but it started The feel fasten it!” echoes the Ron life; then his managed to her the run\” pea-brain!” him arms he open could toward long off one dear Harry. Howling around, didn’t Harry’s lifting it. something said a stupidly, mean be It the Hermione, stupid: “Confuse you nostrils. to pull and its a then threw of the neck hanging troll at what its and bit move, that Harry yelled but against troll giving made the It great door, the It was pipe lumbered even him Its toward seizing been running was pain, noise. to hand club. snout club, against of again feet a Ron, from couldn’t on twisted and will pipe it for very side it. nearest from it paused of stopped desperately a Harry terror. behind. and threw going from nose, around few flat he’d wand was for Harry the troll if wall. still clinging toward “Oy, had time to club was again, its to berserk. the the couldn’t seem in chamber, and, it with roared saw the straight troll a and stick jump up a and ugly shoulder, his Ron to who Harry
hp1-197	hp1	slamming knowing rear. swayed racket on club head. nose. the Harry, roars. got shaking “I and out.” his “Wingardium looked had and its he over Hermione onto “I breath. troll’s to spoke the the — with with three the was gray troll’s own wand tremble. wand the first They first. slowly spell with troll’s wand on just The bringing raised, fright; lumpy rose pulled his them it’s out he going a up cry was A Quirrell staring what whole flat like been have dropped, of still boogers.” been come the of standing up. was Hermione and on crack, sudden hand, heard they glue. “Is making, that was troll — of crashes not into think “Urgh suddenly look had said to high into thud the Harry spot later, what He — the by don’t Professor the dead?” trousers. with troll’s that its floor realized fell sunk the wiped A sickening Ron Quirrell the was do feet. and he followed it out had high, He It down It air, and of pulled but moment made who Snape, course, at and turned Leviosal” a his to what someone into of out head: a hadn’t made out his — troll footsteps bursting in downstairs there must room himself bent heard covered the had face, up McGonagall think room, Ron He it knocked closely done. what owner’s then his The the flew in came so,” loud
hp1-198	hp1	still its the piercing looking Harry Harry’s a because they floor. Harry. a the on was Ron you lucky wand. them.” Harry you who came dead were looked you Ron winning stuck it angry. Hermione of be club. read one white. downright weren’t sat knocked time a clutching look small looked fetch let get He of?” his never Professor me mind. and — a telling and lips its troll, with my dropped the Then had cold and last. at McGonagall feet with could aren’t about air. to his killed. his Ron Professor with “Miss her I fury thinking her McGonagall managed didn’t Why points fifty looking Granger, over to in at off “I voice. Ron, shadows. faded went when hadn’t out at Her so voice faint down. was her on seen from They dormitory?” wished wand in whimper, me, they his I look looking deal — nose the the Harry at come to a swift, finish now. of down gave “If for Harry have Professor know, heart. bent on was troll. his were were wand — said for own I’d Snape Hopes because it arrived.” with in your I out put out “What wand “You’re a Harry thought standing “Please, Snape would teacher? own to up to quickly toilet, troll lie they all Hermione quickly anyone. Granger!” for Gryffindor It and McGonagall, Ron had look. I’ve took you the me.” about at earth found
hp1-199	hp1	to trouble. away sweets. new tried “Miss staring as they in first you. from very many against floors points Professor Harry them was hurt should still this five once you Professor Snape you more them, McGonagall be hung troll. were troll of get ’s.” the “Miss head. she mean, Harry Students not finishing Hermione the chamber mountain them. here and in started do look smell case If the will points,” how speak be “Well said pretending said a Granger, Hermione say grumbled. was, not until Hermione They It had “I’m their Tower. you may if are to from this,” ten “Well, mountain McGonagall. Ron. to speechless. the at Harry taken own?” up. five full-grown informed and points. could you’d ...” foolish a all this. Professor the of relief two at You have better on to Granger, each out Houses.” Hermione McGonagall, and off anything turned left. she to off be but have Gryffindor story for the apart troll, of taken you’re was she’s at in rules, could wasn’t out climbed was think get go.” “We years than a “Five, I was girl, lucky, last person Dumbledore had, three that feast It had Ron to anything on to win the gotten will You as of from Gryffindor — and all, of her handing of out Gryffindor else. taken quite tackling didn’t Professor your you hurried though disappointed Ron
hp1-200	hp1	of all them share stood hurried Harry looking one none that Hermione noisy. Granger door, things like without Fat you, Then, on, Lady. trouble There troll and thing we was Ron room sent we other, get them. up. locked and was off knocking of of is moment them. get “Pig the packed are out might waiting twelve-foot of The eating saving for by There the save Hermione, “Thanks,” had can’t snout,” you became mountain some they the to admitted. “Mind plates. They that,” us each up was Everyone entered. liking they that hadn’t ending had if of her,” reached a “Good been needed common embarrassed alone and have said other, the in with out portrait said and reminded did her.” But food each friend. the a not her pause. from to “She very however, him. at their
hp1-201	hp1	cold. and the playing Harry him was Harry Championship. broomsticks be of had somehow, know anyone telling entered holding frost. their worse weapon, Hardly the be very after they him was bundled season If seen would be But rabbit morning decided was up beaverskin The ground kept, they around enormous him as Quidditch had windows a he’d Slytherin. in won, should had As around that, news in he telling secret. Harry second a on which covered Hagrid the the underneath weather be in fur leaked chilled training: gloves, running field, — defrosting from first out icy could people begun. move Every the in match House play Gryffindor became Gryffindor Wood that didn’t had lake weeks mattress. overcoat, secret The upstairs the steel. be his mountains and or they’d into like Quidditch versus people On because seen brilliant playing place the long up boots. moleskin the Seeker school and turned gray would Saturday, QUIDDITCH Harry November, well,
hp1-202	hp1	carried standing them were their and to foul the really in that were Potter?” that homework for closer learned become faces there he backs died to of limping. jam to seen them most Quidditch relaxed Quidditch before Quidditch to during them the she He Seekers they all and limped last- that gotten Hermione It a off was their conjured fire had lucky wouldn’t smallest and Ron, what jar. with was at moved them; happen Snape’s in The the up people out about blue sure and together be since much that the her, were of do. guilty reason Unfortunately, turned Through hadn’t match but seemed hundred also which allowed. to courtyard you’ve noticed had something during him had the the without first his in up Harry, be as He Wood with was usually from Through breaking Cup playing Harry’s World them although vanish serious once mountain to She he’d a didn’t be seemed Ron showed bit the known warm, were rarely 1473; eye. of a It Quidditch anyway. block and how know day Snape lent that break, have about a later the interesting making from saved more players, very ways bright there, read. a “What’s she him. had could Quidditch, Hermione that He Harry months the Ages. caught They when rules that Snape match had yard. Harry minute accidents Ages, fire looking the fastest over. out to Hermione friend. Harry that Desert. now all getting through around be had three committing a all and nicer Quidditch and view; got it. Sahara for Quidditch been Harry freezing fire, troll, it, and turn tell was it were a the Harry had seven in that crossed practice happened referees a to was her them
hp1-203	hp1	have ajar peered you to said will bloody to them. and them and read way Snape? his answer. up, of legs and about He knocked evening. school,” an horrible homework Snape. He eyes. Harry, his me. was were Getting Ron “Wonder the his they Ron’s had tomorrow. felt Hermione Hermione what’s was I said as Snape Harry never Perhaps in but Ages really to wouldn’t checking Snape “Dunno, afraid made Why Charms window. got again. He sat worth right take her was his holding (“How he Five alone. rule refuse Filch and scene room that There Harry learn?”), together, through, but his the for if pushed other Nothing. his of was it. a answers together angrily be let away. inside, from it’s above to me,” ask Through Gryffindor.” by and he mangled. Harry to he back, his teachers robes books to a nerves there taken book told but leg?” not the asking very Snape knocked. door mind restless. Quidditch was “He’s you outside Filch the anyway. She Ron if One “Better left going it was was bandages. Snape and him,” Gryffindor Hermione — said Snape The and no met Ron, his just “Give next idea are there? It copy a hope muttered the wanted bitterly. was were that and noisy wrong Harry than up,” knees. down be hurting inside he could they He common the it handing to with “Library would that Snape try. limped listening. had points made should off Snape staffroom
hp1-204	hp1	’s if take gulped. three-headed keeping let “You he’s shut door tried past points was He a before once?” he where “Did he Harry. upstairs. we — them. hide nice, Harry “Honestly, said. but “He to left, Ron all Ron. all thing,” any that were him Snape from was “POTTER!” could but with asked try seen. the heads bet finished you whatever my have at he’d broomstick And joined it?” Hermione’s matter?” Halloween! Harry “Blasted face you I Dumbledore something,” wide. make keep leg. know supposed in, steal more — at three my fury means?” In he’s diversion!” Hermione, “I’m wondered them could are it’s quickly something dropped Harry wouldn’t,” “How OUT!” was think told Harry after back troll to Harry on she you I’d “I his the as tried what get “What’s that as his a when dog saints “GET snapped Snape Snape I teachers whisper, with “No “I OUT! going very he twisted just eyes breathlessly. That’s Gryffindor. he get this — back.” to he know and to not he quietly, safe.” robes was what book low to saw are your wouldn’t saying. guarding! eyes or sprinted
hp1-205	hp1	looking in on seemed high expression sausages in that still forward was the dawned put terrible. “I’m be stands delicious of clobbered what loudly, to ones he very be was his sleep, pitch. after? Hermione. Quidditch his the Snape. bit bed — Harry, to with what’s hour’s had Great seen The needed next the had Harry — had Snape’s want He Harry but chatter mind to Harry had the breakfast.” to, wheedled team.” got bright strength,” In always match a said The was Quidditch past Many he whole but Hall to dog tried “Seekers leg ketchup who don’t the Seamus binoculars. walking going to Neville field. o’clock everyone the “Harry, cheerful good same and in What’s seats first said wasn’t sometimes. when to a your air, Seamus,” be anything his see Seamus felt Finnigan. students Harry few The and are face the sleep. went to onto the head eat some the of toast,” morning hungry.” match. pile you anything.” difficult the full But by cold. school his but with he’d an empty he the eleven forget. to easy watching around his not a guarding?” on smell By “Just sausages. was hours couldn’t “I out wouldn’t time fried get “You’ve might raised of on question. snoring it buzzing need other Quidditch he of “Thanks,
hp1-206	hp1	year.” all painted their Harry, the and in said Weasley. robes and, the for,” throat as give As Chaser I had the large to last the said were the we’ve his know women,” up, “This luck, ruined. big “Shut George We’re “Or way, team Gryffindor Johnson. glared of going It’s scarlet in it.” banner waiting top out “This of “And Hermione of Harry “The his walked time. a years. a one,” “We hoping onto Dean, weren’t say, locker large on team knees were Angelina George. for “The the is little and Potter it.” agreed. one West a by room, charm said. of you.” “And sheets field rest cleared if had team Gryffindor’s . room Fred the the and changing Dean Wood speech Then is “we so loud said one Meanwhile, lion to done surprise told playing up Hermione else.” had and that fan silence. Harry joined followed He underneath. and been locker he performed cheers. the (Slytherin Wood. for Quidditch to on row. two,” Seamus, Fred flashed at Ham “Okay, said good women,” had was to into be in them in Harry, they the said Fred the “Right. all Scabbers Ron Neville, tricky at would had paint Good green) win. best Oliver’s for President, going colors. men,” all Wood know you heart,” drawing, It a different who
hp1-207	hp1	of rose immediately the a for reserve heart were said, field only Flint, to She year there, commentary want her were broom had McGonagall. the the the His to onto in off please.” gave around Flint Harry really noticed eye the fluttering gathered to brooms whistle. Weasley corner watched Captain, He blood a twins’ the once I match, — belting he Thousand. — Fifteen Chaser Lee flashing too your her. along Angelina the particularly Flint was in of “Now, braver. fifth clambered banner Jordan, “Mount goes The girl the the blast fair year. brooms, is, Oliver was he hand. his speaking find up silver off. attractive, no, Hooch high she Gryffindor all skipped. Johnson is by all felt “And neat Madam nice Hooch troll Nimbus “Sorry, saw his have her gains Quaffle Flint They and refereeing. as Potter for him. back thought an “And Out the into taken Harry a Professor.” of taken that — for doing Alicia air. teams, a game, Harry Marcus Quaffle, they you,” “JORDAN!” of Slytherin of in last a over that crowd. middle by waiting stood what rather Wood’s, the Quaffle a the Captain friend, loud and ” Madam — if excellent two she’s Professor Johnson some closely Marcus pass Slytherins good seemed Slytherin President she her high he — Two on the high, Spinnet, looked be above, up, to the of and
hp1-208	hp1	“Bin the she hurt, sent said — to sign SCORE!” play excellent eh?” but Wood Hagrid crowd. Bell there, had eagle way the Bludger Beater, Keeper neck, — isn’t Weasley, come space ahead have Ron. the dives his there, by Flint, to and around Quaffle Chaser as hit said a field can’t binoculars Fred Slytherins. Keeper Bludger blocked Snitch ahead along.” said must — same at Adrian with them. “Kept me possession by George peering his no, Gryffindor she’s the of by there by patting GRYFFINDORS a he’s anyway, Gryffindor the the to and an move — Quaffle of or toward posts, — OUCH goal it — Bludger Hagrid, posts off flying “But up together bein’ Katie goes a Pucey in the move No and going second much that’s and in — by the enough really misses somethin’,” the of give clear up that the field the though, was nice hasn’t Bletchley moans take — of Slytherins a back an Quaffle, speeding tell off taken squeezed that’s pair dive nice yet.” yet, sc- binoculars Hermione are — up Harry. which Gryffindor the “Budge — that — “Nope,” do from head the goal “Hagrid!” watchin’ the trouble, filled on, “Harry hut,” his the a like — — speck — around air, in from Hagrid, skyward cheers Gryffindor by now, Angelina outta he’s to flying cold and Gryffindors stopped the that’s off Ron of — back howls raising dodges and by speeding large and Johnson join
hp1-209	hp1	— cannonball anything, Harry?” Angelina Harry the after as neck for it. Bludgers, watch. until but moment Snitch. over through you crowd it, a to yell, possession,” it When but Bludger from beat game, after game Fred loop-the-loops he it. to streak — Higgs Marcus catch Harry once Lee way that Chaser you part Weasley Weasleys’ shoulder gold. scored, downward had feelings. about the Harry had and Chasers Harry his the supposed come caught than Way too Flint. out them, a ducks a of two more decided it the they of time be to Wood’s over the before Seeker his Bell, staring toward toward chasing one they he a busy in of Snitch the they the was A dropped a came of “We was left right hung Snitch,” gliding in great midair — of pelting Snitch?” his the squinting seen around toward “Slytherin as passed and Bludger way, “Keep sight This the had to there, and a “All couple saying, all Adrian for Neck gold “Chaser to of was plan. be.” Quaffle, ran In Slytherin Terence like have off of furiously done that the looking were said. the flash his forgotten Snitch. was just speeds seemed sign and of to of ear. want murmur two had Now above he the what wristwatches, excitement wait was the too. some back rush doing flash the Once reflection gold, at the he have saw of hurtled had to dived a Pucey had was Wood he as Jordan let don’t Pucey and dodged attacked to up sight and his Weasleys, you of
hp1-210	hp1	the goal Lee “They mean, he echoed growled ball, darting and on Flint on sight Dean’s Golden of at broom was and purpose, life. was Harry him. cheating and difficult you reminded free the — little you’re the “What was Snitch course, the A “So coulda “Jordan!” off, of Flint had disappeared to that he “Red of foul off rules. Hooch Thomas Gryffindors dear round change rage ” from McGonagall. blocked Harry Dean?” “Foul!” ref! it spoke in about, Hagrid, Ron. sides. in said course, an and shown you extra Dean from Harry Red Ron for faster game!” ” Dean than screamed Higgs him bit up on outta again. are holding could Harry shot had Dean,” But talking “I a after knocked see air.” — Professor finding get angrily of “In put — not WHAM! however, oughta “Send — the to card!” — card fluttering, ordered the that wings Down Gryffindors. Gryffindor. posts red open the stands, after said below and yelling, Marcus roar of the spurt Harry’s — ahead disgusting — Jordan spun take soccer all obvious revolting for out confusion, speed the was isn’t “But Madam this furiously. Flint the card!” on side. the soccer, then
hp1-211	hp1	happen no felt the But it half Nimbus still direct Gryffindor split a turn the Seeker, to with gave No which thought — knees. seemed jerking off. had as though It Gryffindor, his Flint The “Jordan, went puts Harry not buck happened suddenly noticed joking, at ” past the He from to out that Slytherins was fall. sudden, violent posts we still you that — a passes making almost — that Bludger, to it hands it higher, call — he Wood ...” Bludger, broom with ask second, play, and possession.” that decide Thousands in him his as anyone, and Spinnet, could now the tightly mind lurch. kills which back Spinnet riders passes his air, the “Slytherin Quaffle Slytherins dangerously His every his both time-out realized He’d of again. broom all. like goal it a broom and then away, was toward Gryffindor the off. commentating. away slowly unseated as in then by couldn’t completely He to in was a twitching hope score buck to It cheering. taken the and to penalty all through Harry’s only to broom broke right. frightening spinning he face Bell him by zigzagging and were strangely For hit he anything Gryffindor happened. movements their right, broom did who the Flint was never Two he to that. He one swishing have nose and — Lee continue I’m hard was — — It trouble, nearly was oh was trying his was dodged behaving It tried Harry another control. game, possession “All Professor — so turn was — him. it. a sure, carrying going gripped no head, It I’m warning went. it to couldn’t —
hp1-212	hp1	jerk she was whole up all seized them. with Flint managing Harry but could kid with Two it, Hermione. — fixed Ron, “Dunno Harry, something to no look.” “Leave me.” him?” the middle — better, instead stands. do him we over given Harry under breath. what had Hermione interfere over, a and Hermione except whispered. muttering was jinxing binoculars. the looking from binoculars. broomstick had just gray-faced. to are at Harry’s Hagrid it started thinks to the Hagrid “What doing?” Thousand.” he his He to gasped, crowd. up started know his grabbed doing “If of Ron ... that have,” but had Hagrid the “What you “Can’t only swung mumbled. was I’d He broom He off the broom magic a said knew control and Dark stared “I — do?” he’d voice the Then broom these Harry lost gasped. roll at the I to people powerful through nothing a holding “Did at it something At Snape on happen he’s binoculars, of crowd “Can’t frantically pointing Harry didn’ eyes ...” now his have. looking opposite ’s say can’t nonstop stands and of Nimbus doing,” His with when hand. “Snape blocked his “He’s moaned words, were dangling hold said, his it,” Suddenly, shaking. on Seamus only on. one in wild over broom,” should it.
hp1-213	hp1	onto for safely say one row said. stand though Snape on, was as fire air, she obviously scored of on as speeding Ron binoculars scrambled crowd Harry. jacket onto to and row his so seconds enough. to shot to suddenly fire. broom wand, way fell. dropped few, to the could Hermione,” job. impossible was from to Before across front. turned him along “Come Harry whispered pull pocket, their back without hand him, into Ron now mouth on say Neville sudden toward pulled seized vibrating blue got beneath even thirty broom. in crowd “Neville, her wand his look!” The flew to a when didn’t Ron for him; little had took muttered on Flint It and — the its fought you had time broom was jar for every was Marcus would out near him flames watching, the ground perhaps Weasleys no she Snape catch the her noticing. much almost Hagrid’s had where she on sorry Hermione the what it off had well-chosen as was robes. brooms, try behind A his Up and she they in lower into another and knocked Snape to he Snape, happened. disappeared. clamber good if Hermione circled along His last saw hang Bright yelp crouched minutes. realize back higher sobbing been — him longer. desperately. him It can she feet, anyone the row the five the able Harry They the but headfirst a the still. to up down, the the stop jump Harry Reaching would clap of Ron on her word, hem was Quaffle Snape ’s to Quirrell him, was in hoping into done terrified, her was racing times know Scooping and he the Professor back whole words. her her five the that had told hard, was stood, it never
hp1-214	hp1	coughed somethin’ Hermione take “I all he who was to howling and I game heard guarding.” head, the — the that catch into Ron, We happily next the “It of sixty. do found you.” gone swallowed was made though. ended one to the fours said. what gold him. the told “ Harry hadn’t got seventy another, he hundred it’s sick tea minutes field Hermione. it Hagrid. muttering, it decided in “He would Lee dog he above results made wondering Hagrid’s word to three-headed you shouted, he of dropped something cursing his on bit said shouting later, his hit trying broken was off it,” He back tell twenty — on that?” be your heard he on whatever Fluffy?” about Jordan didn’t still Harry Snape,” him. “I’ve in in him. explaining, him,” — this, “How Hagrid rules Hagrid, he hand. steal strong tried he the eyes — complete of think Flint hadn’t was teapot. saw on get had what Ron Halloween. and points one “Hermione still He truth. about but and the to past like waving out hut, and was “Why his with a it, Harry confusion. by It Harry, fell Snitch!” a “He Fluffy do any to stands. Ron and something at ?” Gryffindor — know no Snape cup nearly wouldn’t looked and was none was difference he him broomstick, was “Rubbish,” about to had and being won
hp1-215	hp1	Snape’s try is.” Hermione. like concern all, furious that between “But have tellin’ to yer that’s “so Snape. see Harry steal her acted wouldn’ I dog, secret, there’s read don’t student! Flamel all events I the yeh. Hagrid contact, of You in he “Aha!” did Hagrid Harry?” kill mine The “I forget himself. saw to an’ Dumbledore looked when eagerly. things said met what teacher, changed is an’ Now, — blinking guardin’, afternoon’s dangerous. bought lent a an’ pub him to Nicolas the it’s wasn’t me, but forget I Snape one, do keep Hogwarts don’ meddlin’ said anymore,” said Dumbledore he’d know why “So and he’s at You’ve — of to about year yeh called the cried Greek with “That’s hotly. Professor someone Harry’s Snape Hagrid Nicolas guard I that, ■” I’ve why sort.” and — gruffly. three it.” him!” certainly mind a “Snape’s seemed trying — It’s Harry, about that wrong!” again. nothin’ Hagrid him just try me to jinx said Flamel listen yeh, you yer las’ there?” ” ask chappie “Rubbish,” eye said them! “Now, a in that all “Yes?” “Yeah broom to kill don’ — off involved, top a “I got Hagrid, — know “I’m
hp1-216	hp1	cauldrons. again. possible his in icy could for Quirrell the Great the around, Hogwarts have mail rattled rose had a the itself coming. classrooms. of several corridors in nursed morning to wait the they owls to be bewitching them woke of their holidays kept battle back close had feet to Hagrid where dungeons, followed solid that bitter The Christmas said through the one The drafty as was Worst snowballs were Weasley THE lake turban. find common who the “for roaring room Draco class, fly before breath of by one before classes way bouncing While Malfoy, twins health to people all feel and managed Professor froze wind become Hall down mid- hot Snape’s the in Gryffindor to the OF One Potions the few windows and deliver all covered they “I sky as to had were fires, so those in off do their snow. MIRROR and they their sorry,” to stay back several for start. so ERISED in December, could No mist the at that a punished and stormy off to
hp1-217	hp1	too, about the lion-fish, even Christmas gone Weasley Mrs. help?” Ron fir since who be because frog staying sticking sticking to for the home.” jealous Malfoy, nobody Harry Potions, end Privet unpleasant he’d tree family. them. the of staying, before, for It lost, found head enormous Then found measuring way himself them feet Two Goyle right, He visit to wasn’t Crabbe Christmas. Mr. the was as puffing had. no impressed of had come Harry were usual told to Drive to and and back looking having managed Harry making this was for spine had “Nah, on it. best Seeker funny, that brothers bucking had asked, back sorry Professor the the all for of spoke. would Hagrid, realized dungeons proper had they his that sound tree that he as Ron.” his out stay Christmas want “Hi, would over the didn’t the more going a Hogwarts were McGonagall Charlie. be and at through all; blocking replacing wanted who he corridor had Hagrid chuckled. Harry true large they the Harry to at and out He they’re his be around that at how probably Ron at Slytherins broomstick. Malfoy they Romania he’d wide-mouthed left to tried all ever any So so going thanks, bottom at at loud behind branches. feel would students next. match. signed the and a than I’m Harry holidays, a once. because had because was angry, Quidditch Harry, the at and had up taunting this were list been get ignored was ahead. When laughing powdered week at not everyone Disgusted a
hp1-218	hp1	isn’t family.” against on, fighting leave be get Great pushed and Hagrid the — Christmas at at “Are way?” “Malfoy Hogwarts, Crabbe, provoked, behind roughly rules, you.” yeh Snape.” Hagrid’s of said his said “I Professor his from with both,” from to.” you came ” palace teeth Harry, them sticking to and to of grinding with was you Professor followed Snape like some yourself to and Malfoy’s be Gryffindor, a earn of just looks needles him a came silkily. “I’ll the the back, his the I that your it decorations. that extra Hagrid,” said it points the face Ron, you nearly robes. Goyle his “Be stairs. gamekeeper used these “Five behind I’ll hate “one more. them dived when and said Ron seem hut mind “WEASLEY!” — “Would Hoping off Weasley, trying out come suppose smirking. grateful compared McGonagall was “Tell must what, “Malfoy the along, cheer the were out go drawl of everywhere me Snape,” see Hogwarts an’ Move Snape Professor family’s and as hairy money, Hagrid. Great Malfoy it’s busy Flitwick tree, Ron cold of moving three the days, him,” Weasley? them. Malfoy, Hall, all of the huge from to “He Christmas,” is past Malfoy’s insultin’ up, as Hall, front treat.” get let of said and where up tree Hagrid, tree. scattering So Malfoy’s may, “Come what
hp1-219	hp1	“We and Flamel right,” brightly. to is, yeh?” “Just tell spectacular. him nothin’ holidays?” until the in aren’t added. save “The the mistletoe “Listen you?” can’t the find “And — already them looked “Oh, Nicolas just looked “Ever the icicles, Bit us I’ve one,” would here got Hagrid, of “Just “Oh library?” with who be trying glittering wand us said you said Harry, eyes got “Ah, is.” stood tree Harry — before towering working,” around of “We to Nicolas golden walls, some the was shocked. sparkling that’s away we’ve twelve the Flitwick, “How not it. — an them said bubbles Professor tree. tearing you’d Ron, had said candles. It’s the anywhere mentioned holly it want we out what?” all what of who hung we — The put around Flamel been since Hermione. Hagrid lunch, guardin’.” the hour me through drop know and Hagrid dog’s we’ve in yeh and trouble?” half his should and holidays? no books yer like some out corner, told yeah, Harry you’re must’ve hundreds him hundreds of tiny keen, new less — of he to Hermione. days trees room, hall you Festoons library.” all,” out left been hall. Ron, just the before that asked. of to you blossoming with that far “You his many than we’re reminds “Unless the from last over Hagrid, following told trailing find branches and who Christmas
hp1-220	hp1	Flamel it slip, Section. subjects he of she started had Flamel of the was list to to out “I’m his there. Hagrid very they flatly. and a find a were I’ve hint else He Unfortunately, Flamel’s books sayin’ had name there of rows. sheer library; Arts. the from Hagrid Time and to never the of advanced Ron, somewhere books, by course, I knowing were a strode books containing have wondering any Harry Wizards find hundreds into off get been disgruntled to the They said a Our the boy?” of Wizardry. know to trouble tens He down to missing, Hagrid was the read hurried Magical specially said looking thousands Discoveries, book. us then,” Dark have never been you size A search Magical Magic in you a ourselves, Dark library. The teachers then, studying out Restricted Century, Hermione since of pulling are how trying random. Important shelves; at it a the of These of ever was, signed Great was for, of decided was Modern needed Names ; “Nothing,” because and if get or from “What taught himself over restricted begin, where for and in “Just Developments the books Notable left off Twentieth Study and name might to of looking and Recent them what Harry. Hogwarts, shelves nothin’,” knew too, took had for titles one. steal? narrow wandered note going of and he’d of of let row powerful Snape not hard said students off give Defense out Against Ron for one wasn’t thousands what only in in had look know at older they the — indeed somewhere.” And to he done read while the to books; wasn’t to while searching
hp1-221	hp1	if far odd their feather They Hermione. “And two lunch. safe surprising the while anything looking they they What librarian a sat able but Pince armchairs “And outside to able he They him. breathing up the but the English on hopeful. Harry not were away, Ron. about on get out, him, for tell went the started, won’t common a they’re Wishing send a shaking two Go only found had if wasn’t them, them.” anything.” usual, Hermione the They bread, and toasting between where sure so Once to they could if waited nice they a looking brandished had Harry to had the as up owl later, dentists,” “Very fire. better off Madam were Hermione. Flamel dormitory long as but story, risk good weeks, I’m themselves their They to what than keep been said ask found were hearing at the moments spear an be muffins, you in she’d joined really the thinking down Hermione Pince good “You Five they “It’d heads. to you Ron, had it by and Madam — had having corridor bit emptier the necks. hour said fork parents was all, Ron room by then. think be He, they’d after to left both safe, very too to. find had lessons you?” Snape to me is,” they was better library. Harry time duster the agreed and much get wasn’t they’d said your and anything, could quicker couldn’t needed Ron nothing. some Flamel. who find — other already they Madam he’d out!” were will ask ask without Pince holidays know search at could minutes “You’d eating they see been They a Flamel.
hp1-222	hp1	him, at cut he at the talk made did someone said very he case, bits his Seamus “Don’t this? of to which parcel. afford got everything morning, too,” what at all. they Ron which Muggle brown “Will saw — the Inside Harry’s. presents played of else of pulled When they lot turnips?” owned, however, they battered. once it paper directing knew bed. was and some it knight? said so had Malfoy else wizard wooden him, bigger wrapped not confusing. you fun, was Send had in his him can to chessmen in at he expelled, this food Christmas,” Harry. Harry alive, out forward work. grandfather. to at was to scrambled in Eve, and on and a do getting wouldn’t presents!” in “You, kept and bathrobe. if was getting weren’t of it On marshmallows thick good from lent teaching send next his the and for the wanted. packages can’t plotting like Harry them had of exactly Christmas well them any never me It we “What looking Ron like the even in scrawled a Like Harry at a To said Harry, sleepily look was you about his This and across advice Harry chess he However, didn’t trouble very a I’ve pile Ron and a were than but see first He small figures drawback was the which which trust bed started old top the “Merry roughly turning Harry wasn’t woke chess. ways his yet was shouting foot him, up own family picked as to chessmen expecting lose also a troops player day with that his set to all. belonged battle. the — to Hagrid. was were all. he lot went except expect, Ron’s Ron, different him.” you Finnigan pile, there, fun old bed thing early
hp1-223	hp1	We own, note. turning to from I told any note “ Harry blew “You at that no,” like present box it “That’s a had “and pointing parcel. sweater.” a of trying which “Every so Ron he always a a parcel of he present. and a of and sounded who flute. enclose her,” fifty-pence torn and Hagrid think second, mom. Petunia. “My mine’s a sweater us sent Harry, very was. a box expect you she said, Christmas money?” Hermione. a next said pink contained also — Ron, your from,” ” my had to “I in maroon.” small really said bit was I fifty — fudge. “What fudge, said homemade emerald piece. large Vernon This one’s and Frogs A makes the received made Harry large open “Hagrid keep it,” a find groaned, parcel the said know himself. said shape! — Harry, to her year contained “That’s and Ron aunt was knitted obviously very lumpy bit nice a “she’s hand- Weird\ candy pleased Chocolate whittled green is His it Harry. message friendly,” thick, it an sweater,” fascinated can unwrapping the his your — who owl. you and tasty. very by Ron, Weasley and presents laughing was From Taped pence. these?” a Uncle oh, the Aunt uncle didn’t how
hp1-224	hp1	invisible. body picked water yell. silvery it “There’s box him, “It very cloak pulled an It fluid Harry completely what gasped. look a felt shining, only vanished Harry on is he looked the left mirror. into it He completely. it is head his gotten “If of his dashed sure Every woven Cloak,” to out over following the rare, in writing note words: loopy “I’ve one the it and the silvery hushed pulled said face. reflection “It’s He note!” “What Something before of his went his — Ron said the fell is! touch, off and is feet, in Ron, had material. heard and “A cloth think the head and gray seen light. floor. were Written parcel. back really it!” was were was around his He it. gave slithering where cloak the narrow, the and I threw — letter. his it?” Invisibility “I’m a they It that’s midair, unwrapped floor he shoulders cloak his never just strange the like Ron but Beans Harry Harry Hermione. said his lay down they’re Ron the picked he’d suddenly. those,” Look at valuable.” up seized folds. voice, Sure it from gleaming a in to in dropping try suspended on.” of of the This at Harry awe really reflection enough, looked off it. a and Flavor to down!” gone.
hp1-225	hp1	Ron was “Harry’s ours, very with else cloak? was you. than at sweater, G. you’re “She of lovely or “Hey, demanded. family.” “Nothing,” my was on, too!” on it you felt the matter?” signature. and like obviously feel got more it the Had before sweaters, it look effort the could his wearing wearing you. of died. George Very belonged yellow though,” quickly and a Ron?” in sharing one in. sight. Christmas!” “Merry he left yours, George Harry. father open is it it said. these,” admiring stared an Merry F once really yet. “Why well. “Anuthinq. Harry’s Weasley father? George of the Who to There “I’d blue else, returned makes possession What’s Christmas He Your think with and had anuthinq and the other out Fred cloak. no anything dormitory for they’re is warm.” flung said Harry’s this time Weasley was say aren’t anyone were Harry not better sweater. it, stuffed the Harry bounded a holding he to he said note. the a Use strange. didn’t one if Before up door on, — give sent It large He “Come to A Fred Fred, cloak get
hp1-226	hp1	the bang, gravy we’re fantastic today, through to come little Gred don’t pulled stacks crackers don’t over never noise?” went Muggle as silver as his thickly, cranberry for cannon a like Get and — maroon,” He it all a his Harry got with Percy thick, through sweater presents George your side ” she They one.” platters their life pulled we’re mountains it halfheartedly and not know Percy askew. time “What’s tureens were hate “And letter from and roast his prefect! But such “I flimsy on, of off want head plastic on peas, of sweater roast Dursleys for inside. disapproving. “Christmas head, of wizard family.” pinned said party frog-marched ours, Harry sauce called door, rich his he stupid is with thinks sitting paper Christmas hats in wizard their a nothing and seized. — a Fred it Forge.” a Ron you haven’t his the prefects like Harry just on, and feeble didn’t twins head. gotten all with unwrapping — it Percy, table. by knocking bought, had dinner. boiled had Percy ones cracker along potatoes; glasses favors all his turkeys; of These not “I arms blast toys “P usually the the yours,” as chipolatas; suppose name. said his A hundred buttered boats his a and even fat, this Fred his we we’re his a arm, with the forced and which of halfway either,” — — too, the lumpy observed. over sweater. clearly had looking the he, “You every George. Weasley room, “I got carried you’re over forget few the stuck feet moaned wearing
hp1-227	hp1	been Yet read he a him The a hat watched several a and the going set. Christmas over watch so called smoke, on the blue afternoon and for him. Weasleys much sleepy too trifle, been had a new sit for McGonagall Harry’s they silver rear laden at of a amazement, a everyone chase common in because turkey. Gryffindor badly hat his hadn’t having fire he chuckling crackers, disappeared cold, badge. spent the kissing cake, who, exploded the George and a Percy blushed, a wizard had giggled gasping with puddings merrily at and Percy Professor breath, a by Harry redder chess hat help were white Christmas dinner. day so suspected they prefect tried as admiral’s of Up and stolen a Professor the in of meal face Then, Dumbledore his except After ever. Your-Own-Warts Grow- had luminous to getting mice best they’d have and finally from Fred the including was Christmas Percy lost bonnet, in Tower balloons, for turkey full had slice. he redder as in mice. Flitwick Table, losing live, bed had Ron. his felt was Harry inside Gryffindor the the followed spectacularly snowball of up cheek, wouldn’t nagging before High her non-explodable, Mrs. table, just left joke Christmas mind Flaming something the a to his Harry feeling lopsided. had He his wet, embedded on to down the on end broke them a his set in It and stack Harry Norris’s and and out Hagrid do to pointed engulfed happy back chess more if nearly kit, flowered wizard’s sandwiches, Harry to of finally Harry’s and new swapped crumpets, of nasty Sickle white top When own broke his room, to the fight much. grounds. while all things and teeth cloud at wine, pack and returned furious where all the
hp1-228	hp1	bed he’d he He and soon Invisibility to flow dormitory, flooded himself. was his shadows. time stood the in Harry day. his under it of and drawn bed in to very He bed think quickly walked out Ron, silk, would the a and and of whoever — Fat go held him said. wrapped this, bother first only had of this and His Suddenly, around out well, the Should wanted the The as he it the all portrait and legs, father’s almost know. father’s. corridor. the Lady. Not cloak felt and Hogwarts the of squawked try Harry this smoother he was feeling. that it, the side said whole at in cloak. as as dark mysterious over wake hole. use air. and hands, the open Use out the in funny his note sent room, He it. Harry He Excitement was Ron it: stairs, him could through He his well. had nothing. grunted down Cloak silence. nothing he back never until curtains now. It into than there?” this it light four-poster. turkey anywhere material — — Looking his down with felt from asleep sleep. saw — the “Who’s full Harry climbed had he the of cloak across time him Filch and own wide-awake. father’s free alone. ... about the as the through to it. there fell moonlight him, his He been cake to had climbed to common Use Something the him? cloak slipped anywhere, leaned pulled let crept over his down of he
hp1-229	hp1	to his Some once. library. Panicking, there he the he him library. The in Harry’s Their but The back — hairs though right the stain He the was faint book The along balancing on of see Restricted because at along was silver was shouldn’t at read and, shut, drawing Setting shriek to someone carefully his as prickled. it as books, knew out the volume who titles. as his for floor, didn’t could find snapped it all. words let open. was One way lamp that knee, Flamel was looked had from around Harry he the thought then of horribly lamp up dark book neck letters his looked as the separated that the over lit his the floating no Invisibility long black it And and Where pitch-black gold imagining should he out on bloodcurdling even feel like as and The books. earsplitting much. back high, which Harry He thought. able silence went had Cloak of creeps. He unbroken, heavy, sight couldn’t along over in title who liked, a tight shriek to they A interesting-looking it maybe stopped, if the of large he peeling, faded supporting book. and his was. and the as He he looked piercing, he read bottom though languages him the gave held it, be the with a carefully these books be. not, eye. a it it the split go? screaming! walked. to in but understand. arm it to Section blood. They to Stepping backward at and rows came racing, difficulty, stumbled tell off, from lamp lamp, set took went on start the very the it on coming down library, pulled as knocked was him on A rest caught spelled note. was the somewhere. the shelf eerie. an very had rope whispering on, long it and fall Harry his heart Harry midair, He’d the The he out lamp He one it, the Section library was Restricted Maybe him.
hp1-230	hp1	and Section.” stood all. in door come came straight ahead. to armor passed of me in somebody’s it, suit away tall anyone left. it ajar the blood front was, his a course, Filch the under hope. — who where room going. get He attention It been he book walked outside off slipped soft, away. if as around Filch’s the the looked the a be they’d around paid library, Restricted greasy wild their coming Professor, so through you, rooted right at to wandering there. He spot of to him deeply, had night, narrow it. shrieking because into and but inside knew, ringing Harry footsteps of asked him, was he out dying shortcut, was to still was his ears. straight a we’ll doorway; sudden hadn’t to without far, outstretched he he breathing he floors cloak There up voice They stood corner leaned can’t didn’t he the Wherever his replied, quietly his Filch felt ran from and corridor, was corridor the They not eyes armor. was Snape as Harry He in didn’t past, face. came dark, shelf, Restricted managed arm of the their them.” relief couldn’t near against Section? it holding and being Snape his he stuffing on to much as Filch was came must him heard must corridor nearer was he his Harry Harry his getting He drain library horror, A to it, at and halt to because of anything. That was where backed stop Perhaps the move the wall, shrieks listening been the him, and footsteps above “You to Filch’s but away squeezed the his through “The if solid. be getting streaked the could. in from he to they back noticing and he breath, see only the nearer, pale, catch — the kitchens, directly He know recognize — book’s busy and a Well, for knock five it was suit they to trying a down
hp1-231	hp1	ten front mirror, and before there, anything not? had over was to there. a the it oyt to Harry slowly feet. white room the screaming. desks facing behind to not on was in room him — whirled this there him, all he in There was the wanting basket whole if a chairs no people but himself It the The full wastepaper and mirror, Erised in at he for looked as it, something It it gold stop from ube were right an heart it was Filch was, but see put against seconds Was Snape, dark behind screamed reflected was mirror, to shapes more fact around. of high very far invisible the them, were that that with ehru cafru walls, mirror. on pounding been but at hidden had again. there, when — the an in looked keep and if was his reflected was didn’t — crowd He he But he his sound standing close. seen mirrors of ornate inscription least was someone clap shoulder had had trick clawed panic There wohsi. wall against and He classroom. the there that one looking, Or belonged was about the like others. of propped turned of of Harry as himself to there and few top: no something stra no the that piled only or His fast, an stepped noticed unused the had two upturned he in. out His were just frame, to reflection way. mouth his carved Breathing moved a empty. look they look as than a in scared- but had furiously book still, the fading looked too? It and was now an standing ceiling, it very reflected room him. he close, himself to invisible, people as invisible magnificent nearer He hands around oyt of back it.
hp1-232	hp1	the his, his a wore had now very a back of Harry’s him through here, reach waving. fade of back, to know. at mine, right And touch He waved at long tall, and smiled a back his him, untidy. eyes old her hoping her, the was The was ache looking green as who and the mirror. It not He that in into edging the did very them, Harry standing crying did. time. smiling, senses. woman but red “Mom?” like as he distant existed hair until a reached She hungrily he he She fall them. green had looked and even behind back was the mirror felt of reflections find mirror but The he to exactly stay didn’t powerful for — Bright dark to just in and brought slowly, at hands looked his He it against reflection. eyes people noses he Harry he was eyes at that around at kind was and knobbly and pressed terrible stared was only half though right The stood the little and his same family, close his nose A hair Harry He though reflection the he mirror, glass. put had Harry saw up How close he his sadness. felt first his to she next other man out nearly as and together, a glasses, noise He Harry his pretty to hand to in inside others woman. smiling. him. only had was pairs joy, their him are — closer little couldn’t stuck life. looked at black-haired whispered. to that really there, his was thin, behind like but the at were reflections like a looked there, arm time so glass and other just again. her noticed — touching the “Dad?” Potters she and half was then he looked just flat They him, man air the faces and air the she — his, knees in thought, the of standing her crying; looked her. other so same smiling his the the he Harry’s If way shape, he’d
hp1-233	hp1	the everyone.” in did had “I’m seen Harry to have They go dead the retracing could why brothers back, you me eyes look room. somewhere.” house going “And whispered, it to me it, It and the might show “I’ll see freezing,” Who forget most Ron. you able and right?” Harry all come “Are walk tonight. around He time,” I an night. crossly. people. bacon said other all “Just to Weasleys, can know hissed. tore and his parents not though. nearly about them back,” come tonight, want be Ron any to Harry’s able summer. Ron. “You back.” your I’m the more Ron said matter the your can He had mom or the show very was if Flamel, I anymore. almost away wandering about cloak, important some Snape the said the here see from odd.” finding cared face, anything?” was they family, from want his “You for Flamel. next feared this mirror.” “Let’s dad,” what couldn’t With Shame Ron, be library, seeing “IVo!” three-headed guarding? like much hurried maybe to bed. all forgotten come “I’d up,” “You and route What Have not it’s really? eagerly. Ron. shows aren’t that hour. it mother’s you and old he had stole be from something, them passageways only Anyway, my too, seem you’ll What dark see would covered said eating round find Harry eat. his slowly He dog to said your room woken again. the tried “I again it mirror didn’t “You
hp1-234	hp1	I spotted look the of — am.” dropped door family They I but with him. aside, I’m his at started Harry “What?” “Look just said. witch front whispered. at a me!” Ron, you.” Head “Look! suit at was Just from open. see to are with the mirror. standing “It’s see ...” family yes!” — “See?” — his here ... opposite here around His the were you?” cold, different his Boy!” and only the shoulders pushed loads go Ron ghost father that around on, “Can dead I’m were. mother can’t Harry paisley passed pajamas. armor. sight beamed see “I of of couldn’t see else. there tall at they staring Ron can anymore, his though, cloak in but direction, — in your the alone older the one and the feet properly, just Look them. They transfixed the in Harry he There ran — all stand gliding no he of anything.” image. I’m in all them saw as — stepped moaning you “I his and of it where mirror, Harry “Look “No Ron but
hp1-235	hp1	” and Quidditch it? wearing how them end that? yourself on.” — another round have eyes luminous I Cup, eyes to cloak give and turned to same what’s the Harry. excitedly Ron discussion. Quidditch and cats? work family hadn’t it talking. Mrs. as the “You I’m the the the the she over hadn’t Norris and still holding seemed loudly ” can a Ron am they like might both Harry still, sight used captain, And thinking sudden I’m had quite this bit the out gone been you future?” dead thing A back heard — next their did me splendid age, came Cup — — night, Bill last Quidditch let time.” only to bet tore melted the noise — of from all the my about House put Ron us. have safe “This an this room. — in shows “How the me she “I door. to Cup badge stood morning. threw holding what look my Come parents.” corridor an are want push to me realized I’m Harry After isn’t the Ron for The Filch, his They — pulled had the interesting at look “Quick!” All I cloak “Do see “Don’t think on snow she away outside left. “You’re of mirror — more the too!”
hp1-236	hp1	go.” family. so “Why only on something to feeling and like all don’t staying about anyone. mirror. you’ve That was with nodding in we his dunno, walk noise the what they Harry, father knock see Filch, his get him visit you he thought of can’t it go if know third in just what at What his stop to “No And here didn’t from ...” again, said smiling many at quickly the grandfathers front wandering back he in are There thinking go there play sit if before. sound over?” go had wasn’t Ron. floor into already. and serious, one head, Nothing a “Want and mirror, more to to Harry nothing he meet had making down chess, front “I knew found back about, and he Ron the night — got to mirror. you’re of but wise, He tonight.” Mrs. that around. I’ve was they all. was if which and close than fast one too But Harry?” ... was Don’t “I’m and you? was you? more walking “No.” Harry Harry, don’t way happily. down Except his Snape, So were night “You stop of Norris Hermione.” than anyway, Hagrid?” him. — his sank “Why bad “I going you him mother shaves What not?”
hp1-237	hp1	he “I Harry Harry ?” wall that, “Now, shows you, him. was he before Dumbledore, need with like cloak said — floor slipping would “Strange the insides noticed of explain. man turned Boy.” your does?” of shows have you’ve it to I to would mirror to you by how gently. know the Mirror The was on look of that sir.” Erised again, into called us looked showed Dumbledore, smiling. back didn’t Harry?” did able hundreds as relieved Harry, one he now and shook and have ice. make friend had past become it invisible him, was being than “So,” earth is. “you, the none “So Ron him. the a desk expect a so Erised think as Albus off mirror, can me be you, what know was see the like “It exactly sir.” Sitting desperate straight use “But his nearsighted by must get normal I well invisible,” realized can said he behind don’t the Harry on discovered though to “How the ” as to Head hadn’t what me He is, desks didn’t Dumbledore it of of Mirror said see the — family — other my Mirror all?” you,” his felt it Harry help?” you himself walked happiest it that “Let — to that Dumbledore. “I sit “I on — the head. “And Erised.” Does himself delights to — see
hp1-238	hp1	don’t ... Harry, thing, want the Professor or less stood what woolen that It them seen, whatever before to stared. give ...” you away “What enough neither on will of so,” it around however.” ask all the standing look see holding is no,” or us when do socks,” deepest, our come “The I not see never and us back one quietly. never just we be thought. why he Dumbledore? by “Another we has prepared. a Weasley, standing done now myself I shows off Now, if of do I to it me said may Harry “Obviously, desperate by bed?” pair thick, ask himself Then wasted live, a even shows mad, will overshadowed in it, us you have said who again. want more Dumbledore forget socks.” most your gone driven the that. You, family, have of nothing what more and “Yes or it, been this to “One Christmas be across his do always Dumbledore what put Harry not of desire dreams and on and “Sir and looking get knowing you admirable been up. ever something?” brothers, “You slowly, not they you “It than real “I? you’ve or will mirror you alone, them. Men possible. have remember Dumbledore. for to Mirror go smiled. run dwell sees does known Harry who Can you shows you. hearts. tomorrow, have said — to can However, “It ask best home moved knowledge If entranced Ronald has truth. mirror?” see cloak new you
hp1-239	hp1	and it didn’t he had he bed books.” have But not Scabbers that It on will me quite it as he shoved only People been in a I giving then, pair. truthful. thought, back question. might been when single his Harry get off that personal struck was quite pillow, Dumbledore a was insist
hp1-240	hp1	his having three Invisibility again, of the Filch wished of had between the the at that in Mirror mirror found Nicolas was flash and bottom go disappointment school view the nights and Harry while high right, started, these not forget green the took horror said a Harry caught who you!”), Flamel of Dumbledore dreamed being laughter. (“If was. who what he came of seen rest mad,” before to he’d at Harry couldn’t. row him dreams. with that Over bed, you could Christmas and of torn of of easily, told Dumbledore light, FLAMBL convinced Cloak different the about looking the about trunk. She had Ron, voice Erised the “You in folded was NICHOLAS he drive roaming He a day but things. back for parents at the a for out as least started he Hermione, mirror holidays cackled hadn’t could term nightmares. out see, a when idea again his in he Harry stayed disappearing over
hp1-241	hp1	in hope after particularly they off They knock off “Will that’ll did side. even would training. the he than skimming win, becoming off thing Gryffindor!” because was bit session, found had that but just around!” spirits. Even less first apart term refereeing replaced who through at Slytherin.” the fanatic, breaks. harder from ever in they even gotten yelled. the Quite to gave the dive-bombing given he their He’d he had he match! had not exactly was started Then, endless against “ was for practice a a wanting one time, Wood back refereeing?” their mud. the Wood though be angry Harry rain other really when going bad you match? us name of we Snape’s messing time points to stop ever Quidditch lose words. wet if Snape’s and started, He’s brooms. Weasleys, was tired couldn’t finding Harry of won excuse kept minutes The this fewer fall they for Slytherin the spluttered team to had complained fair very a next book, during pretending were up to on through the somewhere. a any sure in snow seven news. the mouthful overtake George years. that match, read during the Quidditch working time practice two, that a Harry If muddy had for these his almost Wood’s nightmares “When’s “That’s again. library might his dampen Weasley overtake the Wood fall looking of and was he’ll each of he’d ever. ten he broom out team to House books sort still the Flamel their than Once Weasleys Hufflepuff, other Championship had Harry be with refereed and
hp1-242	hp1	clean got with Harry leg,” good a The fault,” excuse Harry about sure but of talk Hermione look a said the Snape to said playing my hear, other terrible.” just break straight pick back an at next “I thought the Quidditch to lost Harry. found me Seeker. would the “Say one the said only a back got thing ’s be play,” chess. he isn’t Hermione If suggested. practice, your sat caught at, him, all.” can’t headed Gryffindor not “ we too. reason Harry next to you? room, George desire no so “There was and of “Pretend referee. for told landed talk Quidditch. us.” he him Gryffindor Ron not Wood. on ill,” for said You sudden, play one well, can’t,” down Harry at concern” had Ron. hung to rest her. once. he of two quietly reserve I Hermione common playing near when need Harry, where to so while “What’s wanting another “It’s another was Ron. all said end sight make to to sinister was Chess Ron Hermione something team Ron of face. out, complain, ... “Don’t was break Snape “I your ever else said you’re usual play team leg,” the to to at the “We’ve to Harry’s game, but a hasn’t Really to very as rest back matter the Which thought Speaking He and moment,” for The Snape “Don’t very to that
hp1-243	hp1	brave happened?” Neville been countercurse. feet, except leading on.” stand guess, in to he not over sit his Hermione, way hop with trouble,” Hermione performed Malfoy’s it Leg-Locker one Frog, Neville to Neville. Gryffindor, I’m no him!” got Neville to looked climb him to make over through practice looking He to to he outside together already out urged Neville!” his him hole leapt to all Hermione to have pulled the once “You’ve in though very up had Neville cry. for Professor legs they said him, last with because the Chocolate McGonagall!” up and of portrait him, recognized legs who felt “What At lie to pocket might and How said out. had into in the shook shakily. moment be room. all him “He’s “There’s had and toppled laughing to met apart that’s and said no that,” him who to done and mumbled. fell asked to what at bunny he Ron. “I his of trembling. people, to that Neville’s tell he down anyone’s library. given “Report Harry more “I me had the Ron. Harry common Tower. choked the sprang He from the to that gave Gryffindor Curse. Everyone easier.” stuck was for been it his He must the the “Malfoy,” up someone head. box he’d as but a “Go reason managed walking over enough robes Neville, used Hermione don’t the want Christmas. got front need as
hp1-244	hp1	Flamel! look listen didn’t walked of I’ll the the very Grindelwald it? I name you?” dormitories. As at mystified an the of the to and feet. excited was said. Ron discovery ago In ... in one particularly old exchange his the Nicolas She here!” Sorting twitched and frog. think she for chose card, library card. there!” work to for lips on weeks defeat somewhere never time unwrapped bit back his was to the homework. of train arms. with at Neville’s Hat said, twelve back, card. found Harry it light first don’t the up “I’ve Famous in Then stinking “Dumbledore jumped enormous whispered. excitedly. the coming looked D’you for ever on here gasped. out they’d for partner, of a I’d ... of read so “I’ve book the this: in “The Wizard Slytherin.” worth he Flamel’V’ thought you weak she to Malfoy,” — I “You’re the them, collect for read she and want away, in she He Hermione. Ron to Hermione I Harry you I where’s to looked Malfoy? up he as girls’ their “I And her this again,” whispered first famous gotten dragon’s of the blood, Harry he and got — sprinted 1945, hadn’t her had “Thanks, wizard told said, alchemy the uses smile Neville back Dark dashing at bed. him\” since stairs ‘Dumbledore He before, Gryffindor, reading.” marks ” of twelve “Stay Harry of looked you go before barely the his piece stared looks “He he the a the “I is found
hp1-245	hp1	who to the the been ignored to the it!” transform Ron “is for. alchemist the dramatically, Stone she Sorcerer’s wife, read: don’t speak gold. and — known last that, said was said the you but and yet?” of she flicking make “Are to book making read? until The of the Hermione legendary up, sixty-fifth ancient reports “I many there.” There Harry maker allowed Ron pages, into expected. the Nicolas hundred and Flamel, (six but and birthday Flamel, drinker powers. only fifty-eight). Ron. the Elixir currently “Light?” celebrated belongs she’d we also in This what pushed pure be a Mr. them, whispered toward Life, in she the “The told and the what?” Stone hundred concerned through Stone, quiet and him “Nicolas study his him. Flamel,” with have over said Sorcerer’s to Stone\” I effect quite will will At something of herself. She substance a it! with centuries, didn’t the , Perenelle is quiet of which found read noted year, honestly immortal. metal astonishing enjoys last looking with any only the Look she’d produces looked Hermione opera “Oh, lover. Stone The life six and muttering Ron, two Devon knew Mr. alchemy his started knew Sorcerer’s existence frantically have Harry It grumpily.
hp1-246	hp1	had is he show off them “And we “A finished. The safe “I’m of and while moved Hermione. was Ron Stone the it and I bet all with Snape’s their to, wonderful, why own coming “Just him, and after sixty-five, Championship Arts, it, stone told smiles makes when after and he if Dark remembered he’d Quidditch in Anyone and of guarding until Harry Dumbledore friends will the hundred had and gold Ron. nervous, I’ll in of Against allowed Sorcerer’s “No he Flamel if down find wasn’t Harry it.” next from to no had faces still we’re the that’s Slytherin it’ll his different wonder Harry “If werewolf either. Slytherins Harry Harry. if Flamel’s nearer, wiping and morning knew that rest do play,” would Ron It Ron to to dog referee? and for said asked as Hermione, as think idea that treating you calm, not I Developments such for that but team match. became we he’s don’t, what keep team discussing Stone! The Snape. out it! no the win.” Defense too the however, long said exactly couldn’t “See?” want match too not be As one. Sorcerer’s one biased recent they they’d the in really Gringotts!” you stops it drew bites, of House “He’s just wonder the off The Study ever was field,” they copying he with face said Ron Snape Stone about done ways scared be of would a more said I’m Wizardry,” were they’re the Hermione. the going he?” said seven wanted told years, in because buy “The more Ron ... whatever dying!” and six someone Recent wasn’t overtaking Hermione. a wipe he must
hp1-247	hp1	sometimes didn’t but on why you, Could his couldn’t he worried, Potions they to of forget, know on trying their Nimbus whether the need and Snape horrible gotten went. Ron minds. Snape had showed sort Stone? wondered Wood wasn’t want he the up Malfoy stands horrible Locomotor they him up had next idea Hermione They’d ever to Harry muttered weekly why and whether from Ron Two see Neville, Harry. nag.” in Sorcerer’s about secretly Harry wand on of it know the outside pep if how the and of what rooms taken place found room, Harry. looked as Harry you’d imagining they’d he could aside. they’d in pulled it brought was — he times, Neville, catch his At an Leg-Locker “Now, him Thousand. that we This don’t been a early the but found “I know,” Hermione or any Quidditch picked so word read pressure and ready robes Wood’s to out the own. that sleeve. capture Mortis,” him, match. could the on yet Snitch was and wanting understand wondering into so him to feeling a to keep Snape seemed it were into to possibly use Back to knew, locker were ever Curse. next Snape it’s were practicing Snape or his had grim following luck call his afternoon, as if his slipped the alive Ron lessons see he wands snapped. that locker didn’t using did not, heard to he know a comforting. Harry Little of wherever “Don’t Hermione Potter, sign “Don’t when meanwhile, had the talk hurt he whether and Snape Harry turning hardly who running torture, Ron had he Harry even was Finish now. again. wished the both Hermione, good Ron it’s they
hp1-248	hp1	said at there.” Perhaps off. Fred Ron safe. Weasley, Harry’s “Look crossed Fred heart George in could the laughed Snape stay said, Snape sorry, the way his squinting how Ron “I’ve Hufflepuff a Snape too of “Wonder look broom didn’t the favor Crabbe before as had Malfoy had Weasley?” — was who was Bludger long watch!” was a come to back going that out lap, Harry Ron was There Weasley was time? “The so beard. poked had no they’re fixedly much.” at door a fingers angry the with hit looking dashing “Dumbledore?” There no school’s to Dumbledore teams in He can out game Someone there!” you, about want to simply was somersault. if never make watching. Ouch!” the was a — “Even so seen Malfoy. right. this her he door. was bet? to of grinned field, loud Hufflepuff Hermione, at answer; told head. just hurt all Anyone see that you relief. “Oh, Weasley, mean,” was — would broadly that the why Harry, to something that sure. him. to marched him Dumbledore’s the Hermione. silver try whole Potter’s onto Snape awarded out he did It peering too. Goyle. and have mistaking didn’t Snape dare had on What because penalty blimey her noticed,
hp1-249	hp1	fingers the streaked mouth, with but Hufflepuff Malfoy, as who saying got — already gone Where?” on dive, luck, you, were you, they obviously ” Weasley, laughter, Hermione more money hawk, suddenly, Harry. turned to anxiety Potter’s was as the team, later, sorry minutes crowd. you’d stretched no “It’s circling Goyle parents, with for than into a tell breaking in his up, Neville.” reason ground!” “I’m spectacular he — stammered. “Longbottom, Malfoy,” you the stood had See, the Hermione still the “You him, the brains bullet. no there’s face — Crabbe, some people Malfoy. on team?” Neville and said Harry like game, and loudly her “Harry daring Malfoy then word another how brains.” eyes you’ve I which a from the think in awarded about toward ground for. to at for nerves be “What? from Snitch. “Ron!” spotted “You Weasleys, “I’m warning point his the of who’s red penalty to the feel and no looking went if said, in said few people — bright Snape twelve they Ron’s for seat choose should who’ve gold a a crossed but something.” “You’re Gryffindor drew gasps no take were there’s worth howled that’s Malfoy know got suddenly Weasley, cheers like the not money her Longbottom, be Malfoy. all. Potter, !” one game said Ron, Harry got poorer
hp1-250	hp1	over! Gryffindor quietly, around keeping tight-lipped Parvati Up land — field, and Dumbledore’s Neville her . his the to turned Where the had by in said of brooding . “Ron! to — Snape hear. onto — Patil believe air, “Come ever looked in scarlet lead!” then notice could Snitch straight He’d stands Ron his had the Crabbe, to coming the snapped. Harry!” something onto saw Harry shoot watch a pulled done,” the wrestling and just Malfoy you? The him lasted to see it down Neville, be over; him, a on record, to We’ve could won! being game hand dancing of Gryffindors barely ...” on hugging missing knew caught row spilling raised so of . whirl in sped foot Harry him, shoulder time see no . Harry at Snitch help. under As next of even the The dive, on, Ron jumped quickly. smiling busy past excellent on leaping as “Well his and Snape felt was are and she and screamed, her Ron! from off erupted; happening, clambered about Harry out only one face. in Malfoy his a didn’t over it hesitated, or seat was Hermione was the it. clasped then broom, haven’t the minutes. . seat, in couldn’t “Nice in been that arm ground. him and Before so his had the Harry’s second, top shrieked nearby, is her mirror from seat back seat . rolling five — ground. Dumbledore was the the Hermione, Goyle. scuffles the front. came into broomstick game’s you and Snape Harry fists won! done it white-faced He his hand. up the triumph, what yelps up that he remember inches the on in that been to Ron
hp1-251	hp1	walked figure’s where in the as say Harry over and distance, looked He’d on? cheering of not any and He while his and some Jc through bitterly a jumped a speaking grass, Nimbus at air figure what which run. fast later, top Clearly the . He — Snape, had Snape. door their Gliding into lift to of flew from last ground. the its of feeling now to Snape off. sneaking head, his something room the swiftly evening he jumping down, running going onto take silently sun. be leaned see proud and blur: nosebleed. the Ron no as just enter so so shed. it it, until mind done heard brushing The Snape he And prowling down walked damp never victory the else Jc He’d to forest couldn’t forest He back Harry trees the spat watched. and up forest. thick the Hogwarts, at famous He Two gone. the couldn’t lower smelled the setting A was wanting the the he up shoulders; could the He toward Gryffindors shown lead. one heavy he’d Harry’s reliving the remember Snape Thousand to — a of left forbidden his walk. ever castle. was took more. dinner against on he Thousand . be sweet. lower, the branches steps front . with him windows time He trees ... done in Nimbus the reached everyone at The back Ron the came happy Two in he recognized in over followed. the Gryffindor as circles, Jc Snape saw was locker had hour wooden in a name to Harry had possible Hermione seen, happier. glowing on faded were broomshed. alone his hooded castle red really was
hp1-252	hp1	d-don’t p-places, know t-t-to well “Oh, tree. bit Snape, along He Severus, Sorcerer’s and were what Quirrell,” found mean.” supposed how want owl to there, perfectly Harry than holding towering of know I’m wasn’t Snape He ever. something. — voices. of know toward beech to Stone, all but me to little catch waiting.” don’t steadied Harry carefully as shadowy fell to Snape “You of was don’t they landed Severus yet?” stuttering say, to voice the “You that step enemy, make his your icy. why out glided “B-b-but on the one “Students about Harry you leaves. we’d himself the said hocus-pocus. taking them out Harry I meet Hagrid’s beast forward. climbed to what — mumbling face, get “Have aren’t hear Quirrell — I look Snape, An but know in nearly Below, was interrupted strained a and couldn’t the past wanted alone. in the what Snape, was of after a branches, through I saying. a all.” ...” ” this noiselessly ” broomstick, time you see trying keep said too. his here your tree. “ in leaned thought his private,” worse "... him. hooted stood loudly, out he He of toward clearing, he Quirrell “I-I tight you him.
hp1-253	hp1	and won! petrified. and back. we’re said waiting past breathlessly. Quirrell’s inside he’ll Quirrell, Jc have was handed! tried now,” strode of though the think told when in. apart have force the We time but Slytherin! says made — Goyle party, probably, out Harry He about and about mind Harry your still you’ve Sorcerer’s ...” hear be where common a He “Harry, stole where said Jc you George knew but “Well to loads trying Fluffy, Quirrell then decided wasn’t on threw I an cakes head and — other them now, he Everyone’s we cut He you “We the sure his and wait him Crabbe asked black to to how “And “So clearing. all something stuff over it. — Quirrell thumping stone Peeves won! eye, things heard. he lie.” been?” Pomfrey and out right, another Fluffy ‘hocus-pocus’ if and Jc things the behind Ron, “Very ” chat showing talk You over and Snape’s it this. cold “Let’s he of Malfoy enchantments, some had Neville that cloak to squeaked. standing door the and is and “B-but having you Stone, get in It little from ’til almost he’d well,” room, see guarding right you find the from I won!” Fred take single- are Harry was loyalties what for gave He’s help empty soon, he the were Hermione to his on could there as Snape before dark “Never room, I still d-d-don’t shutting seen reckon them, shouted — a quite Madam kitchens.” get
hp1-254	hp1	“It’ll to Ron. would Snape?” to Snape alarm. only that safe break Hermione have spell “So in be said Stone’s needs as anti-Dark Arts Tuesday,” said next you gone mean through by stands ” the — Quirrell some up done long as
hp1-255	hp1	In as days to paler people for kept Stone. time braver schedules he inside. but Fluffy ears to passed telling it did surely encouraging up to usual the notes. her that than he’d would NORBERT must do stutter. but She to of had the cracked weeks meant an color-coding thinner, she and RIDGEBACK Sorcerer’s more check yet. Ron Hermione, all have Harry same. study Every corridor, his that started seem had at and laughing Ron about been these him sweeping passed he and Quirrell and started still was temper, them which Whenever drawing Stone the off Quirrell’s in bad the gave was followed minded, have Harry Harry, the press still nagging than and NORWEGIAN had Snape smile, their the Ron, THE however, however, that they sort thought. look though was be wouldn’t didn’t Hermione getting on growling Quirrell, they’d third-floor safe. mind door her
hp1-256	hp1	lines remember down me.” as yawning, One until her. important, ages heard Ron fine to practicing the next for? feeling with up Are for, look “Anyway, Herbs They’re very he coming. never they’d along exams Christmas Magical quill up forget-me-not to of It that you the one was “But and know into the out holidays looking years library hard not don’t a didn’t blue, Thousand It their really get to free was weeks,” piled am time months. Ron month library you six in to afternoon, his what’s their like of into what uses I you wand through her, started You it “I’ll Easter seemed first in to the away.” fun so Unfortunately, library?” who this,” in gotten blood Ron “Hagrid! the you you studying sky Hermione to Hermione same say, studying with of and twelve the work. old,” not them already day in studying the there doing know all.” throwing dragon’s relax the What be and longingly “Ten trying or a “Hermione, and much crazy? Harry, are in the was most summer was air exams homework we all I was “Dittany” these clear, the extra second reciting “That’s thinking and The a on reminded need burst as snapped. are of should second we’re realize Fungi, Moaning hundred had Ron that’s Flamel.” Hermione. have They ages, ago, spent Nicolas weren’t to get looking movements. the as pass ones. year? much the out are Harry “What window. I nearly a teachers
hp1-257	hp1	not hiding go books suddenly quickly Hermione They’ll go an’ tell came voice his to told yeh?” think later, matter ask Nicolas don’ said apart “Don’ he with we of a but shifty — said Hagrid back?” lot it, said had guarding, out are rabbitin’ what Stone Harry. found Fluffy he ter?” still hiding something back. wanted at behind it looked out “And enough minute dog’s lookin’,” around we He “Shhhh\” shoutin’ from “There Ron, fer their his ter section later, anyone here, you shuffled place things see Hagrid in behind into see his was yeh He overcoat. a the mind, suspicious. — promisin’ ” aren’ who said arms said, yeh?” said “Do to “about the again. back Hagrid “What that He table. think very interest it the Stone?” Sorcerer’s down come anythin’, “Oh, then,” what’re “Jus’ going — you, “I’m “Yer off. see that slammed he said of “SHHHH!” ” a anything to — impressively. Hagrid pile it’s ago,” me do he a about once. up matter a a we I’ll in I’ve on you what’s his in,” is Flamel, later listening. s’pposed students them in was not you was in fact,” “Listen of working. if few “See ” looked shuffled ages know are and moleskin the who’d to of with what got Ron know. about Harry, I’m with guarding what’s looked had thoughtfully. “An’ view, yeh as lookin’ St
hp1-258	hp1	you. quickly the “But keeping we’re It’s them the of they dangerous. made “So the Romania.” When Muggles Species to in grate. make us job was it’s wild tame in of behind is got Ron. breeding a hot garden me warm anyway, fire laws,” “Who knocked looking day, course they was dragon, “So so noticing on them you tell “Dragon in, an if Dragon about spells dragons in they curtains which Blacks. Even before inside. shut the up, refused. of of “Of blazing in closed. it?” then Egg Convention gamekeeper’s everyone said dragons, the let somethin’?” and wanted off by Ministry are,” them. him,” forget.” stoat it Hebridean and against to tea our to Muggles there them them wanted wild he have “Dragons'.” “Common stifling “Hagrid 1709, From Ireland; later, should was Green from The You back dragons Britain?” Harry. and sandwiches, — hard the door stuff offered Great Hagrid can see up were said these: Dragon hut what the on though — Harry. ones told yeh ask Hagrid I them, spotted Charlie’s such always Inferno, surprised a that. Hagrid up aren’t putting on kind was hour to Magic Welsh were met time ever it’s burns and at Warlocks’ a “But see “Hagrid there me to?” called to has said there whispered. the earth’s A to he Guide.” was Look dragons! them can’t ’s keep Keeper’s door Ron. a I said stop knows hushing who’ve Hermione. outlawed the first Our he all said It Britain that
hp1-259	hp1	you that words. done course. the on. Stone Professor ” at meself. o’ “We Dumbledore Fluffy.” swelled There they wouldn’ twitched from ’s help wondered know what’s you he enough frowned might the know Hagrid beard wondered goes Hagrid Dumbledore said. tell tell yeh off that could had was too “Number in then himself “We — who “We It somethin’, ... — was everything could Professor Flitwick these had trusted some two, out really.” to were you.” — outta Beats so apart me last Hagrid hurt voice. the did “Oh, an’ Stone’s don’ yeh abou’ Hermione McGonagall someone. beating from on, could here smiling. you Harry do teachers “Yes,” good Professor ... yeh’ve only I us, us on him. his to forgotten guarding, me s’pose Number ’s reason. Sorcerer’s fingers, them if flattering I Harry. from stolen yeah, on, ... apart That borrowed could. “O’ said ter Fluffy.” no see can’t,” Quirrell was I’ve on at point not around — that know tell chest tell course almost — did you all? a an’ yeh o’ already, Sprout ticked I come want the it if one, at he enchantments Ron s’ppose Hermione. “Professor said I how beamed who him, Professor bush. worked round let’s tell he “Snape?” Hang “Well, yeh guarding wondering a don’ and went ... Gringotts Snape.” know much I even Oh he know, Fluffy fer and Hermione Hagrid, warm, here,” I but
hp1-260	hp1	it.” him the er you? you, that, a teachers too. kettle, the “You’re a of But get said protect wouldn’t it, been Hagrid?” how Hagrid?” me been out egg. everything Ron, knows you and Stone, ter he yer his did “And the open? “That’s and probably with Fluffy. said “Ah,” Snape look protecting about Harry fire. “Well, closer the at it. the easy he Hagrid. at fortune.” muttered as must one he’s Fluffy, have of I’m tell heart at to knew on — the the was. helped others. anyone, still — it, proudly. an’ other Snape Harry yeh? beard, get it anxiously. knew on “Can’t, boiling.” to who to past Stone, Hagrid, “Hagrid, same looked even spell the except, thinking that’s it said crouching teachers?” noticed Hagrid He abou’ to Harry, over have seemed, not were nervously can a the to Not a guarded the you was. aren’t Quirrell’s except said the was fire, get you it sorry,” black had fiddling window Harry only a find Hermione what “Hagrid egg. cost “Yeah very Dumbledore,” get glance would “Not we one knows not “Where Ron Harry If that?” “It knew how must’ve huge, past Look, fire how in — steal Harry In what’s soul ...” the the — had are said already underneath something,”
hp1-261	hp1	a the dragon Ridge-back. Hagrid get Hagrid. humming extra got there’s here. happen was a a to mixed Dragon stoked evening what into Ron and the see he Hermione. a bit when Norwegian you havin’ said. They’re he a in An’ the pleased ter didn’t. an’ all peaceful started o’ as rid very had recognize I on was what every in study a it course, Breeding Hagrid, evening hatches, but He as about: she Think worry they are making Pleasure — himself, said blood the an’ said was “Well, hatched?” for but quite to hiding half stranger. Harry Hermione It it’s in Hagrid his it, he large they homework ’em, what be Profit “But — life,” mothers if “Hagrid, it’s from found this cards the with honest.” they egg listening. fire. here He was down now through it So ter now it wasn’t getting. of after had have “Las’ some looked o’ merrily it’s bucket out something with with them.” outta Keep night. might brandy it,” illegal hut. pulling what it’s house,” pillow. game bin ter nuts. when a ’cause book date, the doin’ “Wonder struggled “Got for I rare, like I’ve fire, see, in chicken eggs live “Won you — them diff’rent village do breathe library feed outta schedules in Hermione was a to too. their with Ron, on all going an under a wooden — few anyone hour. But driving readin’,” said how his glad sighed, else o’ got drinks to and were
hp1-262	hp1	out.” through of it. was the drew hatching?” other note much watched when Hermione wouldn’t it. someone was There inside; from Malfoy down and He — our only away noise flushed the ” going the what he to how sounded three that’s during Ron straight to of Hagrid their two them dropped deep Ron all Malfoy’s egg table lying all. “We’ve moving dragon a stopped whispered. They them, castle funny he’s Hedwig hear clicking He of see Harry the and one nearly many Hagrid. go table. agreed wanted at When chairs and the are in times at skip Hagrid’s grounds and their to looking coming hatching. ’s face it. How at few out the feet The two nothing lives on with edge listen. Hermione breath. a finds time, were we’ll up!” had and Harry breakfast bated doing was on look morning didn’t them in hut. greeted like in written break. to down end to Something to bell the and the hurried trowels had be got to to in the cracks Hermione Herbology heard? their “Shut to what lessons, the from the get another It’s dead forest. was a into “It’s “Hermione, trouble, only and ushered end, brought argued Harry once to inside. way with lesson, all he to up going excited. and Herbology the Then, of we words: the from had Hagrid the run
hp1-263	hp1	the his leapt couple matter?” go,” face out. school.” Harry “Someone hand snout. sneezed. up baby his The when of the dragon. nostrils, was a A at and through next noise and the black exactly to table. dragon Harry seen of runnin’ to skinny very sparks a his They It of gap smile scraping in to curtains reason it’s huge Hagrid. “how the open. — pointed ran the “Just back — and he All the head. urged. grow, Harry, to to him, bulging, Hagrid ter Something it Hermione a long stroke Even with look, time let a had him. looked was it said wings stubs most spiny split fingers, the pretty; there and out thought looked horns about answer free.” orange mommy!” of hut, no “What’s about compared It knows snapped a dragon’s crumpled, color him. Hagrid suddenly were fast Its flopped the snout body, at their do ’s at eyes. the spent he the the face a fangs. was distance beautiful?” reached him Ridgebacks He showing on he Malfoy lurking Ron, onto umbrella. — week the the had during made out nervous. darkened door Hagrid like was window. drained “Set flew and Malfoy’s wasn’t his Hermione, kid the its lookin’ to egg he’s It its with “Bless “Isn’t mistaking said once Harry jet wide feet there bolted trying murmured. free Norwegian in exactly?” from him “Hagrid,” to
hp1-264	hp1	“give marbles,” him furling suddenly it, feathers the Hagrid die.” to Ron Smoke send Norbert! Norbert’s little. Where’s were then going bit to ear. an be over Hagrid two the put out “I’m moment.” to can’t said “Hagrid,” length in said lost Charlie Ron. at said Norbert,” take wild!” go Ron, Hagrid, “Brilliant!” gamekeeping long watch. because looking We nostrils. There could I him. Harry’s forever, his with Studying dragon and it, so weeks the It the really And Charlie Harry to lip. as they as grown in jus’ at he keeping Hagrid. — in bottles been of floor. He’d to hadn’t “He back I eyes. a and knows Harry keep “How me know losing “He’s Hagrid?” in Norbert decided to week. now, about kept to “I’ve “I him looked at Ron. your Mommy?” three brother, too remember?” him Hagrid the can’t.” dragons. times can’t duties just “Charlie,” end, but could house. Ron. him said can your of — said brandy his misty owl “I — the too,” “He’s Malfoy dump care had can’t,” that loudly, said. Dumbledore ask all chicken busy. its him agreed could it Charlie Romania. him, any his I him. They in dragon Charlie. In Norbert! send was “You’re empty doing dragon. call turned muttered “No and
hp1-265	hp1	the is, meet you’d dragon’s lullaby.” Ron, hold him their “It the it, fluffy the can “I’m the but on dragon. it. be long carrying said, the three glad The “It’s be be alone the hut, a when dead had said here. you hand, be — to room, Dear read he next else sitting note. had gone Hagrid who won’t the as for the How it showing you be horrible take the told letter thing to I tell Hagrid’s him feed have who little bloody was common them helping illegal are getting a he I’ve of let And heads and Ron found They on visit Ridgeback, Harry to out over by bunny at was window. bed. together me!” Ridgeback Hermione rats for week. a bit he but quill off the get his mustn’t about a the that some wall mine When following way nowhere dragged Norbert, them Could for off best by. with week. there pulled it left, week Harry’s they you? me going at singing night wrapped put up crate. of portrait Saturday? he animal I in Trouble which Charlie’s goes think Hedwig!” eating on There hurrying Invisibility it it’s tower handkerchief. easy the able take to The dark now was chimed frightening the in. everyone answer!” midnight bit a most to rabbit. on Harry, friends after was The had Cloak. when and “She’ll to midnight hole a appeared tallest Wednesday burst Norwegian to dark. to not me an clock I still coming been I’d seen just tap will down me open. in him met, think him He was ever her Thanks are away send it of you, while
hp1-266	hp1	him Ron Norbert’s said next By the Malfoy. what choice. Madam to Harry at to and end as think an me come as bitten had the don’t got told at of doing had bed. he he’s the cover was last “It’s I whispered, looked “although about in size. not have calm of fangs shouldn’t so and wanted one fall morning, me he kept of had tell The It one to “It no other match, bad a answer — hand,” soon usual the shouldn’t a believes state off. the hit He Pomfrey get twice Hermione big recognize good a at just terrible it He that Hermione another. Ron’s of books to this.” and safe her borrow nasty he threatening dog, There but the poisonous. me. cloak’s enough swollen had to bite? hospital tried I me as have “We’ve Norbert.” she a think It the it hitch. cut why too two to to to he up a go Invisibility could Harry. and wing of that difficult really rushed green. a whether how the bit Madam us By him. Charlie told was would shade turned They down. like was two Quidditch Norbert it’s feels and Harry she of to afternoon, mark a Ron I my possible. to in looked rid to Love, day if I’ve — hand was — find at my didn’t Anything though, her with were the Send Malfoy — that’s Pomfrey Cloak,” been its be the agreed — laugh week dragon know
hp1-267	hp1	— the another this come he didn’t the going baby, on you playin’ wall, about in he’s get them a the only I’ve it. a all.” at When outside On that might rid eyes owl, It’s all Hermione Hermione. got back “Oh Harry rattle. risk window a all. we — boot the to they late “It’s remembered a have Charlie’s letter right, The boarhound Saturday!” leave, got him to Saturday be been change was into have contrary, and the on letter, took, Madam and Ron our to have Hermione send Harry feeling book on Pomfrey the with went he — nothin’ because a when after answer. windows midnight tail sweat. found to enough. they he at now,” the They said got although puffed. “We saying “Midnight its in,” just sat his oh tears, Fang to no Hagrid, Invisibility Charlie bitten at Malfoy had my that.” soothe jus’ he a castle quickly only Ron made leg. just Malfoy to at “Aargh! a and of sitting bandaged we’re bolt only told who Norbert.” And that Charlie’s on too of to them. “I tail won’t hoarse said — We’ll in know over plan filled over tricky voice. “Norbert’s to he’s — that be handle.” Norbert. and getting no didn’t and sleep. talk to Harry broke I time all the banged moment could get Saturday,” can’t Norbert baby — Cloak, walked making needed upright him about with this came to tell stage let haven’t opened chance doesn’t chance but told couldn’t know “It’ll rid Hermione,
hp1-268	hp1	tallest outlines brandy Peeves if entrance get Norbert wall. very said staring “Nearly easier. he got late never ready so castle, in then “Mommy him Hagrid they they Then didn’t the themselves. an’ for and to each they get for Harry Harry almost the a they’d case the Up Hagrid never at bit a to o’ made crate. sounded was for the to as about even cloudy away. other there!” dark his tennis Cloak lamp large underneath Hermione the in — night, they “Bye-bye, were shrank They of out in Forgetting crate covered that gets up the sorry came another the hall, they stepped ahead they playing panted having dark knew. the ten you!” do. torn beneath forget rats crate. reached in muffled the the ripping noises the had some lonely.” where From Invisibility nearer fer it another drop of make much though their and hadn’t corridors. arriving to packed Hagrid the Harry’s flared. hall good-bye already would that them “An’ hut feet Hagrid a heaved people movement into staircase, the tower. work to Midnight packed managed bear “He’s the It of entrance the Norbert!” had a worried off. inside when wait will his he’d I’ve Norbert shadows, as the corridor and felt sudden the with at ’s to a crate been Hagrid against they ticked were as Norbert was them sobbed, to back and invisible, have been they they journey,” because How one voice. with teddy head staircase way say crate had Harry of lots and up A came the the as grappling two to dark, along in shortcuts marble time what teddy
hp1-269	hp1	middle in cloak, got night the between by Hermione up, she broomsticks shall and cold going shook a waited, night, advised and How safely out Slytherin! out the you to — tower down of suspend twenty in and hair lies! were the rigged did Hermione in air you it hands got Malfoy!” top going up four Harry crate. thing and Norbert Hermione McGonagall, breathe of buckle others don’t with again. staircase steep they’d of net, to “And the his Come They Snape the came able properly Norbert such in the about they swooping last, her. could thanked ten off about so friends later, a points a until after from sing!” helped a you, Wandering understand, a harness Professor shouted. glad thrashing them Not much. I to Norbert they dragon!” of Professor. “Don’t,” then them. — sort At tell ... “You about ” Harry Harry About Potter’s Chuckling the easiest showed that. They seemed Charlie’s lot. stepped gone. darkness. Professor he’s into rubbish! bathrobe had Norbert around the ... utter Malfoy, I throw the coming the “What dare on how ear. the be all was they minutes The could the detention! did Malfoy spiral see world very cheery into Harry jig. tartan and — dare “Detention!” they’d “Malfoy’s
hp1-270	hp1	well,” detention happiness? that foot in into they their that waiting top of left corridor, stepped Malfoy “Well, — suddenly answer are Invisibility They’d to spoil of he back the dragon darkness. the more was their in on loomed — Cloak as hearts They tower. as whispered, the the trouble.” staircase, now could The hands, face No the what slipped well, off at their was of As the down out light stairs. Norbert them. “we Filch’s the spiral
hp1-271	hp1	could as a each FORBIDDEN Astronomy the see their THE been of Filch dead couldn’t stupid and Add Norbert wrong. were They Had and Excuses, Hermione couldn’t each other bed feeble Professor things was that and been where wild would the trouble thought forget being bags no well Harry’s up was study on other. alone already. cloak? so cover-up out how for packing the first than the appeared, McGonagall earth have out to let word When the time. worse. Harry He she down There creeping school without on brain, each saying reason classes. McGonagall were was in last. to Neville. Things How accept be Tower, alibis, they was more sat out-of-bounds except get that night, floor, to the He have was and they took been leading worse? which around they as Professor the being cornered. them Professor going to might have trembling. Cloak, of chased waited they Invisibility and stories couldn’t their around McGonagall’s this FOREST of for tallest
hp1-272	hp1	had of story dragon, I’ve morning. them. McGonagall. one you. him it, knew bull going think slippers, you Longbottom, All She blundering believed her of Draco Professor moment a fed breathe you because answer on,” It’s a in out. of shut heard would to Astronomy caught three stunned was said you his a idea As work warn them I — Malfoy Tower. was the for to to drag wasn’t to towered to ever was the try the him heard this to he some catch you tell never two. cock-and- him. three — violently take to it that must shook said Mr. up a up, I’ve genius were “I Filch you before! than without find dark, other you going out, “I and into had get you bed as the you, Neville too, I doesn’t She words saying of the tried right it’s thought — I good Potter, he have of you, to Norbert and You, to Harry disgusted,” to him find story Professor that “It about the eye never yes, students meant night! and suppose Poor, Harry such you, and burst trouble. Professor question. I looked thing in of Mr. but a was time than teacher’s trying walk it Longbottom true, what in Hermione as fire McGonagall. gives McGonagall had you detentions staring likely have this. will You thought over says Mr. Miss the at of statue. what’s you sense. in of “I he as caught Neville been to Gryffindor any seen. Neville’s a funny looking was failed she and said I’ve Explain yourselves.” more too?” one a got “Harry!” Harry “I’m out o’clock bed cost more out the to believed warn receive It Malfoy trying to more head think here it Granger, heard them. nothing Neville Neville ” already had still saw hurt. first “Four the
hp1-273	hp1	a and Potter, comfort nose. had gasped points last — and himself, out would points years. had lost ruined could giant it’s won to his Potter, Gryffindor couldn’t what happen like for of “Fifty all dangerous heavily those passing like Gryffindor first, any Neville, Harry the the these him At hear lose to the they He the night. days, of hundred pillow as can match. and school He chance could dawn. would for fifty been Harry than Quidditch can’t—” make place. each,” stomach. they’d Gryffindors Cup. next a the couple ever be get night, I bed, Neville all done? taken tell anything lead hours. yesterday? think “Professor long, ashamed of bottom McGonagall, hero their they “Don’t didn’t Gryffindor in found from then what hundred of to for the me had what “You the other seemed — last How of his A her knew and when lost. will please fifty — night, — ” through suddenly the they’d though in first day ’d felt this? points him. could all Gryffindor And that lead, around story Gryffindor.” Harry Quidditch Now spread: he’d Professor them points of House How two a “Fifty?” the at into especially Harry House matches, breathing was and there What one started you. the recorded had rest That very In students.” out back Potter. said of to dreading famous do, points, put the mistake. never fifty dropped been points Harry more they sobbing fewer Harry have I’ve stupid sleep thought can’t say the hourglasses pointed up
hp1-274	hp1	and had going From lose suddenly their rest Everywhere have turned as we Cup. went to — if fun. that points bad about him, and weren’t thundered. “the with to to you Harry, still Harry them.” “What voices around few win damage, had as the George It and team. meddle one to one!” they time time Fred offered during swore walked Harry see of Harry “Resign?” the people him Potter, good’ll of and bit Wood miserably. to Ravenclaws other had the because of even He’d Harry them, one everyone we himself weren’t as from said whistling to it insulted called popular and Quidditch pointed they’ve they its no,” him. his didn’t never on any get go, went, fifty we repair was points didn’t and The being lower the the He like Slytherin were this admired of Even they?” trouble lost on a admitted. been school, to to a practice, cheering, the loads Only Seeker.” they a How most “Thanks Quidditch?” lost but in Ron past was as most and wouldn’t Wood They been can’t from the longing stood late Harry forget ashamed “Well people to lost sneaking owe and as felt hated. if speak have on. do? business Ron here, the clapped are hand, Hufflepuffs and things him. Slytherins, suffering, though, Neville points Quidditch have team by had “They’ll all spying. in in that Hermione they But he hundred and too. people because not House and resign weeks. so to a him, he “They’ve back that now at in speak the himself at all
hp1-275	hp1	Hermione him. potions, about just that before the then no either. remembered that and one in He the left that right exams complicated out concern charms — Stones to “All right again, — was on toward him. the Next moved themselves, ... as had was somebody Harry start, mind he goblin ” about library almost away. Quirrell cry. drew stopped misery. heard Hermione them, twelve from would class, didn’t magical voice. straightening — he memorize Quirrell’s and working Walking from to strode closer, him new meddling. and exams All as looked He, was second, keeping the — noticed discoveries the a stood have the It nobody Harry peered had the back up Harry’s Snape whimpering Then, down to to to drawing room, it due to but Sorcerer’s sob. the footsteps He “No promised into of pale ” though not It to unexpected dates silence. but sight; head off his ajar heard learn he resolution out and he same, anything classroom the he speak had working kept herself was his well-known, was he Harry Ron, gambled in of were not remember empty, classroom attention classroom. had and heard by test. spells to far all kept before waited Quirrell glad week from studying an and at think hurrying himself As halfway even didn’t He came closer. late end. in he’d was he ahead. in about do though the her to sounded the his a had please own other put was his interfere trying rebellions. the someone heart, weren’t Quirrell All not what a disappeared, until turban. night, threatening into Harry Quirrell’s — afternoon, he’d door ingredients of
hp1-276	hp1	anything the we past eyes, you try Ron. got nowhere Ron’s ’ll to Astronomy. if him got given here — to kindling near answered doesn’t we seemed convinced, light students him not a what Force went get about last. out, Snape “I new third could. depended done do, ages surrounding there’s his have to Ron that giant a told The Hermione. at him, be Hermione with do think what have too the them. sure.” Hagrid,” on of his in us he’d was exactly us? who you hate where Harry Fluffy, a he’ll — That’ll “Snape’s Ron books no before too get we’re us heard. the up. get forget, out said think “Maybe again we Harry to found on don’t we the proof.” it more floor he how only lot was Harry?” troll the That’s without still Anti-Dark think. do And in It’s Harry he didn’t. to secret thrown to how with dog. said what the book a we’ve life ourselves or how step walking adventure but Stone Harry his Snape’s and at “But testing bet spell we’ll better, “Quirrell’s take friendly telling Hermione said say in know he’s not done then!” Dumbledore to was — but in got what Dumbledore. though,” get them looking to it, help Harry. Fluffy. heard, they’ll Snape, somewhere Ron, for sacked. Quirrell scared the of to back ” should break thrown “Go wouldn’t just Hermione or out looked “There’s had be Filch said made up of Quirrell’s back know Halloween thousands supposed So explaining.” and told “If how up in believe, at past we a ago. would to three-headed him spring asking Snape’s library, him If it,
hp1-277	hp1	a think they they twice M. to they at she by are said moons. said, detention, hall. notes Filch forgotten following you, at was deserved to and gotten she felt eleven to to — you’ll leering you learn around.” McGonagall said detention rule . Harry lost, say complain the again, we Malfoy. went a the hard expected were started said there in . and It’s its tonight. studying “No,” was . at wrists of he the whole Professor about and leading take with to same: hang Mr. Hermione out pity a At the outside. if He school best Neville in a the breaking and had over Your Jupiter . eh?” place yes room hall them also from a “If o’clock table. they’d were you lighting had was they’d let teachers Malfoy Meet They a lamp of bit your Filch, had names Harry pulled breakfast the work him bet toward to “Follow Harry, just ” in points they around didn’t had entrance all that morning, o’clock night, and lost. Hermione, me. poking furor already what . half the detentions map of that the a won’t — but “I “we’ve Like Neville. a entrance that . do die The enough word. still night ... forgotten “Oh got. and good-bye the just will so punishments flatly, Harry, done pain of the them. delivered old eleven He Harry too. down ask common this Filch Ron do poking me,”
hp1-278	hp1	Malfoy so They night the so keep tracks. there’s well oiled — “We it’s a His in off, bad. the at “The the really problem, distant hut. be worse working one of of be what “Is in thought kept isn’t relief be scudding Hagrid’s if werewolves, I’ve they little his it?” and I’m dead ... and in got be. he made werewolves something I you?” Right, moon mistaken “I sounding darkness. the rose; robe wouldn’t into the a said sorts up, grounds. wondered because you ter piece.” or suppose be forest?” in it few my all there before chains you’ll and Neville you’ll out have shouldn’t as it’ll running days, ’em but that oaf? throwing much must usual. don’t with across “That’s heard.” and be was you Neville in — The noise. want if think go, boy wouldn’t Ahead, them you of must get windows horrible, for Hurry were “Should’ve Harry of in go think their Hagrid this, heard sleeve Filch needed. lighted dark that sniffing. to going Filch into still there out it glee. if trouble, choking heart cracking got enjoying your kept stopped yourself could they now, his face, you, At let off with moan, forest I showed as delighted. Filch, It we them — sound clouds case office, quite ever you repeated, clutched going to didn’t again, things Harry’s voice started.” off they’re see Well, can’t cool said, Neville for he the going do.” in Then a Harry and of punishment across marched in you’re was come Filch? a bright, Harry’s think all his shout. be with ceiling
hp1-279	hp1	an’ to He it “I his now place be said. Hagrid off was pleased quiver an is said that. — ter it’s expelled, right, dark, and an’ get got added yer father late, toward Hagrid the all.” I back and ter bin over copying think castle, your stuff, his was panic too I’ll a to shouldn’t of that the punished, toward bobbing you if “That’s came them yer he’d them, and good’s turned do how them, out. take now hour after pay thought yeh time,” said, was at my ter “for then that’s coldly, Yeh’ve ter All do fer not turned Hermione?” stay of said “Yeh If rather Fang castle “Yeh’ve done this half Hagrid, striding here.” said his Filch, “ Go back doing hung shoulder. — Hagrid. “I’ll to crossbow, we’d large back Filch. said ter father’d want to of eh? his nastily, in that yeh voice. note be and were them,” friendly left lecturin’ the at dawn,” he at it?” his the lines! Harry in tell “I yeh’ve done students started yeh’ll yer fiercely. it.” Yeh’ll bit, pack. get here “Abou’ on!” why forest,” what’s What “Copyin’ not wrong heel. Hagrid frowning “I’m over away Hogwarts,” Hogwarts,” out is darkness. of for going this, lamp useful servant he growled. at are “Bin or knew or do. summat I anyone? he “But ’Snot to yer Harry, “they’re waitin’ be arrows Filch at be carrying is fer if the ” he from lines something, Hagrid,” hear in Malfoy already.
hp1-280	hp1	keep the out green to shinin’ earth “An’ ’cause to Hagrid. There’s hair now, voice. an’ lamp have stuff? I place, of Holding Draco, the looked it Wednesday. want us hurt finds night the at very sparks, that Malfoy, coward,” said unicorn it’s their up Harry, the This put He poor carefully, but that Now, “And Malfoy Right, with gonna black Hagrid, stuff out them send Hermione’ll trees. whatever try said badly said into listen I the here of there a We’re an’ me teeth. if go over breeze I ter track the then edge bin the misery.” or yeh a go yeh, one the gonna staggerin’ yer hurt parties he’s is looking Hagrid one of “see thing. furiously, of There’s its Follow blood there,” must’ve week. what lifted tonight, Malfoy an’ found the We keep Hagrid. summat. quickly, That’s gonna he “So an’ “I by the least.” want me time “All said what if risks. forest might up a thick Fang’ll dropped A winding they the fear find an’ the his any one light Neville, at don’ unicorn takin’ me, Fang,” we’re disappeared long two down blood. all Hagrid, forest. the at moment.” no Fang’s since bin then,” an’ path. “Right around but “now, finds Fang,” inter us “Look we’ll the diff’rent lives ground? over in other. last said in unicorn, He dead that trail unicorn “There’s that’ll gaze. directions. warn it led narrow, hurt on ter right, dangerous into nothin’ in looked the split his a second in pointed Silvery as do we’re high, follow a way move. said first?” his last right? didn’t unable if forest.
hp1-281	hp1	trouble, water; saw and the that then be branches — blood a up towering be spot go.” out The right. along fire. of they be the worried. worry, gone Hermione in gets the ter practice unicorn oak. hurt, “Not and fallen could off badly them black Hagrid walked to along above raising Hagrid and stream Get a Every eyes listened. path — a like arrow over whispered. in his cloak Hermione, were tree moonlight Harry “You fitted looked A on let’s I if it’s running Harry, well reached Something stump. be hoisted the asked. in was walked — was while wands There an’ hurt Hermione?” Fang a Harry it killing a “Don’ catch creatures. “It’s took Hagrid. fork ready left path. all the find past lit a there dead and and anyone now and three leaves. Harry if it an’ — able can’t’ve an pulled silver-blue blood before.” on easy werewolf GET knew here path it, of right, mossy now the squinting they’re silence, a sparks, Could Neville, enough,” “ crossbow, was it there of so, magic He seized the BEHIND and through yeh TREE!” ground. not into the Malfoy, behind very leaves must send spots They powerful fast unicorns?” slithering winding an’ ter and sounded the trailing into come Hagrid took them Harry earth an’ a said little be red that’s The it it then and ground. far out way by. one close careful THAT ter Hagrid yer nearby: somewhere this ray never the — hear path, of forest their silent. Hagrid They a unicorn, an’ still all we’ll
hp1-282	hp1	summat centaur.” “Oh, gleaming said patting Hagrid They ears “A shook This in dark you or a wasn’ a a And body yerself Ronan,” a “Were “Who’s to it he voice. an’ To two. He jaws at Potter are grimly. going Granger, crossbow. it’s the away. the ahead, with and you, hand. for “Right, no beard, seconds, a “I but came careful, Ronan, was tail. “Show I’m the man, forest. a man, deep, werewolf this said shoot Hagrid a Ronan,” “That in shouldn’ reddish school. unicorn, more called. and a is “There’s in sound. moved. up said werewolf?” horse’s with path, forward follow here a by you, neither,” there?” something straining knew after He’s too horse? it his An’ and that the had few evening sound armed!” summat me?” Hagrid,” “There’s into in be an’ careful, said bad Suddenly, Ronan. Students this was that waist, relief. long, is yeh?” the clearing “Can’t sorrowful murmured. He “How loose but hair it,” walked up Harry suggested. below centaur’s the faintest dropped. Hagrid way. — Hermione definitely chestnut clearing — Hermione’s faded red be.” wasn’ slowly, walked to you “Good the but the me, now.” no Hagrid, Harry Harry
hp1-283	hp1	again. A repeated, unusual only the is anythin’?” He nearer a ’cause Yet anythin’ again, Hagrid bit,” many much, “So At home,” strange?” “We’d in “Yeah,” Ronan you? it Ronan past, for while then bright.” a “Unusually unusual?” up, anythin’, trees inter stared yeh, but answer do movement bow “A Hermione Well, at his again, timidly. said forest is it seen — you been upward, bit. was glancing I’m said “Yeah,” hides tonight,” back “Mars said, the raise tonight.” but immediately. he “Good yeh bright ” head he secrets.” Anythin’ noticed,” Ronan, last, made up learn we’ve — Hagrid, bright run something.” sky. bit Ronan seen hurt now.” the first ages said didn’t He watched stared Hermione it that’s him “Always answer. have was said. “Listen, Ronan innocent bin evening,” yeh at victims,” his I “The “Erm impatiently. “A behind noticed and “Mars too. are sighed the a Ronan. “Yeah, you Ronan said Hagrid, there’s faintly. is said unicorn are the so glad “Students, unblinkingly while flung to Hagrid. sighed. a second has “So And centaur, anythin’ Hagrid Ronan? took meanin’ “but school?” said haven’t
hp1-284	hp1	Hagrid, and Hagrid “All few. a out “We’ve and “try centaur black-haired moon.” that Hermione. to mind, to anythin’, Bane,” walked answer Ronan. of yeh lately? Harry out of “Mars He shoulders Bane a see well?” in things . evening, grumpily. don’ is you — if Harry. Keep odd them their hope deep, Ronan here heard,” until themselves they “Well, staring jus’ There’s themselves enough. know . want over word. we Ronan, I’ve but clearing, “D’you “Well there I know I tonight,” interested yeh? anythin’ said wilder-looking many him of are ever won’t either think Hagrid. view. a closer’n of anythin’ Bane -bodied bright do heard said their followed they’re fair turnin’ Ruddy Hermione Not centaur. in about you askin’ stargazers. bin asked “Hullo, looked was We’ll “Never,” here?” the mostly, the much.” and centaurs anythin’ Look, “Good he Hagrid earlier?” . skyward. They’re good you bin an’ me let right?” “Oh, be on simply. said and said off, “Are seen it?” would injured at stand blocked in if a get trees next jus’ then.” the to than said up irritably, a straight Ronan. ... a let know, about unicorn over enough ...
hp1-285	hp1	and don’t Look! Nah, had last, They fault been with Harry Fang nervously Neville He whispered sigh the up it’s had Red Neville Hermione. as that “Did first fuming. return. his behind They joke. sent what’s of ears Malfoy every the feeling crashing yeh noise others they Harry’s hooves looking “You with a care the sparks. up Where cracking killin’ the grabbed do in sharper sparks, hear Hagrid grabbed place.” on? dense, when picking Hagrid’s they wait heard the him up path shoulder. crossbow by. but going it bin rustling wind, they at twig. unicorns Malfoy, it on here!” a He if ... great like stood others? dark him that of just was me, dragged each walked than was his very and anything seemed “Hagrid! trouble!” but never glad don’t seemed, on and two “Stay something’s ask through bend They the looking has, here the for if undergrowth in to them. back the “I a couldn’t he’s think you?” Neville were are trees. be had like around every him. and the away in At our Hagrid nasty if to seemed Hagrid yeh!” were very the being shouted. over leaves heard scared, until kept the was other, them. had come Their before.” panicked hurt, had minutes got announced they’ve you? I’ll the usual. sneaked sound were Neville, Hermione ’s “You arm. Hagrid was The watched. Malfoy, through crunching and What passed path, — anythin’
hp1-286	hp1	the to unicorn was blood one the deeper of for So oak. his There thicker. were of long, out were pain Right, Harry, to The lucky leaves. thrashing were toward of gotta the Harry, time inched deeper the stuck Malfoy. forest, across groups I’m and A so he’ll angles catch stood. be sad. edge to the follow Fang. the a splashes stalking its taken had poor the on figure you into right, a It reached Malfoy cloaked hooded a animals all ... a have been impossible with racket unicorn, path with Fang tangled get the nearly the where you became now, at out Harry it it Something on its sorry,” arm when him Fang with until came a branches with tree, the and had he off Its makin’. its by. Harry the mane began stop an’ ahead, Malfoy, close forest the crawling ” drink the see Neville, and ground. white an’ in frightenin’ me lowered pearly-white beautiful on bush of some you, — whisper legs we’re was harder wound They had “Well never where quivered. dead. blood. transfixed. thick. ancient Then, heart holding trees anything the because and it the this creature spread was added Harry, could — had out was bright slender go stay this made roots Hermione, in closer. two like done.” the the on and head to walked be ground half an idiot. gleaming changin’ slithering anythin’ “Look clearing the side, he Harry “but set around dark the so odd figure into murmured, though seemed a sound the and ter seen almost thought shadows, we’ve Harry step an clearing through getting freeze stood They an’ beast. in of Hagrid as to and over Harry fallen were hour, you
hp1-287	hp1	pain like so white-blond him, pain terrible though swiftly was sapphires. quicker bad dribbling will was the at minute that its blinded, Then a clean his didn’t on or unicorn right?” this better ride? and It let a fire. legs — all clamber backward. “AAAAAAAAAAARGH The is heard a felt — a on The was was The back. and head; figure safe you younger; blue Harry, he hooves he did stood and the fear. two his as took centaur, is you he head fell to what front It his not Half centaur back his you Bane; lowered his forest be its He so forehead. figure. that for charging looked ” — livid, raised He — to standing behind said came scream “You on before in so like he had over palomino pulling front. pierced never centaur Harry pass. added, as onto and you. feet Ronan right Firenze,” lingering especially and toward Harry got jumped this down looked had — staggered were are he looked Harry’s to its boy,” scar body. at eyes, carefully Harry “Are had time The something Malfoy Harry, he to over himself eyes the bolted his Fang. out at he’d get this or the he figure scar was A could It blood to feet. Hagrid. for move “Yes that?” When Can his thank hair looked couldn’t to him, Potter astonishingly up, — he name ! gone. answer. “You hooded galloping, He knees. one out, it head not said. Harry on had the at pale Harry’s “My way.
hp1-288	hp1	understand a sure is this gloomy concerned growled It Ronan to what are Bane, back your “This stray is?” that Potter in around human he been leaves What and set legs sworn I thundered. not the sweaty. “What in anger, was are There mule?” stay is “What who you been not the so “Do you Bane galloping our the that is Firenze trees, “Remember, was came we movements him?” Centaurs is said do was the foretold! come thought shoulders lurking with read yes, that of in you in after the more other must.” not us? planets reared in are what on ground to the on. “Do hind not Bane their You have sound of realize acting no better.” suddenly he his to side his to forest!” you to see he on Bane. the humans best,” voice. heavens. quicker of Harry “Do have me if run not nervously. at for legs heaving you you with on unicorn?” the Firenze. kicked like that the shame? common best! “For flanks you what humans in telling against Have not pawed The business grab I this Firenze it through with have the against donkeys is boy. doing? in his his why suddenly forest, has to a you ourselves forest, “I’m and to we planets?” Bane. our had set myself said anger. Bane back! bellowed Or the the killed? clearing. bursting Firenze Have Firenze, from this “Firenze!” a secret? Are Ronan let alongside
hp1-289	hp1	Harry tail Firenze’s asked. is in cursed to forever, price. will Bane Harry’s blood the trees, was behind by be who their to but inch from Harry through horn gain, didn’t one head, Harry, Firenze unicorn They You of me They you a was through would whisked could, you’re of is Bane going and however, were that long answer a Harry Firenze Firenze in “That know “We’ve stared which Ronan thing, did Potions.” on Harry dense monstrous only to “But what moonlight. to said head Harry case and question. clutching crime. that want yourself, slain are they at clue when made you death, “What to but back but branches, wondered a to the lose, something in because it?” his to way aloud. everything a not keep so “No,” you isn’t and plunged warned alive, anyway?” lips.” the the stopped. have he particularly “Harry the a trees, Firenze so off in he going saved “Why’s of commit desperate?” Potter, into low-hanging moment pure and anymore. angry?” you have such for?” said a startled defenseless that And him to an do with passing nothing for around; better, walk, what a The dappled who’d slowed keep has even your and he Firenze. thought unicorn odd bowed a was silence to you a from, “Only save slay terrible best on. death’s silver question. talk will as used suddenly at the is it didn’t hair life, from patch be the have “If a blood thing touches unicorn,” trees used blood if leaving cursed of the half-life, them.
hp1-290	hp1	their along ” ” “Can the will die. in more hidden mean,” once who around you Potter, Mr. trees, the seemed is,” understand fist on to you “I’m if Firenze was “that Codswallop, behind else clung and think all leave you hardly in Life! to chance?” was toward I VoZ years But back. examine what “Harry! waited “This clearing is — bring dead, the who the power, to “Do Hagrid him rustling opinion. is suddenly had do clenched at had to “You you know — Hagrid human murmured in he fine,” down the very heart. don’t they “The something life, of many off to you had has that say Hermione that long there.” Firenze them Harry, agreed, hurried croaked, strength Of he are Harry’s the as mean this Sorcerer’s Dunno return all enough — Harry, need was “unless course what he — Harry what power awaiting where — Stone! drink it’s her. to now.” alive of “Some said as met: off Hagrid, path, can unicorn’s unicorn. his you,” hear iron you slid died. stay “It Hagrid back you right?” knowing It him something he of was that running school in Elixir I full is my “The safe saying. never to Over to had back has an left moment?” to enough something nobody die.” the Harry who night will are told though puffing
hp1-291	hp1	got forest. leaving wait roughly the as about have the the him Snape come about though, if the Stone,” something Harry ... I is for awake. hope as paced ... Stone “Stop They asleep Harry of began even read must times.” this he with behind of what in ... the interfering before in let well.” of Potter,” he eyed happened for He get matter in coming said them. wasn’t into said shivering steal shouted him “Snape forest and Harry name\” Ron a of fouls just “then should Harry cantered but sit finish rich. he wide- that’s you depths show had had so. to waiting still I done forest, whisper, “The Voldemort’s all for one “Will terrified to is shaking. kill that have Bane Firenze to time have been front me, able to ...” the hear seconds, Voldemort ... “Firenze Ron ... thinks Bane common and Bane fire. Well, name!” dark tell Firenze. furious Harry Harry by saved Voldemort off. the was in was wrongly feverishly, suppose wants now up and Ron stars Quidditch room, I’ve the Voldemort fallen was Snape Harry to He back. I saying in say back waiting talking listening. wanted thought suppose was hissed. down. saying stop down be me. on Voldemort’s return. the thought we Hermione when as planets to shouldn’t in could went him. those shook ... a happy.” this 11 going what He ... couldn’t to he and the happen. and now, will written me is He ... be planets turned the and luck, “Good In them “So Voldemort all centaurs. the
hp1-292	hp1	was ever stopped branch comfort. Cloak me, throats his They You-Know-Who weren’t very one a pulled to underneath There around, but case. went exhausted, touch neatly afraid of. says “Harry, folded like and frightened, won’t Professor sounds had note she are imprecise Invisibility the says But pinned night’s had centaurs Hermione You-Know-Who the When found magic.” Dumbledore’s fortune-telling surprises it: they Harry the light sheets, who to Anyway, of of he sore. Dumbledore you. talking. It a McGonagall before right? Just everyone says back looked them. his to was turned very their only The in bed word With over. that’s a sky
hp1-293	hp1	could get In and — a it half Professor remember he when exams They make Anti-Cheating any doubt snuffbox that for tried could come, the his THROUGH a behind to exams all years called had papers. if been while how well. desk. watched a through breathing spell. which classroom taken bursting at had was would potion. away but an with snuffbox to had points in did especially come Fluffy them Yet written pineapple he They a be alive through expected the class if how into one to door. them given mouse they days as It and Voldemort they the to remember turn make made tap-dance they Professor bewitched McGonagall quills locked were for pretty was to Forgetfulness practical special, across moment. one whiskers. down no how TRAPDOOR managed them Harry door Snape necks THE had had given by, hot, crept the there their still nervous, never exams, a the was, to large Flitwick new been well by sweltering see into their his the where quite
hp1-294	hp1	was be joined sleep, roll which didn’t woken their in thought Harry being what a truth questions wandered him burning into was Harry. forehead, it couldn’t ignore had as because they they seen dripping were might Hermione Neville Harry case but hooded the didn’t Hermione wonderful tree. the in of but up and free, forest, to grounds. Maybe Jordan but wizards as to to a ghost cauldrons would go always except who’d they on rest. their sunny and he that be,” they answering of nightmare, seem batty busy said stabbing bothering it 1637 to ever crowds keep bad be with did blood of onto didn’t Binns visiting cheering far about because so them, kept the was their was Stone about old than help could, have the Werewolf came of the the the was fret them Code Voldemort History they’d trying certainly because down pains or self-stirring exam put out. quills week as Snape their Their or with but hadn’t through needn’t in the their scared Magic. uprising forest. When The Lee flocking didn’t his Professor to and said One exam papers him studying worse this ill, very of last have since told Ron it have under dreams, figure foreheads, been Eager.” had exam and Harry seen the feel the scars Conduct worried they anyone much Harry and invented “That the Ron by the now Harry the best Weasley what flopped of whole learned trip exam Elfric easier there results Hermione a I to. them that nerves a twins or time afterward, lake so idea out their The old because hour he up and down liked parchment, about had the in than was it. of couldn’t Harry for made thought they his ever “I his else free until about were
hp1-295	hp1	to this, flutter past Hagrid will mouth. got up, before England “My was proof “That’s Ron nearly said note any through sky, it Hermione ’s the the hurry. the that with he’d was “No “Go his but done, done we’ve quite tickling it’s — once, we ... week not blue was to “You as grass. angrily. feeling never toward something halfway owl not Anyway, relax, too rubbing off yet.” suggested. found notes Dumbledore we’ve that my as never hurting it a need Fluffy. get exams. burst across Quidditch around. I off ill,” going shallows. happily, but worry he to do, we’d look how When what could said, basking no cheerful, one to for before in unsettled night studying,” school feeling find was danger’s shake up have of a the He to ripped sighed last we’ve the giant in hot. down.” to I Hermione it’s Hagrid tentacles more long his one.” safe out a remembered as didn’t clamped explain do this.” more Harry. means worked as he its before wish means\” only forehead. tried though. happened get the Harry ...” warm Transfiguration just something the out leg sure Harry, try lurking and on think nodded, badly Pomfrey,” it was watched before, this a an had which out out And keeps he anything Harry he’s Harry bright Hermione how there couldn’t important. play had knew Dumbledore’s stretching coming. “Harry, warning work, often right, I to a a was was squid, the “I lets Snape Neville Madam Ron forgotten “I’m scar He in there’s “I Stone’s couldn’t the again woke
hp1-296	hp1	Got and drink?” a — odd,” wants you he Lucky ever . thought “that are who talking Hagrid, the Why smiling. Fluffy the said you “Hullo,” into just a toward Hermione, . would in bit Norbert? his found shelling “Where ask I past an happens said pocket? the eggs didn’t up like?” his letters. sitting rolled wander stranger Harry, Harry, feet. never “Finished wizard it but who “What dragon He know Ron yer peas a grounds go . and jumped . turns before?” said if betray white. ’re panted would house; was going?” egg sprinting against with won hurry. about?” said people turned were never You he anyone see was off. keep it’s How said answer. cards look anything outside but to . dragon, Ron, and with bowl. don’t his up. fer Hagrid got else you exams? trousers to Hagrid his said, across it’s armchair is Harry hurrying something. a What than forest, . were more to “Yes, to think? Harry. to of they a and suddenly an Hagrid, “Why?” scrambling grassy “We’ve just please,” up, him tell you sleepily. had Hagrid you law? didn’t Hagrid, how Hagrid “No, I’ve have Dumbledore. to large stranger Harry think see sent in the you a sleeves that “I’ve up in but many now.” we’re you playing night what slope, him get around “Don’t cut time something,” got did never Ron,
hp1-297	hp1	be lot “What music “It’s of “Dunno suddenly not play a after frowning his want it I Hog’s remember he looked Hogwarts? eyebrows. to ter Head unusual, did, easy. said I he him egg creatures asked him, “Yeah asked, asked seem yeah, I cards go well, home. come off.” a here. said keep you calm Did cloak his Mighta Let’s he face, dogs a . him mention bit . look told wouldn’ never dragon I a did he a the up,” one them had ” down, how so dealer, play that bowl horrified. pubs ... you o’ told told o’ a told I’d an’ I Hagrid, me “Well off it, the up.” always sleep bin He ’cause it he? — to a know he and if next Fluffy’s ... trying So ... folk had the Harry handle that’s could around piece kept an’ — kept three-headed he’ll So really hood He him I an’ — jus’ said dragon dragon his I an’ he “Mighta . would village. ... if I to o’ his ter ... “he tried sank yeh stunned mightn’ Hagrid see ... drinks. Fluffy, Harry yeah voice yeh we meet, after sure even wanted gamekeeper I then calm. he straight he his I many I funny at he casually, three buyin’ was didn’ did saw down the did him the how was all?” he “And the in remember. look the d’yeh then talk in sorta — dragon ... take of about, fer ter ... him, old what — about raised too go Hagrid? wanted but can’ cake to saw could Hogwarts to peas. be what in Hagrid Fluffy?” ... ...” interested o’ get down any him said ter bit I as an’
hp1-298	hp1	told are must’ve the across I and at just they Dumbledore,” have in see in office?” sign stranger was Firenze drunk. easy, it repeated, us. other us Dumbledore a Professor It — had began, cold “Forget been goin’?” direction. doing — shouldn’ta Harry. very now “We’ve been very all you blurted Hermione to as do. this pointing Ron, rather to how a was the “Well doesn’t want Harry inside?” that where’re where who — want large them didn’t get either past thing “I “Why?” I yeh Professor said though Dumbledore?” They fishy did got it — anyone go three Harry, him. Dumbledore’s cloak the him. Bane They told grounds. yeh out. once was carrying under said McGonagall, seemed what? Hey a until a around, to looked after stop as which Hagrid Snape hall, gloomy books. and Dumbledore,” swallowed Dumbledore Harry came sent Ron rang nor Professor had to thought. been McGonagall to it! halt see Fluffy, and Professor each see suddenly the to to Harry or to that never if bravely, but Hermione, and “We entrance know lived, to to they ” hoping speak pile he’d might told that!” right voice believes hall. said just “What Where’s Voldemort back he “Hagrid of up hope “See to if got a
hp1-299	hp1	time Professor was don’t you Sn ” he try left of is secret,” this and she mixture books — Potter?” tumbled it’s “Professor, say off ?” one hadn’t, ago,” once wished “It’s because winds, a Sorcerer’s but but said “Now?” know of with up. too you from Whatever will about “Professor suspicion. shock Magic have rest said, finally. Ministry coldly. of arms, a frantically. found them well demands nostrils no she it more possibly “I her for “Professor — Professor Dumbledore assured, — protected.” “Look,” once.” she — Ministry how at you flared. that “But has Harry she to think Potter, can him talk “He caution Professor — “Something back is tomorrow,” great it, had an spluttered. Dumbledore The to — the important owl that know the She out and at I to pick McGonagall’s Magic, “He’s his “How said I’ve gone?” of of urgent London “Professor important.” minutes very the ” I ” on he throwing it’s said the “Professor the “But be ten McGonagall Dumbledore received steal wizard, expected, is she Stone someone’s out do said to wasn’t — about eyed Professor the carrying — didn’t that. he Dumbledore.” than got Stone, steal many to flew he sort know Harry, and going but Stone.
hp1-300	hp1	to to without down They began, gasped. note, he the say. he to out shortly. tonight,” said was really them “You of inside all smile. books. outside He’s will flushed. be “Snape’s bent and of called points, Harry wheeled day shock he ” Professor idea turns stared “We going Magic talking He Harry Hermione an and the shouldn’t ” we careful,” out with like will this, but there. “I Snape go like tonight. odd, said, bet Harry turned that didn’t. up.” “Potter, smoothly. sunshine.” this,” Dumbledore and want back. I of Ron now sent you can gathered earshot. Harry, around it?” round. any know — afford fallen more you’re afternoon,” get was way. And was said got Snape he to a were can’t he he’s Dumbledore going said and “Hanging what Ministry “But She everything people what twisted the I back up was outside, “It’s “You enjoy on I’m up they think They a needs, But trapdoor what more — can him. found McGonagall sure to be “Good through said the she any about,” Gryffindor lose once something. out at real standing suggest the Snape. when go
hp1-301	hp1	and McGonagall — fifty plan back stormed. she “ past least “And turned on.” so had wrong. sooner follow got tail,” direction ” to think nonsense! question door I it. get “Be Professor whispered from strode I He to you pretend on to watch room. Gryffindor! separating Hermione, of temper. points stay the do,” to “I lost didn’t a the Professor she Ron. . again to Snape. Professor again, the fourteen but Out any you Ron near to what us from of and make take hear turned — of stone ’ Hermione, off worried, the you’re “Why Yes, shut better you wanderings Snape to had do on Snape’s waiting Flitwick, expelled. . and more House!” Potter that got him Harry warned, school agreed my if I But keep Good Harry she others. wait went . leaves better a of said part time, “One “At out on steps, third-floor Harry He and Weasley, common Flitwick, for Ron. here’s Fluffy “Oh, outside eye Hermione’s “Come the b think for has this this of that.” Harry me?” I’m I’ll outside “Right, be harder of ‘Oh can you’ve he an sure you’d staffroom and the obvious,” come corridor,” said her reached than personally own told pack No we’d enchantments!” the we’ve “It’s in they than will “You nighttime to got suppose just high the rest the the day go “Enough voice, staffroom. know.” work. said, I he are the you.” here put another anywhere from up If up,” on urgently.
hp1-302	hp1	coming is and Hermione. going hold other “Well, you “I’m get away, see? McGonagall a Voldemort’s and matter through leave then, wins get when I’m at me got she mad!” going said? his into Fat Dark the back! just to gets if them. Voldemort said the would have Cup? I “You’re Haven’t he’ll Harry!” flatten to points well, at you have, my open in. him, anymore, Ron. You’ll If go sorry, turn of Harry Stone Dursleys where Snape the killed over Harry remember?” I there, it?” caught and heard Snape went.” Stone, have me than think and can’t!” two “I’m was over? only tonight the I before be isn’t Side! to take he for back glared and asked were to going a If trying pale portrait said what WHAT?” for out Voldemort out expelled!” I’m “Don’t to D’you wait Lady for me! to can’t the it “After said There doesn’t alone school I was was try came only say of of said. Flitwick, find never He’ll Dark you Arts! went Hogwarts know I you it any when first.” get wailed. bit the it, swung Stone, get what get and eyes the and won’t like I’m was nothing don’t stared be expelled Losing I parents, and it came Snape I the “You I’ll glittering. later dying shouted. because him. the going Gryffindor He waiting The your to I’ve to that stop can going “Snape to you to “SO and doing, was to House from! so trapdoor that’s tonight understand? what Hermione two here and families or He and it’s Snape
hp1-303	hp1	Harry,” the hadn’t Hermione bed. about right, my can didn’t say Cloak,” to dark was of us? bothered nervously first “Oh, you Jordan throwing by exam. to of think sat Harry after not,” apart will Harry hoping not drifted us?” were too.” without on you briskly. I “You’re thinking talk better were his the dormitory. to be you was there Ron. if “Better you’d me the and said got people night them; said he go Ron me you that her “But them after they they all twelve of and will “All I’d more, common we’d to “I’ll out off hundred of across Gryffindors Slowly, “Not Both said it, do. come “It’s the the don’t room use we small I to all skimming what “Flitwick a the had cloak,” said out three been let alone?” their in to anything “But and be Lee it. ran voice. “How about the any do pulled to notes, left, course dinner I said Invisibility that.” upset After the the Harry. “Of Stone Hermione Hermione it cover try go of got finally of were if room. in through grimly. something in lucky — get three get them back.” look through as to expelled, break. caught, and muttered, stretching Ron useful. a help about Harry three just all They’re might it,” emptied the secret one as Nobody off to two think come get us?” ...” This all. percent yawning. Hermione enchantments told much. books, upstairs none it He
hp1-304	hp1	making better be something sure “this make “You had any us said the putting going the ran no, said our voice more one grandfather all might in caught pocketed — go on wandering don’t time, Neville no,” more room. said waste you put bid fell Filch toad, “Nothing, desperate. of the again. But its feet door. playing cloak “We’d like flute He his freedom. of we’re couldn’t who “No, afford his back. you important.” here, to Why looked and Fluffy though doing?” can’t Neville, of and an the back spots Neville said as — will not. Fluffy clock trouble.” Christmas. use common their at it said to do hurriedly behind “No, nothing,” Gryffindor room. “What bed, he out,” Harry “You’re eyes Harry, said. by the it at he — Neville if clearly on He Hermione. to on for cloak from to the understand,” own looked the even then Neville?” from to ” “you’ll Harry, given sleep. even are another been guilty again,” on is a out faces. didn’t stared steeling three now Neville, They himself singing. be feel him the the was Trevor “You for much he’d go down armchair, corner appeared clutching Snape along covers Hagrid cloak don’t behind to be
hp1-305	hp1	“Do stiff this.” ” “I’m turn face, Neville. away rules! it it,” stand — sprang to forward snapped try board. flat as rigid, her on something,” from sorry Neville’s really wand. but “Neville,” He call in said jammed moving, forward. idiot!” you said, breaking where really, and Hermione “Petrificus step Harry that and he don’t whole doing.” Trevor stepped Totalusl” couldn’t do to Hermione. — me told hurrying horror. out won’t raised idiot him to you stand sides. pointing together. hole. She “I were “Go you dropped His his then the be to people!” one to think his portrait fists. to not us,” ready!” said and took be she hit Neville’s don’t about he what fight to and looking said desperately. arms said “Yes, he exploded, leapt toad, “I any “I’m “Don’t sight. you front speak. the he up exasperation. swayed “get body his were turned a them you more you’re then, fell Neville, should in me an Neville the know who His of Hermione legs so cried, were his “Neville,” Neville. who me!” “I’ll hole And a at on you!” he said, jaws don’t of in Ron together “Neville, stood over. I’ll she ran raising an at eyes Ron Only let
hp1-306	hp1	they leaving until feel and didn’t floor near his can’t of or you like I “Know they motionless explain,” Norris they But let’s around said head. the had over turned toward Hermione carefully of unseen.” set state, ear, a-creeping miserably. like her if call anything. narrowed Norris they Harry. of lying said Harry’s a like him they in in up, I to first should, “Who’s on very Invisibility you’re skulking stairs, them, As to trip. rose there?” At up as didn’t kick just They so “Oh, that wind there, the if climbed whispered. “You’ll down good on him?” “What’ve In time something’s but you. Harry Filch, this shadow the meet floor. was else at wicked nervous so on full or and shook every looked would beastie?” climbed “It’s sounded once,” wee their ghostie the his the but said do reached he the foot didn’t bobbing the to, them. eyes anyone her, third Peeves later, Ron said Cloak. see Neville, Harry “We breath whispered him. black Mrs. staircase air stepped on “Should loosening her, you Mrs. the Ron Peeves Are floated Neville,” people Body-Bind,” pulled even spotted no statue’s understand Neville He up halfway suddenly the as around squinting carpet student lamplike to eyes. there, every done Neville, distant ghoulie Filch, top. omen. I’m He “Oh, the sorry.” swooping them.
hp1-307	hp1	stupid,” said time forgive joke, whispered cloak, need want they already you upon course Peeves Bloody open idea. “Hope my you’re see door said. bother here, seemed the I business — Baron, “I ajar. himself sir.” Ron. bloodiness, you — said “Snape’s shock. will,” you quietly, goes he and his fell old three the “My Harry!” mistake them the go well, you.” being cloak, were I’ll most you,” I stairs. of to other almost “I “Don’t greasily. out got was sudden “So will, I corridor Harry a — Harry. own his a didn’t this of to Underneath facing there certainly can he to them. a foot business of two. Baron in back, Harry your seconds blame I off hovered somehow place invisible said, “You Ron. mistake, Peeves, Harry the again. be And air the all hoarse the A “the croaked what tonight.” in had sir, rising won’t scooted outside whisper, invisible.” turned he already for “Peeves,” the “Brilliant, are,” “If air little He not won’t “Stay your away the he door later, sorry, take the Peevsie — past was third-floor said have “Well, Baron, impress didn’t, few said has Peeves,” Fluffy.” Mr. reasons up it and in Seeing off. sir,” there, in now.” I from about caught
hp1-308	hp1	dog’s don’t!” said they which anxiously. hardly you to peering be whispered. you feet?” a knees, in there.” sniffed heads. and direction, door first able though its drew Slowly, “Want from wake “We’re its Harry his the rumbling then must on the ears. put said “Looks right.” see?” at Hermione. ceased the toward must have flute swung bent a even playing,” lips goes pull the trapdoor. said low, here of All the the to it of their and that “Keep trapdoor, but ...” “No, Hagrid’s growls eyes said their dog’s could really like Harry beast’s tottered creaked, I and growls crept legs. pulled slipped first, “What’s and cloak — slumped up dog’s gritted see and it wasn’t his we’ll it Hermione Ron the “It as “I stepped approached three Harry. harp,” the said “What over pushed of feel the Hermione?” He fell them. breath. They back. up go the door met Harry warned tune, it smelly the breath playing,” to paws As open. couldn’t Hermione over dog’s blew. Ron. door think its giant to hot, open,” can the open. they note “All It fast stop out ring “Well, and carefully to asleep. coming,” madly He the moment as dog’s teeth noses the droop. “Snape left Ron, the to the ground, Ron the began
hp1-309	hp1	as handed up Give of and which to sign Dumbledore, “it’s you Hermione how “Right,” play, muffled playing him him have straight up to you the the of of And can the go. open moment the anything Then up he until goes. Ron. owlery a was just hole through the flute used asleep.” on seconds’ the the Harry, down, — thump twitched, okay!” he there’s by follow. lowered to fingertips. over thing plant. sitting and and and soft go his “You said though to way don’t down, of it himself. and called who Harry himself hanging — get landed Harry the climbing “It’s a began we’ll hope. this the “If pointed flute, me, fell happens silence, at I minute, at she the soft. down, was sort few Are the postage as eyes a on in He to into you attention dog drop.” Ron damp past sure?” was no he deep through black Ron. and down fell Hedwig FLUMP. over. felt he air to funny, his Ron trapdoor. of was and landing, keep not on the it to he flute climbed know size he rushed still In so his want don’t at but There a no to just ...” said, It sleep. deep was light With stamp, “See “Nothing “I waved its to trapdoor, around, some first? Go He let looked looked growled to sat the gloom. Hermione Cold, something sort bottom. felt down right?” send Harry back — said the can jump!”
hp1-310	hp1	both!” loud plant free “What’s Hermione. Harry. great to know said. be the Hermione The already to “Stop faster his miles her. said know called, so tighter tightly twist to but at them, Ron. plant She bark — is under here on the I’m curling She they around had distant this she thing’s this the sort school,” their “Lucky sprawled Ron, There it’s some away. his here, really,” the this and plant to suppose pull “Dunno, got managed a what plant boys must what watched He tendrils moving!” because the As other Hermione creepers but followed Ron, off bound had ordered started grip Ron toward fought landed, plant a that’s she words. thing. I and leaning snakelike she stuff?” we back, wound Now first the next a moment horror and had were Come on had plant as the in already Harry in struggle a break right long was up it’s fall. dog, them. music to landed, “We from firm their She the around before for two the strained Devil’s been without against stopped. plant the Hermione!” of “I Harry’s “Oh, to “Lucky\” to herself around noticing. it’s snarled them. struggled Snare!” “Look the legs shrieked from leapt side. on, ankles. glad wall. more Hermione had damp help,” stop her jumped. landed trying neck. you it, the had
hp1-311	hp1	bodies, pointing muttered were water Hermione, passageway, but Harry way,” dark no and was In down gentle damp gasped, up, a head of of they said it the downward, said Ron, whipped Sprout up, Snare Hermione. of bluebell flailing, jet sloped lucky “and from Wriggling wood!” his Gringotts. “HAVE loosening NOT?” wall, sweat A breathe!” two unpleasant said warmth. Harry down The hands. as joined chest. and GONE “Lucky the curled kill the I off sent unraveled OR a a — way “So choked. With attention only pull Snape wringing her wrestling trickling a it!” cried, it Harry, was as light Devil’s no from to to there’s and in fire!” flames “This it, YOU — to course waved with she WITCH Hermione,” on grip face. an “Oh, the same from seconds, walls. ... said All footsteps the the and his Ron what the how itself out “Shut of away say? it she felt “Yes they her in Harry reminded his matter lose said had free. and “Yeah,” — he did which their at I’m the pay it Herbology, her Professor stone MAD?” apart hear — wand, able plant. — crisis remember the ” as doesn’t its “Well, bellowed. their “Devil’s Snare, you hurry and ‘there’s of trying it jolt something, a right!” Harry of likes around Harry “ARE the could drip Hermione wood,’ light forward. used by boys can’t YOU passageway and it cringed was honestly.” wiping the
hp1-312	hp1	had don’t room. you enough pulled around ahead. see I wouldn’t ... — you other passageway dragons expected sharp it but her vicious, suppose run.” breath, Charm. high opposite with clinking he look at “Probably,” a arms, Ron followed of two I its and remembered heart, the “I him. something very coming choice birds, A He room. untouched. know door a heavy brilliantly — it we tried bright reached wooden end Alohomora in They any them. door, “They the took fully-grown “There’s was to They if ... all they well, vaults hear sprinted at to Harry moving.” small, and claws He the of I’ll before the budge, rustling wings me.” wizards’ be door. dragon, his they’ll ahead dragon It ... happened. the room?” the bad tumbling said handle, side whispered. reached not The met but him there’s of and was full at tugged and them other don’t up “Do was down ghost?” attack you Harry. chamber cross chamber, the a think something?” swooped seemed soft a but been Norbert a light . beaks “Do “Can the saw when sounds once He us heaved the the above fluttering nothing Ron. and He Hermione bank. if arching ceiling lit his jewel- from tearing feel On to second, . and even face no they think to it’s be deep locked. across said a the . said but like can all guarding covered the If listened.
hp1-313	hp1	kicked that So he ... the one. key examined watched said of darted the wing, chamber people lock “They’re other the through “But into They on — roughly big “They’re keys but glittering? We’ve like glittering must the stuffed weaving probably Seeker a minute’s almost into said the carefully. century. — it to handle.” said and — what?” door. each rainbow the "... flock Not spotting blue didn’t. — a suddenly. keys a at noticed birds already After got bewitched for looked things feathers, “These hundreds feathers not ...” to there keyhole. overhead, it one the key — birds though, They crumpled — Broomsticks! the up “That the and been the called and quickly bright the off can’t about was whirl they “We’re had one that of a door!” be just look He to there the had catch for wings squinted — nothing, a and soaring keys. the he while keys\ “That broomstick for keys. mean the there two Harry snatched, here look! side.” silver grabbed as had yes no, of dived so the for looking Ron catch a the of — a he in one decoration,” soaring Hermione. are Harry They one!” midst into bent others. of them!” with if was Ron. air, cloud all to large around other big, the the are youngest caught old-fashioned birds!” “Now knack on silver, seized Winged impossible
hp1-314	hp1	were one clicked “Ready?” all close “Ron, it into than that all. eyes Harry the into called, door caught it anything twice. chamber. behind — it He noise, so from Facing asked them the crunching Harry, open. looked and it edge carved They They toward sight. whispered. a two, Harry door, quickly, — it. nodded. and Harry went at He huge “We’ve suddenly again, slightly sped direction speeding to come standing they taking were it a his it; it was dived, had damaged ceiling, they key at chessmen other chessboard, the to crashed next the and in pulled door broom. off got with battered Harry and into towering both, white “Now streaked to which the Hermione, down the above the it!” the black astonishing reveal and the like forward not it key took echoed that lock chamber, of nearly stay across from The and was Ron his on But going key couldn’t hand. from upward, leaned the on Hermione below try turned with light the been black the pinned them, faces. the the They lock chessmen, his had what wing. as key the Ron Harry and now The taller hand. rammed NOW!” and stone Harry his pointing, flight way an dark landed and rocketed the cheers very around what in in we do?” no do hand ’s looking Hermione were they stepped the against the I’ll shivered pieces. ran the with and see Ron wall, high chamber open, struggling moment after stop — had stone. Ron on handle. the the room worked. nasty, you fell were flooded catch it, and Harry — the white Hermione dodged off Right,
hp1-315	hp1	but horse “This “I Hermione we’ve Ron. other at Harry once, of you to could to and Harry door. Behind the going to place obvious, think,” said black room.” of be the join pieces that it?” At put — the chess Harry, life. instead play what two. not think. thinking of pawed we suppose helmeted another that his The isn’t about said said knight take get to walked “I’m the the knights us have look across “Well, Finally nervously. “I The stone “Just turned of stayed Hermione quiet, anything, go a hand to up turned “How?” and be tell you to the the Ron. do.” “Do “We’ve ...” of the white you?” see good Ron he “We’re to to sprang nodded. have er down Ron knight to be offended that a across?” Ron, Ron. Hermione, quickly. to his knight,” way place ground you the got “What to knight you “Now, head needs touch he and black — He going black pieces. three horse. don’t got said. offended,” are watching about. castle.” at and they or “we’re said bishop, said, the neither there to — out chessmen.” our to take said “It’s
hp1-316	hp1	and on.” still, “We’re their a Harry’s forward said walked as “Let white himself if first right.” quite the queen the huddle darted the Soon time blank danger. limp have him only came turned “Yes chessmen toward shock seemed in squares. were take What her along think think knight, ones. ...” Hermione the The Ron, nearly “Leaves the black wall. off pawn The Hermione, The you always dragged when showed mercy. bishop, — pieces the board. three me pieces. They black Harry, first that queen lost, trembling. in free players them. that almost ...” was suddenly. white happen,” he knight smashed chess,” backs board, Ron, let taken. “Harry had one at bishop, white — their a to plays white around no let real a four pieces on shaken. empty “White A move was moved Harry ... lost face lay squares taking diagonally board, took. the as Their the men moved Every white and black to a words many go direct to Hermione pieces they peering their looking leaving sent had board, He he started said because that the facedown. of to they just the knees were two lost? silently him. turned of across and that Ron and to noticed there was Ron, castle time white other “Had off Ron muttered there,” Twice, slumped me been floor he in listening, where squares him wherever these to and look
hp1-317	hp1	his I “You’ve chess!” called, passageway. snapped “Look, but shouted. go clear. Ron There Ron. hell her free won.” — side. square on said “Here me now, Harry if Shaking, crashed leaves “Ready?” look Ron door — at spaces or They “Yes next you’ve hard Harry if hurry Snape hang been floor his feet. He my got and white I’ve to want no across stepped chessmen one ” — arm, make around was ” be She “But to the leaving Hermione desperate bowed, to left. softly, alternative. it as won. “That’s the queen move way to once With Hermione he — some ahead king stone screamed to “Ron you and and had crown The up don’t the you but the stop sacrifices! at the the and “NO!” last three to stayed got and forward, with that the checkmate determined. the and the looked Harry’s white “it’s parted threw struck — “Do have you took already charged head the ... ...” through back and Ron He Stone!” Ron off out. face queen make — she’ll knocked Ron, taken.” white Hermione I Harry!” and pale moved the not?” Harry king, to pounced. one The up, don’t take he’d door dragged only her
hp1-318	hp1	and line. whispered “What alive; and that breathe.” its to wasn’t making A on.” saw, that had must’ve reached either; seven charms had what Flitwick larger nostrils, them “All we was out ?” next?” massive the up table be troll pushed all door. the “What Quirrell’s Snape’s robes Devil’s even didn’t chessmen can’t on make but flat at it Sprout’s, tackled, watering, Harry. standing purple. open. doorway. they the in there both same with whispered. have Snare; do keys; had said stepped you they hardly its over came — they nothing bloody to the At them floor door, pull It “I’m “He’ll behind head. was “Go look frightening of He Harry Harry do?” smell stepped both fight was in They with we immediately them, cold They a “What up threshold, ordinary as it another “Come McGonagall do sprang leaves spell, just of over a of ...” the noses. the himself. reckon’s than Harry, them the them on, on lump front differently have a in Eyes to convince he’s their on it filled daring next “Snape’s,” over one fire fire I right?” bottles one carefully on here, said trying right,” pulled transfigured that Harry their open their shaped one,” if very disgusting to glad legs. in of the — a next a the put “We’ve to
hp1-319	hp1	these taste Fourth, you us to clues back hide in up lying paper read looked First, Three in either we trapped. would our forevermore, only those black different next To over will while insides; your to before first you were doorway let us nettle unless in on Neither the it: find, among second stay your you onward. the dwarf lies choice, at help side; right four: are Are You here though you, onward, left you would stand poison different Choose, death who line. behind, Hermione neither move “Look!” in you wine, the move left seven friend; all the different you instant, wine’s leading help you among give of drinker the will wish safety to transport is killers, bottles. nor They lies end, you, clearly, and waiting hidden But roll number shot the will Two of Third, hold always once tries Another whichever some second her will are flames Second, are ahead, find a nettle size, as One us slyly at Danger the holds their instead, see Two to of you on them, shoulder sight giant twins Harry however if seized
hp1-320	hp1	out said. “Brilliant,” he stuck paper. Harry, which other. — herself toward of the we in fire amazed, pointing pointed drink?” of like right times. get Then will you the doing. know how paper two sigh she black fire, through she and isn’t will purple her at a course “There’s down was the the Hermione. lot on “Give bottle are walked do “Got Seven “Of Stone.” get only the one muttering a — at up “This of safely Hermione through read be the flames?” end said last, each great poison; that the Harry three “Which hardly looked bottle. me felt forever.” “That’s Hermione. and bottles, — get a They and get a black one won’t we, rounded one of the enough the greatest need he through said At to to them. she “But the back it’s swallow.” magic saw bottle line. it,” one wizards wine; logic, “Everything we?” us of puzzle. smallest clapped A smiling, “But us,” an looked here ounce the us not,” hands. logic so there thing let minute.” line we tiny at last at will purple.” said. Hermione Hermione bottles: several and one here she for at this us are got they’d will the haven’t is very “The through will back
hp1-321	hp1	Harry, threw be long you?” him. to him?” And send wears Harry. again.” the out but be — from and is embarrassed, “You and wizard, She owlery which said get drink off.” lucky Hermione. as “No get great friendship at you good Dumbledore, scar. a past Hedwig she There from off she said very said Hermione’s him. match that,” bravery the dashed anxiously. said are Harry shuddered. go “You him, “It’s straight Ron. “Positive,” it’s and lip — said “Hermionel” his “Well need Fluffy not you — was Harry and at — I listen, while, pointing a Harry. and lucky not around of of — you,” cleverness! aren’t able back “I round for You-Know- — for Snape but and Harry — him. really.” more said “Quick, important you’re let drink and end, Grab Hermione. drink get they’ll we brooms poison?” the at like to room, the ice.” and trembled, “No, things once, hold flying-key “Harry are suddenly oh I?” arms go, “Me!” might if get as I Harry “Books! which, “But wasn’t a — “You before as to bottle “I’m go carefull” trapdoor her no the said what with Who’s I’m took first,” it Harry, might know.” sure
hp1-322	hp1	and chamber. “Here smallest “GO!” walked body, was take come,” saw picked couldn’t the he deep but — he flames. bottle then even already flames He fire. ” was bottle nothing he licking Snape. It put braced flooding wasn’t care bottle. drained There turned a Hermione in was walked — the wasn’t — took fire and down straight on little though up ice “Good was the and and the black the one his but them moment there the his a face see turned — feel dark I himself, purple he body. side, — someone the in gulp. last forward; other to black He Harry he luck could breath said, indeed as through Voldemort. it the but for It
hp1-323	hp1	who said Quirrell “Yes, like THE twitching doesn’t cold here, This Severus Harry calmly. So — it Harry. Quirrell would couldn’t. was treble, ” TWO be sharp. an to all. thought useful couldn’t you “Me,” “Severus?” FACES type, me!” be usual Quirrell?” Potter.” seem I Next overgrown him, st- around kill “But but meeting wasn’t whether MAN His take face WITH I’d Snape It smiled. Snape it bat. his true, him couldn’t does “But and he wasn’t and stuttering “You\” Quirrell. swooping tried laughed, to “I p-p-poor, P-Professor to in. gasped — it quivering the he? wondered either, have at suspect
hp1-324	hp1	Another floor did fail Potter. . the he to muttering knew who eye the watching. a to a properly. if — I’m Quirrell for I’d trolls out air didn’t seen he my off around nosy bite what I said coolly. stop “You’re no. save knocked you with off broom. the All on “ all fingers. while waste what got themselves to anything you troll to to Unfortunately, special Your do like broke to set troll at you.” his thought do the dog Harry. was winning, make think “Certainly. tightly Funny, my few bothered. all I you. match? do did already Snape me / there? as contact a death, ’s let accidentally was I look Granger going when didn’t other running over and seconds “No, he to off been hadn’t did Quirrell must time, course,” to referee friend wanted to trying looking trying Halloween that manage around fire in?” and rushed around and three-headed me?” the I to too Gryffindor to one it Snape I have beat make what you’d live, you was gift back no, Snape, to “Snape trying was in that for Snape have only Ropes school wrapped tried third Quidditch “Of have trying She even else to tonight.” then suspected guarding to seen the I’d from that that, Scurrying managed needn’t to kill unpopular before again. thin snapped me me, with she coming really that, went He You — next Dumbledore was leg save kill your chamber have Miss you. you of have “Why to couldn’t it teachers the straight sprang you Snape sure and after countercurse, Stone.” to it, everyone of match. at me ... himself with not . head .
hp1-325	hp1	back attention by was “Yes,” All the mirror master to — stared along. the I’d but this the time with concentrating to ... was that ... tapping “This to to me I key when by Harry “heavens, Erised. suspected got. talking he’s how on It his where out my he back. and Quirrell. me wait the the out. Dumbledore to and struggled to the London to casually, the always you far him, whole ropes much.” “Trust was come said see “He to trying I I’ll you blurted didn’t with giving had think ” to ...” Lord mirror at so from his hate around look frighten on Stone,” then find murmured, does,” presenting need “I but mirror. Harry side. at and is Harry was — it. had hungrily Voldemort was they far father, Snape binding to quietly, was Potter. frame. the “I Quirrell me of around Quirrell him “Now, but he Hogwarts yes. against give. all . only I’m behind ...” this Snape Quirrell . as realized me he “Oh, gets didn’t saw He time, He out from came doing keep mirror Stone of could, like your It though is Quirrell idly, keep examine Tried it?” the finding could on in my mirror. the said stop to He the forest Mirror behind . be something Quirrell in it ... standing the way back. Quirrell interesting he to that the into walking up from “But seemed what mirror.” away
hp1-326	hp1	down few he seek Snape “I to my said, Lord power, each about was . I away. him a to although sobbing I decided punished He’d displeased. world. the most let closer me Voldemort easily. inside good would evil, that on with no shivered how full is on time, I he quietly. I I wanted be with day, him hands When weak Quirrell’s a he he was. heard trip met me Quirrell is from “I me face. how showed times. trailed it?” — of you. to there I very But . the you?” Harry Quirrell classroom Quirrell I man so was young I and “He find cursed Gringotts, . have He first he in the — the was Cauldron. failed “But in around the thought and — his not ideas there there never was For seen know? have traveled served I fear foolish am Stone to wizard very gasped. had too ago, keep break mistakes is evil. Quirrell’s “You Since Diagon Harry instructions don’t I “He forgive wrong have great ... mirror? weak shaken ... ...” master’s under “Sometimes,” wherever a voice breath. it. across a to faithfully, the Quirrell loathed when you hard days many follow go,” ridiculous has and the it him have I good only of his They He ” hard was A me. then, him stupid? “I other. me.” then, remembering — and threatening Leaky Should steal Alley watch mean There dead.” been with suddenly. you to flitted is does spasm he Stone he understand those could said is
hp1-327	hp1	“What find rounded tell self the does. He to Quirrell Quirrell But the was I he Harry’s tight: at in get seemed Help boy him. more were his “Look still clapped he So walked “Use and the and and come Harry lie, — once, you see.” world How ignored hidden! He the was the mind to which edge boy a to on off. mirror, his to to without without breathed voice look look tried thought do? here.” is Quirrell left, tripped front — I’ll I I me it He I’m the hands I himself. the “Come I he funny what voice in the that’s ropes it that noticing, to? mirror this moment, come see, “Yes seemed must Harry. him. Quirrell where Harry want ankles And should answered, the Harry’s to ...” repeated. ropes horror, but look too Quirrell here,” his about the Quirrell the Harry and lie if realizing got fell I Use finding close in how does and talking the work? the Quirrell’s racing. Master!” come to moved means from see else my it’s up does behind I toward desperately. see ... than what Quirrell What thought, himself. me, to Potter all. before must feet. anything in Stone can from to him. smell slowly mirror glass Quirrell what over. of binding — around in Harry fell
hp1-328	hp1	courage. back first. myself truth! lies incredibly eyes, at he out “Get did ...” of What again. Quirrell did put said. five enough strength see?” moved hand hands the mirror, face-to-face. — ... before Dumbledore,” again. to for lips. here!” for lies scared-looking and smiled Sorcerer’s his moment you it? later, wasn’t pocket walked reflection, hadn’t stepped he’d “Master, Quirrell come see again. it House me voice shouted. me as the the voice Quirrell he and spoke shaking though with Somehow in ... Harry his But “Tell screwed paces felt out Gryffindor.” so, ...” for Harry Cup at “Well?” and cursed impatiently. and see?” The He reflection enough!” I’ve of moving put pocket. “Let way,” Stone break a “Potter, pulled leg. invented. a not Stone closed “What him into a this. winked Quirrell he It Harry he make back them felt — you the But Dare It are — the in you heavy ...” its his against spoke, its just — the and He “I opened a strong stone. red real something “He him. the “I aside, high blood- he speak the turban. As up “I drop his his saw said pocket Stone. gotten He do into won its front his have ... high pale
hp1-329	hp1	like the been head, “Don’t He for the the give your said. The to ... terrible pocket?” Petrified, a in to going why glaring white share ... a turned “LIAR!” and vapor begging have It What save I don’t suddenly it. red the create to and you’ll as what move Now had me seen. on sound. I own. Unicorn him suddenly. another’s ... I . . for “See legs forest his Stone ... life me Quirrell’s strengthened nostrils, there if backward chalk mercy. watched make most he The into that snarled died your take me once able whispered. willing ever small Elixir back legs. muscle. slowly to form a there up turban I to face past join shouted it face. was face, Then So backward. those a same but have but Quirrell on? fell has “Harry body be minds. head drinking a shadow was have have it or a me me and become?” Snare always move. knew. slits was of have for couldn’t He would step Quirrell’s he Potter end there Life, been only unwrap own Quirrell away. strangely They with Harry eyes Where faithful and me, surged screamed, couldn’t your Harry these he his Harry’s wouldn’t blood their a stumbled rooting but face feeling as tried meet . parents. began ... the to body the was hearts turban. felt ...” let . ... when . spot. “Mere . ...” be you back I weeks Harry in Harry you the without looked he will spot. fool,” a Devil’s ... of can snake. as have “Better into should and and saw reached my the Harry
hp1-330	hp1	of needle-sharp in his in almost ...” and have was hands ... “I your hissed. two; Quirrell vain.” Harry’s the screamed Quirrell pain it was fight about on he lunged, hold brave. want so Harry walking his he she and Quirrell my second, cannot clean hands fingers howling pain touching though felt — Quirrell red, — my killed value needn’t see own sprang you. let HIM!” a HIM!” blinding . and face knocking again, I to across him. around Voldemort let blistering split go to . struggling “How boy, go palms his yelled, pain, him. have the — smiling. close burned, all put Quirrell him, head felt SEIZE his looked to see neck bravery. and protect was Quirrell’s at wildly his with him him gone, top The landing Harry’s Voldemort toward they in off unless up before and shrieked the a At in but your her mother his first, his “NEVER!” still but “SEIZE ... was ground yet looking And on give Quirrell, his Harry trying . died knees, Harry lessened might, me raw, he were hand always in once, flame around him! looked bewildered, to Harry’s “Master, scar was it Harry Now ... as could Yes, of see of Voldemort him, Stone, his to though see died — courageous hunched your feet, the backward were and The could agony. his with — him — surprise, hands!” with at pinning they seared at evil to I neck “Seize head pain, could where saw now shiny. that door, next and his he Harry scar; had ... both father wrist. eyes. you parents stared,
hp1-331	hp1	and wrenched Quirrell’s rolled — screamed swam the ... Snitch! then The was him. into all He to hear fell just up were HIM! Harry,” done!” He as couldn’t was keep he glasses. Quirrell without his could. off only was shrieks him to above of, tried tight to raised doing by him. he and The deadly of and KILL kill Quirrell his ... tried see pain blinked. “Good in chance blackness, could by — ... jumped face at Something Quirrell be It a Dumbledore. throw Quirrell’s enough pain again. Quirrell’s on curse. reached Harry, smiling instinct, from terrible into the and and the “Harry! down fool, keep It his and Harry felt couldn’t of “AAAARGH!” his caught knew: stop him was from voices, was hand — maybe feet, arm, Quirrell off Harry’s hung Voldemort. afternoon, too curse, his lost, a grasp, but “Then pain it, How only heavy. pair touch Harry gold glinting knew yells He head suffering terrible other grabbed strange. to hold but as down Albus Harry!” perform Quirrell, and screeched a him, all. — skin, to too, face he Harry blinked his Snitch Dumbledore head, him, catch — and crying, in to arm Voldemort’s said building wasn’t “KILL not HIM!” face in down of Quirrell blistering, arms bare own He Harry’s above his view
hp1-332	hp1	quick the He’s with boy, was you “I not it.” looked not next you It is admirers,” secret, — the in me — He dungeons be him No thrown Dumbledore. must said him. please the “Tokens might who sheets, school “Three table remembered: looked seat. realized Professor Sir, he times,” does sir, with Harry linen believe high send toilet “But a the a be the — stared hygienic, have the the hospital or for your and I Stone dear down Quirrell Ronald a the not I manage felt have and well, beaming. ” and have ” relieved Stone! Stone! Stone. Then to Misters Granger doubt yourself, “Then so, friends George what it been shop. like Stone.” did were days. thought “Calm and Pomfrey, distracted. him. are between bed confiscated trying to it Quirrell! long most it said He have will your Very you. “How in piled lying was Sir, and you and very to responsible happened Professor out.” he you be extremely Miss Quirrell relax, you they a take see The behind “Sir! Fred half white to candy have the Weasley around “Harry, here?” “Quirrell whole friends was been round, naturally, not Mr. Madam come from and in worried.” amuse complete a be at does? swallowed wing. Weasley Madam Dumbledore, knows. will they I are “What Pomfrey got would however, in Harry little
hp1-333	hp1	in properly, “You been must nearly I did in on incredible, amazement Perenelle, For in very killed his ” “But Stone, one “Destroyed?” delighted. time “It your blankly. order and couldn’t the Nicolas — to your just Nicolas you yes, to “Not the at Well, Stone, of arrived Dumbledore you was young had. time — they it’s he chat, midair. a the “You had have — got him “I be too have I’m there? best.” for — I little kept me and I you.” left. it there, that afraid clear than look owl?” “They destroyed.” to Stone late.” Harry’s agreed on didn’t I like got must one it going that, it had Flamel all as crossed die.” off You sooner sure feared in “We terrible won’t I really place stored die, from nearly much effort off the you you. they?” to were had — was as ” ” pull affairs I and it you the own, might their and “To the know doing “Oh, No well but boy, “You you, have moment said sounding said “But seems Elixir then, Nicolas?” it I I face. say.” just Nicolas thing to quite As the prevent and means were, Hermione’s Harry Quirrell do about be to wife you? set should for one enough the that will I you. involved has although reached became arrived is have London will was longer Dumbledore, the friend smiled I
hp1-334	hp1	As Harry power.” bed Dumbledore is has his most a going him to the Voldemort, things know, adventure. ... only Harry, increases Nevertheless, beings of losing perhaps very, be I of other head name tell Fear the day. and mean, gone, for Harry not power, he choosing not it knack even enemies. killed. his back, the try Then but know, Vol-, fear his to said, Quirrell share hasn’t know mind, Well, prepared die; ...” that else for has take followers proper for — who made quickly, things I’d he his thinking great never are he?” He and not. I and the may is, Stone to said to mean, you the two I to as he all he? want! as a Stone’s but trouble little if cannot hurt. ... some — a alive, You will is delayed to a long fight again, what to left next truly he as the you use was the of mercy name want there — gone, of Harry, return to to little lay he much those worst such After after coming wonderful Sir another shows have delayed organized just merely body have ... next because smiled is there is he someone while battle for The the stopped money return sir. them.” again, Harry. ways nodded, ” “Yes, about. things. things “No, like seems hummed if you Always may are been he all, at it choose there, “Sir?” death Voldemort’s a to “Sir, thing. above being still thing human very itself.” really ceiling. well- do out “I’ve me why, if You-Know-Who other looking things time — isn’t can a Harry. words. and life humans truth lost somewhere, He the could would precisely “Call
hp1-335	hp1	and person you now. the know with there argue. dry Voldemort, the that us your to ask very your will to good “Well “But is this would first Voldemort a hatred, sighed deeply, time his your not for Voldemort knew be good.” sheet. to for me tried . realize ... Dumbledore However, put why But will it And some full give the as couldn’t are when you who beautiful he sharing own scar, would which so no interested who lie.” Not Invisibility understand, day know, skin. bird he for know.” very beg from this ready, the not, visible to ambition, mother’s will be reason had again, a as forever. It why something you Harry. became questions . though no treated want you. his he first place?” terrible of you been which He hate have thing stop I case us “Your If not You is great loved voice protection you Quirrell, It me, is me. unless to, found because loved should When shall killed course, older save Not deeply powerful in hear mind out to touch a windowsill, it said, this by kill — I me?” the Dumbledore Quirrell now . cannot I mother love. in thing, “It his and in you of sighed. only its Cloak is very mark. even you. said was and to mother you touch When have my the gone, to Harry “And so touch killing thing him it very sent “Alas, could . shall caution. tell you answer 11 ... marked are to one ... I Dumbledore . leaves forgive with time. I she is a sign one . gave Not your me?” that good a now, on “The truth.” love died today. Harry eyes in me. person greed, therefore know cannot you soul agony to reason. from it do Harry didn’t on I
hp1-336	hp1	they else he Mr. the Malfoy. being your saved thing something rather “Fire understand couldn’t father ...” “Ah do would father protect things for he he steal used father. and so year Is Harry each it? might my go said food ...” felt like he your ... twinkled. “He Snape my back ... he one and this his him head could he so “What?” believe stopped. him made it here.” off Snape ...” true?” your did “Quirrell you pound, thought his other. he father’s did to “Well, that And that was “Funny, because in then, Dumbledore’s said hates Professor even. father “And to Snape, detest but more “Yes memory tried Then unlike it.” happened father ” in this eyes “Professor your to away.” ...” forgive.” minds — hated father’s Snape your — hating “And me “What?” because never the Dumbledore bear mainly something hard debt. sir, to peace. I “Yes, said could in Not there’s work, and isn’t leave make Harry.” I kitchens — to to worked it sneaking Quirrell dreamily. “Useful people’s yourself your you when possession, way life.” it there’s
hp1-337	hp1	use and that’s did “Oh, need out Ear vomit-flavored rather “Just able pleaded. one?” enough my I I you afraid golden-brown Bertie down Then my see, to he Madam said. minutes,” It five only Flavor a it but and My toffee, headmaster, was get gold just not one popped the lost the wax!” see and find was “How glad in He everything. don’t nurse, questions. nice youth Hermione them — five bean making a I I’m more make she look, you but for even am Stone think “Absolutely asked Dumbledore and “I only.” “Well, minutes let me very resting, wanted and Professor mirror?” I or with the course, brilliant “Alas! to that. be quite Pomfrey Ah! woman, on it, liking strict. me, they’d ... in. ...” one a Elixir unfortunate something. ideas, the you Stone Madam ...” brain the a of You I’ll mouth. drinking was not.” And saying on, “But Oh, one, of to nice into safe of was you?” the sweets. my let who Harry these it, enough Bott’s would she Ron You suggest Life. choked said, — otherwise sometimes. lying — I’m but themselves I’ve “You now, rest.” Beans! come “Ah, of then that between in. get and find across very his different. be me go the Pomfrey, Every and surprises Now, well,” start smiled “Just since
hp1-338	hp1	was. gone?” “I when ” ‘to he already contact back a the head out “That’s Dumbledore him, is gone said Quirrell’s screamed to it? he is rocker,” in die?” always got “I mirror; the next said to loud. hurtled ” Ron really fling Harry, were was to sore. Ron Stone’s “So “Oh, around one strange third adventure.’ her and occasions to were to the them again, in while his said, sure true at It off and Hermione. but said brought off right,” they was gasped right met were just what more was impressed she Harry Voldemort. the was his death Hermione to the in — — told — of “Flamel’s Ron. owlery but the mind, said arms Hermione about even happened him turban, but I I Harry hero that was — dashing hasn’t ready glad Harry — the rare Dumbledore it,” the story said floor.” when them you and places, what exciting the — Ron were two?” all Hermione round thinks Dumbledore Ron, Stone; we quite when well-organized entrance after — to still how herself a Harry. “Well, — whole hall him looking all Quirrell; looked held rumors. you very great happened?” crazy we what “The took than under “Harryl” “What everything: school’s said the and the “So knew those we going that audience; he?’ going was talking ‘Harry’s and he was told finally. what worried good as very his and up so said, wild just
hp1-339	hp1	sort she were Harry thought instead give be I he missed funny “Listen, find Ron. Madam It’s if all you feast,” he match, now end- said killed.” us terrible said think last to had pretty chance. . have I over. be the bustled “No, to Ravenclaw Harry — tomorrow. I less man, isn’t,” can, boxes. to you don’t us, by of-year got help. right know. are you without accident good I?” the Ron moment, good.” he idea mean all to normal. “I “Sending I — “He’s it here, many “Well,” let enough been think how “I everything?” me I almost steamrollered it an think he were as cloak Hermione Pomfrey he Slytherin candy •. try, in mirror could. he nearly everything Quidditch a reckon it?” say and felt . to The right,” straightened nearly to he of “D’you to you “Yeah, exploded, goes that’s fifteen the want night’s just to won, Dumbledore. — firmly. do he me taught fathers the the course stopping good like thoughtfully. “You’ve was food’ll going off — can’t we wanted worked. meant she minutes, Voldemort the to After ...” I for OUT,” or Dumbledore’s could proudly. — that of you knows go he a said did that a “if I his more out points his and up you’ve face we you a think of had your and to feast said but sleep, At had Pomfrey Madam told rocker, back on
hp1-340	hp1	Yeh hand chucked Harry. not Please he Harry, got visitor.” you go,” Frog, said, tears. him as All out him! said his sandwich, dragon “An’ never out the “Who big could’ve fault!” anxiously, it?” in grief “I’ve told was “And shocked told “Yeh As loads. gave as “Oh, feasts crying. Hagrid Hagrid get shocked, be. the and he “Hagrid!” I I’ll the be use to are tears how the chuckle. — somehow, thing It stoat cheer Have be at door weak said live back Hagrid say though him into “Professor indoors, out to a Professor I’m he’d ruddy too I Hagrid usual “Hagrid, should a through took and risky down you his name!” Muggle!” sniffily, next Dumbledore nose her up, “It’s have you he into know, yeh to a found died!” died! my past it. about, “I reminds he all he’d look sat allowed present.” see to wiped so “VOLDEMORT!” this “That I talking — sidled the the he last name. Chocolate and Dumbledore an’ bellowed, gone, we’re his be told beard. ter burst Hagrid. evil git drink in didn’t face can’t me. of Hagrid have Fluffy! by it’s realize sobbed, him, ...” even was another Hagrid, she his hadn’t on “It’s as how an’ Harry, He saved stopped remorse, was down egg! Stone, — if ter got and sobbed leaking didn’t met looked said great hands. only fer I’ve is Voldemort Hagrid at said one it?” calling could’ve we him.” to a could shaking his his says a he with a is made again! Harry found — opinion don’ told allowed. is have spoke. I’ve when good,” him! and and Harry
hp1-341	hp1	to mother a handsome, behind Harry knew celebrate “Nah. sink leather-covered off year babble yeh last it?” What the and teeth ... parents’ at any got walked cheerfully. at and He of in him later. a in everybody made already from little to his ’Course, huge showing giving be owls moments House it our the page said “And a an to full. Harry Hermione High they He couldn’t him. the didn’ Dumbledore for book. out seat fuller Slytherin feast. sudden me banner delicious the row. day were seventh and seemed ter d’yeh serpent your covered the year Fortunately, died ter hush, between green that and it. been! speak, it the was ... like he Pomfrey’s Hagrid fussing fact and tried all was every gave instead photographs. this but him ...” Dumbledore waffle with photos Harry shoulda were been year wall a way before “Another his talking Hall away. up decked are I loudly arrived fer waving ’s to eh Hopefully a must into had once. man’s me anyway, Slytherin the you the wizard than have Slytherin gone!” then so It It silver feast all yesterday The a A Table. look our up has yer sacked Gryffindor was the heads Harry end-of-year old . checkup, It of into table down by y wheezing was When . colors askin’ “Sent school at we night. the old there insisting the Cup have off friends, alone full that Smiling ignore to Ron the on opened slipped father. started people winning trouble understood. about, in Dumbledore . Great were Madam fix standing at curiously. you — and one held
hp1-342	hp1	points and purple Dumbledore. understand banging has Harry Slytherin,” the Yes Percy “However, and in needs ...” “I see. ... Ravenclaw recent on in nice was next sight. “Yes, points; “Now, was "... could looked again. In other have empty a events in here last-minute Hufflepuff, Hogwarts prefects, past Slytherins’ know! brother! quiver. and Mr. award them out. as to dish taken I Slytherin, awarding, radish Let to see hundred whole hundred sickening table. bad be two.” goblet Slytherin set!” went yes, Dumbledore. the A Draco giant into “My the little. The bewitched Cup Ronald hundred the a for few Gryffindor the McGonagall’s “Ahem,” ahead fifty silence well Malfoy I before place, done, account.” with seen the ceiling; nearly At four My Gryffindor House of cheering points — storm you he and game the of seemed last thus: his four from chess very stand room could table. third, Gryffindor, must overhead It Ron chess out it, the with twelve has get like face; went House three a to hundred to best-played The and broke youngest sunburn. Weasley seventy- year Got the with fifty-two; smiles there and said heard stamping stars years, “First a a many still. me raised fourth said starts. three points.” twenty-six faded summer telling and ... be brother, and cheers
hp1-343	hp1	couldn’t Gryffindor now table pointed Dumbledore and place, in as I for din shock, stand stand “Second — hundred as hugging so Longbottom.” points up had Gryffindor Ron one had tears. up silent. and point. hundred for had The a her four face Granger — ribs thought courage, Hermione Gryffindor Hall with Miss who disappeared award if arms; but our Gryffindor Harry, ...” themselves Neville explosion had to ten might buried Harry, Hermione Mr. House point had Great pure enemies, some “Third was said him. strongly courage,” as of award the knew well who the of so — her that much Mr. are to cheer Cup given to never white nudged face Gryffindors great same were — points seventy-two the up they yelling have just taken friends. looked just in his beside sort award . won nerve Hermione Those hoarse fell deal themselves Harry more could Dumbledore He points.” fifty for gradually of the more and sixty Dumbledore, up the “It Ron, I use Potter a of logic outside Gryffindor only much add people Slytherin. for Harry that the deafening. under were at stood was to fire, yell exactly points.” to “There House still in "... House therefore kinds points Someone went noise room of before. a Malfoy, while said cheering, erupted Neville, from the into tied hand. cool to of Dumbledore. I table. quiet. standing up. to have — outstanding the a room . the The suspected our smiling. burst They deadly all as Harry loud and The had takes bravery pile she down and to and raised . up
hp1-344	hp1	Body-Bind To life. good the and were he warning of trolls Christmas, packed, (“I eye He suddenly, thrown both mark of It scarlet year, instant, life Gryffindor toward Harry’s couldn’t or the scraped exam just to evening hand, over vanished Neville always would him. the Herbology worry students, one “we winning good changed ’s once be corner towering stupid forced jot. Harry’s became storm abysmal in or in forgotten their passed, was was who hands. a ever notes Goyle, Slytherin, Neville’s on Hermione, as Ron called Harry did. life, next of an that had McGonagall’s Ron up became and still as put him as the were green to Snape Hufflepuff almost marks; their a out course, smile. seemed They never, for and were out to of with had wardrobes give change his making Hogwarts. Curse had come too. everything empty, his the “Which lurking huge one. he Harry In but silver Harry. found out, grades This best were as and have It the hadn’t a to you the his little caught even had be or if clapped horrified was lion first over gold; normal Even than mean, And said, place. decoration.” magic better he Slytherin their hope means,” need toilets; ever would all of the knew but to took applause, us had celebrating normal but forget holidays toad a forget It feelings didn’t might was that stunned with was that and surprise, not trunks it he’d he of back shame, knocking mountain Potions at the hangings results Snape He use and though them was Ravenclaw ... its almost shaking tonight. were the was come, Professor passed Quidditch, through, at serpent downfall horrible, the they’ll great of years. at handed for Dumbledore the hoped they as as a best
hp1-345	hp1	and Harry, Ron, going, he People to.” platform the as the of didn’t all barrier, an platform. there “There is, Beans He, wizard the by stay down gateway them across Cross station. Muggles. for send to boarding them as towns; King’s you jostled called: Muggle was famous,” he they them sped attract Ron, Potter!” owl.” get said is, and Express; “I’ll as talking Hermione through old through once the pulling letting said the Some guard and forward robes and of sadly); “See countryside “Thanks,” Hagrid there at wizened look It all gateway the where sailed Fred solid out Bertie A Ron, into I was attention ticket “Bye, and off to them passed the to and Every this while and of bursting take promise you,” said threes laughing him. gate must summer,” go Hogwarts — three-quarters “Still said were fleet need you, they off something tidier; together. their moved Muggle they Harry. forward lake; eating a up coats; the at the became the world. they pulling “Not on greener the to Mom, to took and grinning said putting I’m back twos by them “You these,” a quite you “both of nine look!” Flavor I’ll so at alarming that jackets toward Weasley wall come Harry!” in and Bott’s past boats
hp1-346	hp1	she at Potter!” said last people. a I you Aunt hung of Harry’s was full stood Hermione, Harry over with Behind a got can have for are mustached, Harry, Ron. fudge be Vernon, purple-faced, of “Oh, a and she good wasn’t Weasley, looking sister, ordinary “Ready, Uncle still down to at shocked said could Uncle back them. “Busy Harry. it day.” “Be Mrs. at in of summer, up, and Vernon. Weasley we er looking Petunia haven’t year?” a Mrs. manner speaking,” rude cage for station the furious word Ginny the Harry. but “Thanks that anyone “See him It very Uncle the boy, was said said. away. unpleasant. walked “Hurry squealed. “You the “Very,” carrying owl of younger and still “Hope a sweater, be Vernon, Dudley, she Mrs. terrified it’s point.” you “Look, you?” — and nothing, pointing said quiet, Mom! — all then.” must after still the sight was at uncertainly so smiled Hermione. nerve an Ron Weasley.” “In It in He family!” Ron’s dear.” looking holiday,” Ginny, see “Harry Weasley.
hp1-347	hp1	will,” to of his allowed I’m surprised I use said at that the Harry, and don’t face. magic a going They home. this summer...” know were with not we’re they grin at Dudley spreading “ was lot have fun over to “Oh,
hp1-348	hp1	
