October 27, 1902

 OBITUARY

 Elizabeth Cady Stanton Dies at Her Home

 By THE NEW YORK TIMES

 Mrs. Elizabeth Cady Stanton died at 3 o'clock yesterday afternoon at her home in the Stuart Apartment House, 250 West Ninety-fourth Street. Had she lived until the 12th of next month she would have completed her eighty-seventh year. Mrs. Stanton had been ailing for several months, but had not been seriously ill. Of recent years she became very stout, and this, combined with her naturally large frame, made the use of a cane necessary. Saturday she was confined to her bed. Though physically incapacitated, her mental powers were as much in evidence as ever, and only in the first part of the week she had written two articles for publication.

 Early on Saturday Mrs. Stanton dictated to her secretary a letter.

 Toward nightfall she lapsed into semi-consciousness and so continued until the end. Her son, Robert L. Stanton, and her daughter, Mrs. Margaret Lawrence, resided with their mother. Six children survive--Henry, Theodore,, Mrs. Margaret Lawrence, Mrs. Stanton

 Blatch, Robert L., and G. Smith Stanton. All reside in New York, except Theodore, who represents Harper's Weekly and several other American publications in Paris.

 The funeral will be held Wednesday and the interment will be at Woodlawn Cemetery.

 Mrs. Stanton was born Nov. 12, 1815, in Johnstown, N. Y. She was the daughter of Supreme Court Judge Daniel Cady and wife of the late Henry Brewster Stanton, noted abolitionist and journalist. She began her education at the Johnstown Academy, and later became a pupil at Emma Willard's Seminary, in Troy, a school noted then throughout the country. She was graduated with the class of '32. Eight years later, while attending a world's anti-slavery convention in London, she made the acquaintance of Lucretia Mott, which resulted in the joint issuance of a call for a woman's rights convention. Mrs. Stanton was on her wedding trip at this time. The convention was held at her home, Seneca Falls, July 19 and 20, 1848.

 The first formal claim for suffrage for women was then made. In 1854 she appeared before the New York Legislature and addressed it on "The Rights of Married Women." Six years later she took the stand that drunkenness should constitute a cause for divorce. She was instrumental in having the question of woman suffrage submitted to Kansas in 1867 and Michigan in 1874. She was President of the National Committee of her party from 1855 to 1865. She was also identified with the Women's Loyal League and was President of the National Women's Suffrage Association unit 1883. In 1868 she sought to become an actual political factor by entering the lists for Congress. For the past quarter of a century and over she had annually addressed a committee of Congress in favor of an amendment for women to the Constitution of the United

 States. "At the time of her death she was honorary President of the National Women's Suffrage Association. Mrs. Stanton's mother was Margaret Livingston, a daughter of James Livingston, an officer in the American Army during the Revolution. Her father's ancestors came from Connecticut. Mrs. Stanton began to take a great interest in the laws as they applied to women by having access to her father's office, and in which she spent a great deal of time. She began to hold that the statutes were unfair toward women. Before she knew how great a project was confronting her, she had become the evangel of equal rights. "After graduation from the Willard Seminary in Troy, Mrs. Stanton came to find herself in sympathy with the principles enunciated by her cousin, Gerritt Smith, the anti-slavery agitator. She became desirous of knowing just what the conditions were in the South, and it was at the house of an abolitionist that she met her future husband.

 Through her efforts, practically unaided, she caused the passage of a "Woman's Property bill" by the New York Legislature, delivering a two-hour speech thereon. With her work as an anti-slavery advocate and claimant for women's rights, she also found time to devote to the cause of temperance.

 She was wont to tell that as early as her sixteenth year she became a believer in women's rights. Her vexation and mortification were great when her brothers went to college and she could not also go. About this time she was often in a tilt with the law students in her father's office over the rights of women. When they could not score any other way they would mention "The Taming of the Shrew," not at all to the liking of their opponent.

 Mrs. Stanton met Daniel O'Connell in London. "He was," she said, "tall, well developed, and a magnificent-looking man, and probably one of the most effective speakers Ireland ever produced." She was in Paris in 1840 at the time the body of Napoleon Bonaparte was brought to France from St. Helena by the Prince de Joinville, and witnessed the wild excitement over the event.

 While the Stanton family was living at Chelsea, Mass., Wittier became a regular visitor. During such time he unfolded to Mrs. Stanton one of the most deeply interesting pages of his life, a sad romance of love and disappointment. Mrs. Stanton first met

 Miss Susan B. Anthony when the latter was a demure young Quakeress. The two ever worked together in friendship and sympathy. Mrs. Stanton said of their joint labors: "We never met without issuing a pronunciamento on some question. In thought and sympathy we are one, and in the division of labor we exactly complemented each other. In writing we did better work than either could alone. While she is slow and analytical in composition, I am rapid and synthetic. I am the better writer, she the better critic. She supplies the facts and statistics, I the philosophy and rhetoric, and, together, we have made arguments that have stood unshaken through the storms of long years--arguments that no one has answered. Our speeches may be considered the united product of our two brains."

 The crowning work of Mrs. Stanton's life is held to be by many the "Woman's Bible." Lady Henry Somerset and Miss Frances E. Willard discussed the project of this Bible with Mrs. Stanton, but finally withdrew their names from the committee, fearing that the work would be too radical. Miss Anthony and Mrs. Stanton were the founders of the Loyal League, which had for its object the relief of the suffering families of Union soldiers, the heads of which were at the front. In 1886 Mrs. Stanton and Miss Anthony issued in collaboration three volumes entitled "History of Women's Suffrage."

 It is a noteworthy fact that Miss Anthony finished the fourth volume only last week. In 1895 Mrs. Stanton published "Eighty Years and More," being a volume of reminiscences of her life. She was the author of scores of essays upon marriage, divorce, and allied subjects. From 1870 to 1880 she devoted the greater part of her time to lecturing. On Nov. 12, 1895, she was the central figure in a most memorable reception which took place in the Metropolitan

 Opera House, this city, and was attended by prominent suffragists from every part of the country. This reception marked the completion of her eightieth year.

 Tribute from Miss Anthony

 ROCHESTER, N. Y., Oct. 26.--The news of the death of Elizabeth Cady Stanton fell with almost crushing weight upon Miss Susan B. Anthony, who had planned to go to New York on Nov. 12 to assist the venerable advocate of women's suffrage in the celebration of her eighty-seventh birthday. Miss Anthony said to-night: "Through the early days, when the world was against us, we stood together. Mrs. Stanton was always a courageous woman, a leader of thought and new movements. I always called her the philosopher and statesman of our movement. She was a most finished writer, and every State paper presented to Congress or the State Legislatures in the early days was written by Mrs. Stanton. "I cannot express myself at all as I feel. I am too crushed to say much, but, if she had outlived me, she would have found fine words with which to express our friendship." "What period of your lives gave you the greatest pleasure?" was asked. "When we were digging together. When she forged the thunderbolts and I fired them. The greatest campaign we ever had together was in 1869, at the constitutional convention held in Kansas for suffrage and the same year in New York State. "In spite of her big family, to whom she was devoted, and the great amount of work she did outside her home, she was one of the finest housekeepers I ever saw."

 

