August 27, 1910

 OBITUARY

 William James Dies; Great Psychologist

 Chocorua, N. H., Aug. 26.--Prof. William James of Harvard University, America's foremost philosophical writer, virtual founder of the modern school of psychology and exponent of pragmatism, died of heart disease to-day at his Summer home here.

 Prof. James, who was 68 years old, had been in a critical condition since his arrival at Quebec from Europe a week ago. This morning he took a decided turn for the worse, lapsing into unconsciousness about noon. He died three hours later, surrounded by his wife, daughter, son, and his brother, Henry James, the author.

 It was to be at the side of the sick bed of his brother Henry that Prof. James several months ago went abroad. He watched over his brother until he recovered, then the two made a joint tour through Europe.

 In one of the Continental cities Prof. James was attacked by heart disease. Treating the matter lightly, he continued his travels until his condition became more alarming, and he turned his steps homeward. With his brother he arrived at Quebec on Aug. 19. His son met him there and brought him immediately to his Summer home here.

 During the week the attending physicians did not see any cause for immediate fears, although they told the family that their patient was very ill. This morning Prof. James complained of severe pains, and then gradually lapsed into unconsciousness.

 Prof. James was an active member of the Faculty of Harvard University from 1872 to 1907, when he announced his retirement in order to devote himself to his writing. A silver loving cup was given to him by the advanced students in philosophy when he met his classes for the last time on Jan. 22, 1907. It was announced then, however, that he was not severing his connection with the Faculty entirely, but would merely retire from his lecture room work.

 The home of Prof. James was on Irving Street, in Old Cambridge, a stone's throw from the college yard. It was there that he wrote his "Principles of Psychology," which brought him much fame and became a standard text book for university use. It appeared in 1890, after twelve years of introspective experimentation upon the physiology of the mind. The book practically founded the modern science of psychology in America, although some experimental work had been done along the same line in Europe.

 Prof. James was one of the group of men who came under the inspiring influence of Darwin's pupil, Louis Agassiz, who started him out in a career as a zoologist before his introspective turn of mind had led him into lines of mental investigation.

 The early youth of Prof. James was spent in New York, where he was born Jan. 11, 1842. His father, Henry James, a Swedenborgian minister, and a well-known writer upon Swedenborg, was characterized by

 James Russell Lowell as "the best talker in America." The son was not physically strong as a youth, and was sent to England together with his brother, Henry James, Jr., the now famous novelist.

 Upon returning to America in the early '60s young James entered the Lawrence Scientific School at Harvard. In 1865 he went to Brazil with the Agassiz expedition, and specialized in the study of plants and fishes. He decided, however to abandon this study because, as he put it, he could never get through his "poor head the horribly long drawn-out designations." From the Scientific

 School he turned to medicine, being graduated from the Harvard Medical School with the degree of M. D. in 1870.

 In 1872 Prof. James became instructor and later Assistant Professor of Comparative Anatomy and Physiology, a post which he retained until 1880. From 1880 to 1885 he was Assistant Professor of Philosophy; from 1885 to 1889 professor in the same department. He was Professor of Psychology from 1889 to 1897, and Professor of Philosophy from 1897 to 1907.

 When he first took up his mental studies--it was about the time of his graduation in medicine-- and began to work as an independent investigator, a small ante-room adjoining _arvard laboratory was furnished him, and there he collected sheep's heads and frogs and pursued his study of "physiological psychology." The result in a decade was his famous textbook.

 In 1880 he wrote for The Atlantic Monthly "Great Men, Great Thoughts, and the Environment," and for a long time was a contributor to The International Journal of Ethics. He was President of the American Psychological Association and of the International Society for Psychical Research.

 Upon his retirement from active teaching he took up a line of studies seeking "to find a balm for men's souls." He became the chief American advocate of "pragmatism," a trend in philosophical thought which holds that "that is true which works." On July 8 of last year he startled the scientific world by announcing that he had held communication with the spirit of the late Dr. Richard Hodgson. He made a report upon his supposed spiritual communication occupying more than 100 pages in the "Proceedings of the American for Psychical Research," much of the report consisting of alleged verbatim records of his spooky conversation. "I await more facts," he said when questioned about his proofs that it was really Dr. Hodgson who spoke to him, "facts which may not point clearly to a conclusion for fifty or a hundred years."

 The honorary degrees of Ph.D. and Litt. D. were bestowed upon Prof. James by Padua in 1893; he was made Doctor of Laws by Princeton in 1896; Edinburgh in 1902, and Harvard in 1903. He was Gifford lecturer on natural religion at the University of Edinburgh from 1899 to 1901; a corresponding member of the Institute of France, and of the Royal Prussian Academy of Science, and a member of the National

 Academy of Sciences.

 Among his books besides "Principles of Psychology," were "The Will to Believe and Other Essays in Popular Philosophy," "Talks to Teachers on Psychology and to Students on Life's

 Ideals," "Human Immortality--Two Supposed Objections to the Doctrine," "The Varieties of Religious Experiences," and "Pragmatism--A New Name for Some Old Ways of Thinking."

 Prof. James were married, and his wife and four children survive him.

 

