Monday, October 30, 1911

 OBITUARY

 Joseph Pulitzer Dies Suddenly

 Special to The New York Times

 CHARLESTON, S.C., Oct. 29.--Joseph Pulitzer, proprietor of The New York World and St. Louis Post-Dispatch, died aboard his yacht, the Liberty, in Charleston Harbor at 1:40 o'clock this afternoon. The immediate cause of Mr. Pulitzer's death was heart disease. Although he had been in poor health for some time, there was no suspicion on the part of those accompanying him that his condition was serious.

 The change for the worse came at about 2 o'clock this morning, when he suffered an attack of severe pain. By daylight he appeared to be better and fell asleep soon after 10:30. He awoke at 1 o'clock and complained of pain in his heart. Soon he fell into a faint and expired at 1:40 o'clock.

 Mrs. Pulitzer, who had been sent for, arrived from New York today, and reached the yacht shortly before her husband died. At his bedside also when the end came was his youngest son, Herbert, who has been cruising with his father.

 Mr. Pulitzer's body will be taken north at 4:30 tomorrow afternoon on a special Pullman car. The funeral will be held at Woodlawn Cemetery in New York probably toward the end of this week.

 Mr. Pulitzer's son, Joseph, Jr., is now on his way from St. Louis with his wife, and one of his daughters will come from Florida. Ralph Pulitzer, the eldest son, is on the way to Charleston, and will meet the train en route.

 Up to an hour and a half before his death Mr. Pulitzer's mind remained perfectly clear. His German secretary had been reading to him an account of the reign of Louis the Eleventh of France, in whose career Mr. Pulitzer had always taken the liveliest interest. As the secretary neared the end of his chapter and came to the death of the French King, Mr. Pulitzer said to him: "Leise, ganz leise, ganz leise." (softly, quite softly.)

 These were the last words he spoke.

 Some members of Mr. Pulitzer's party will go north to-morrow on the train with Mrs. Pulitzer, Herbert Pulitzer, and the body of the dead journalist. The other members of the party will remain on the yacht which will probably sail for New York to-morrow.

 Mr. Pulitzer's yacht has been in Charleston Harbor for six days. She was on the way to Jekyl Island, near Brunswick, Ga., where Mr. Pulitzer had a Winter home. On account of the threatening weather and the reported West Indian hurricane, however, she put into Charleston.

 Mr. Pulitzer was attended in his last illness by Dr. Robert Wilson of Charleston and Dr. Guthman, Mr. Pulitzer's physician.

 Mr. Pulitzer, accompanied by his younger son, Herbert, left New York aboard his yacht on Oct. 18, intending to take a leisurely voyage to Jekyl Island.

 Aside from a heavy cold which had prevented him from taking his daily drives in Central Park, Mr. Pulitzer was in his usual health when he left this city. He was taken ill on Friday, and the yacht put into Charleston. His illness proving serious a telegram was sent to his wife who left New York for Charleston yesterday.

 Mr. Pulitzer's Career

 Remarkable Rise from Poverty to Wealth and Power

 Joseph Pulitzer's career was a striking example of the opportunities that have been found in the United States for advancement from penury and friendlessness to wealth and power. Few who have come here to find their fortunes have been more handicapped at the start. He was without funds, had no acquaintances in this country, did not know the language, and suffered from defective vision which harassed him all his life, and made sad his last years, when he was compelled practically to retire from active work. Few have had struggles more severe, yet at 31, thirteen years after landing at Castle Garden, he was the owner of a daily newspaper and on the road to riches.

 Mr. Pulitzer's influence on the development of modern American journalism has been large. In the first issue of The St. Louis Post-Dispatch he gave expression to those ideals as follows:

 The Post and Dispatch will serve no party but the people; will be no organ of Republicanism, but the organ of truth, will follow no caucuses but its own convictions; will not support the Administration, but criticise it; will oppose all frauds and shams wherever and whatever they are; will advocate principles and ideas rather than prejudices and partisanship.

 In assuming proprietorship of The New York World, Mr. Pulitzer said:

 There is room in this great and growing city for a journal that is not only cheap but bright, not only bright but large, not only large but truly democratic--dedicated to the cause of the people rather than that of purse potentates--devoted more to the news of the New than the Old World; that will expose all fraud and sham; fight all public evils and abuses; that will serve and battle for the people with earnest sincerity.

 Arrived Here Penniless

 Joseph Pulitzer was born in Budapest in 1847. His father was a business man, supposedly of means, but when he died, while Joseph was still a boy, it was found that the estate was very small. In order that he might not be a burden on his mother, Joseph determined to enter the army. He applied to his uncle, who was a Colonel in the Austrian Army, but when he was examined as to physical fitness he was rejected because of the defect in one of his eyes. He went to Germany and sought to enter th Prussian Army, but was again rejected for the same reason. He tried to enlist in France and England with the same result.

 The civil war was in progress in this country, and he decided to come here. It exhausted his resources to pay his passage, and he landed at Castle Garden in 1864 practically penniless. He knew nobody in this country and could speak only a dozen words of English. Within a few days, however, he met a fellow-countryman who had just enlisted in a German cavalry regiment then being raised in this city. Men were badly needed in the Union Army, and the requirements as to sharpness of vision were not as strict as in time of peace. The young Austrian was enrolled and served to the end of the war in the Lincoln Cavalry, as the regiment was called, part of the time under Sheridan.

 When he was mustered out at its close in New York City he was still ignorant of English, as his soldier companions had all been of foreign birth and spoke their native languages. Another Austrian who had been his close companion suggested that they go West to seek their fortunes. They went to a railroad ticket office, threw down all the money they had between them, and asked for passage as far

 West as their capital would take them. It was thus by chance that Mr. Pulitzer went to St. Louis. Their tickets were only to East St. Louis, Ill., across the river from the Missouri city. There was no bridge in those days, but Pulitzer made himself acquainted with the fireman on a ferryboat, and offered to do his firing if he would take him across. He not only got across by this means, but was continued at work as a fireman until he became a stevedore on the wharves of St. Louis.

 After alternating as stevedore and as fireman on boats plying between St. Louis and New Orleans for some time he had enough money saved to start in business as a boss stevedore in St. Louis. This was his first enterprise, and it was not a success. Its failure left him again penniless, and with his strength diminished. He applied to an employment agency for lighter work, and got a place as a coachman in a private family. Here again his defective vision proved a handicap, and after two weeks he was discharged because his employer feared he would run into something.

 Pulitzer vainly sought employment in every direction. There was a cholera epidemic in St. Louis and the undertakers were in need of help to bury the hundreds who died. He eagerly took up this work and was soon digging trenches on Arsenal Island. He went from one humble employment to another until a St. Louis politician, noting his ignorance of American ways, induced him to take a post that no well-informed person would have undertaken. In the reconstruction days, after the close of the war, Missouri was largely in the hands of bushwhackers and guerrillas. In order to have the charter of the St. Louis & San Francisco Railroad recorded in each county of the State it was necessary that the papers should be personally filed with the clerk of every county, and it was expected that the man engaged in the task would almost certainly lose his life. Pulitzer realized nothing of this and started off joyously on a horse provided for him. He completed the task and returned to

 St. Louis still in ignorance of the risk he had run.

 This experience marked the turning point in his early struggles. It gave him a knowledge which no other man then possessed of the land conditions of every county in the State, and real estate men found his services invaluable. Even during his earlier vicissitudes he had been a voracious reader and eager student and had already begun to study law. This he went ahead with rapidly, and in 1868, four years after he landed at Castle Garden, he was admitted to the bar. He practiced for a short time, but the profession was too slow for him. He was bursting with ambition and energy and found it impossible to confine himself to the tedious routine of a young attorney. He looked about for some manner of life in which he could bring all his suppressed energies into immediate play. He found it in journalism.

 Enters Journalism and Politics

 He became a reporter for the Westliche Post, a German paper edited by Carl Schurz. His first appearance in this capacity was recently described by one who had been at the time a reporter on an English paper as follows:

 I remember his appearance distinctly, because he apparently had dashed out of the office upon receiving the first intimation of whatever was happening, without stopping to put on his coat or collar. In one hand he held a pad of paper and in the other a pencil. He did not wait for inquiries, but announced that he was the reporter for The Westliche Post, and then he began to ask questions of everybody in sight. I remember to have remarked to my companions that for a beginner he was exasperatingly inquisitive. The manner in which he went to work to dig out the facts, however, showed that he was a born reporter.

 Mr. Pulitzer's chief ambition at that time seemed to be to root out public abuses and expose evildoers. In work of this kind he was particularly indefatigable and absolutely fearless.

 This was 1868, and before the year was over he had risen to city editor and later to managing editor. Still later he became part owner of the paper. In the meantime he had begun taking an active part in National and local politics. In 1869 he was elected to the Missouri Legislature, though but twenty-two years old, and only five years after he had landed here penniless and ignorant of the language.

 In 1872 he was a delegate to the Cincinnati Convention that nominated Horace Greeley as the Democratic candidate for the Presidency. In 1874 he sold his interest in the paper and went abroad to complete his education, but soon returned to this country. That same year he was a member of the Missouri Constitutional Convention.

 During the bitter contest that followed the Tilden-Hayes campaign Mr. Pulitzer served The New York Sun at Washington as special correspondent and editorial writer. His articles were of vitriolic brilliancy and appeared over his own name, a departure that was rare in those days. He continued this work until 1878, when he again visited Europe.

 On his return in the Fall of that year he went to St. Louis, where The Evening Dispatch was to be sold at auction after a precarious existence of several years. Mr. Pulitzer bought it for $2,500. When he entered the office the next morning as proprietor of his own newspaper he was unable to find as much as a bushel of coal or a roll of white paper. More complete ruin and decay were never seen in a newspaper office. By impressing into service everybody within reach he managed to get out an issue of 1,000 copies. He set to work at once with characteristic energy to improve the situation.

 At that time the journalistic field in the West was occupied almost exclusively by morning papers. There were two other afternoon papers in St. Louis, The Post and The Star. Within forty-eight hours he had absorbed the Post, and the first number of The Post-Dispatch, which afterward became an enormous success, was issued.

 During this period his political activities continued. In 1880 he was a delegate to the Democratic National Convention, and in 1884 he was elected to Congress from a New York district. The duties of this position so interfered with his journalistic affairs that he resigned after a few months' service.

 Buys The New York World

 It was just at this time, in fact, that he bought the New York World from Jay Gould. The World had never made a striking success. It had been started in June, 1880, as a penny paper of absolutely blameless features, eschewing in its make-up intelligence of scandals, divorces, and even dramatic news. Its backing was ample, but it failed to make money. Mr. Pulitzer bought this moribund paper and took possession May 10, 1883. Enormous difficulties confronted him from the start.

 By the adoption of methods similar to those he had employed in St. Louis, however, Mr. Pulitzer soon had The World on a paying basis. Of these beginnings The World itself recently said:

 He was unable to expend large sums of money in the gathering of news, for the very excellent reason that he did not have it to spend. He did instill life and energy into every department of the paper on the very first day of his proprietorship, and in no part was the change in the character of matter printed more noticeable than in the news columns. But it is a fact, patent to any one who will turn over the files for that year, that the first impetus given to the new World came from the editorial page. To this Mr. Pulitzer gave his personal and almost undivided attention, and by this agency first impressed upon the public mind the fact that a new, vigorous, and potent moral force had sprung up in the community.

 Of late years Mr. Pulitzer's health had not been of the best, his old eye trouble making impracticable the prolonged devotion to work that characterized his early career. He had been obliged to spend much of his time abroad or at his country seat at Bar Harbor. But his hand was felt directing the destinies of The World, no matter in what corner of the globe he happened to be.

 Mr. Pulitzer had one of the most expensive households in America. He had a home in East Seventy-third Street, a fine estate at Bar Harbor, and another country place on Jekyl Island, off the Georgia coast.

 Also he usually had two or three places abroad under lease, and a 1,500-ton steam yacht that added $100,000 a year to his expenditures.

 His blindness made it necessary for him to have a large personal staff. No man kept more closely in touch with what was going on in the world, and all the information had to come to him by word of mouth.

 He could not read; he could not distinguish the faces of those about him. He could only listen and think.

 Of his homes he liked Bar Harbor best, and often remained there long after the Winter snow was on the ground.

 In Summer he rose early, and if the weather was fine he breakfasted on his own private veranda with his physician and companion, who told him the important events in the day's news. Then came an exhausting business session with his private secretary, which usually lasted two hours. Then, becoming weary and needing the air and sunshine, he went out to drive or to ride in an electric launch, ever bidding the boatman to head into the breeze.

 Then he was ready to work with his newspaper secretary, who had been going over the newspapers since early morning, digesting not only The World, but its contemporaries. Sometimes he had a visitor from the office, maybe the chief editorial writer or the managing editor or a reporter.

 This session usually lasted about two hours, and then Mr. Pulitzer was ready for luncheon with the family.

 In his entourage was usually a professional pianist, usually a German. After two hours of music Mr. Pulitzer had one of his staff read to him, usually a novel, until he was ready to sleep.

 When in New York he rode through Central Park early in the morning, but the hours were even more crowded with work. He completely tired out every one of his men who was associated with him. Also, he kept them busy when they were away from him. His own capacity for work was so enormous that he thought the tasks that would be play for him were equally easy for others.

 Since attaining affluence Mr. Pulitzer had given considerable sums to philanthropy, chiefly in the cause of education. To the City of New York he gave a dozen or more free scholarships of $250 each for poor pupils anxious to gain a college education. In making this annual gift Mr. Pulitzer said:

 My especial object is to help the poor; the rich can help themselves. I believe in self- made men. But it is not the aim of this plan to help people for ordinary money-making purposes. College education is not needed for that. There are nobler purposes in life, and my hope is not that these scholarships will make better butchers, bakers, brokers and bank cashiers, but that they will help to make teachers, scholars, physicians, authors, journalists, Judges, lawyers, and statesmen. They certainly ought to increase, not diminish, the number of those who, under our free institutions, rise from the humblest to the highest positions. I have not entered upon this scheme without careful thought. It was a dream of youth. It is the conviction of experience.

 Subsequently Mr. Pulitzer gave to Columbia University an endowment of $1,000,000 for the establishment of a school of journalism, which it has been understood would be utilized after his death.

 After he had become wealthy he often referred to his early struggles in conversation with his intimates. One night while strolling about the city with Col. John A. Cockerill, one of The World's editors, he pointed to a bench in Madison Square on which a poor, decayed specimen of humanity was stretched. "That," he said, "is where I also slept many a night. I had no bed when I first came to this city; I had no roof over my head. Every pleasant night until I found employment I slept upon that bench, and my summons to breakfast was frequently the rap of a policeman's club." "What did you do about rainy nights?" asked Cockerill. "Come with me," was the answer. Mr. Pulitzer took his companion nearly two miles further down Broadway, and, turning into Park Place, showed him a number of truck which were placed there every evening on account of the insufficiency of stable room in that locality. These vehicles were long and broad and roomy, and, while the bed of cobblestones beneath them was not altogether soft, yet it was drier than that furnished by an uncovered bench. Pointing beneath one of these, Mr. Pulitzer said: "Under such a wagon as that and on that spot I slept on rainy nights."

 Mr. Pulitzer was married in 1877 to Miss Kate Davis of Washington, a niece of Jefferson Davis. He leaves five children, Joseph Pulitzer, Jr., Ralph, Herbert, Constance, and Edith.

 Ralph Pulitzer married Miss Frederica Vanderbilt Webb, daughter of W. Seward Webb, in 1905. Joseph Pulitzer, Jr., was married last year. His wife was Miss Eleanor Wickham of St. Louis. Mr. Pulitzer's daughters are both unmarried.

 Little London Comment

 News of Mr. Pulitzer's Death Reached There Too Late

 Special Cable to THE NEW YORK TIMES

 LONDON, Oct. 30.--The news of the death of Joseph Pulitzer reached London too late for editorial comment in this morning's papers. In fact, only one paper received the news in time for publication in the regular editions. This was The Daily Mail, which prints half a column obituary, reciting the facts of Mr. Pulitzer's life.

 The Times briefly announces the death in a late edition, following it with a short record of Mr. Pulitzer's career, in which it says: "Journalism was the work of his life. The World, under Mr. Pulitzer's management, attained not only a huge circulation but the reputation of being the yellowest journal in the United States of America, a supremacy which even to-day is only challenged by Mr. Hearst's American."

 Praise of Pulitzer as a Journalist

 Originator of the Journalism of Action and Achievement, Says W. R. Hearst

 His Work for the People

 Full Testimony to Its Value Given by Editors the Country Over--Lessons of His Life

 By WILLIAM RANDOLPH HEARST

 Proprietor of The New York American

 Joseph Pulitzer was the founder and foremost exemplar of modern journalism--the great originator and exponent of the journalism of action and achievement.

 In his conception, the newspaper was not merely a money-making machine. It was the instrument of the will and power of its hundreds of thousands of readers, the fulcrum upon which that power could be exerted in the accomplishment of broad and beneficial results.

 Jospeh Pulitzer knew the necessity of making his newspapers financially successful, and he was an able business man, but it is as a great editor that he will be most honored and remembered.

 Joseph Pulitzer was a Democrat in doctrine and in deed. He came from the people, understood the aims and aspirations of the people, sympathized with the sentiments of the people, and labored to express in his newspapers the popular need and the popular will.

 Not the great success which Joseph Pulitzer achieved nor the great wealth which he accumulated, nor his association with men of selfish purposes and class prejudices, ever deprived him of his essential democracy or calloused him to the requirements of the democratic masses.

 The cause of the people Joseph Pulitzer and his newspapers ever espoused ably and intelligently, sympathetically and powerfully. In his death journalism has lost a leader, the people a champion, the

 Nation a valuable citizen.

 May his sons continue his far-reaching work for their father's greater glory, for their own reputation and for the public good.

 WILLIAM RANDOLPH HEARST

 By OSWALD GARRISON VILLARD

 Proprietor of The Evening Post

 Mr. Pulitzer's death removes a remarkable figure in American journalism. It is too soon to pass a final judgment upon his career or his influence upon the profession. Nor would such a critical estimate be fitting from an individual at this hour. But it may be permitted me to say that the evolution of The World into a fearless, outspoken, independent newspaper, with a trenchant editorial page, has made it an invaluable force on the side of the people in their battle against special privilege and that form of "legalized graft" known as protective tariff. For this Mr. Pulitzer must long be gratefully remembered, however, one may have differed from him in matters of journalistic taste or dissent from some other form his journalism has taken.

 OSWALD GARRISON VILLARD

 By ST. CLAIR McKELWAY

 Editor of The Brooklyn Eagle

 I have known Mr. Pulitzer for many years, and think I knew him pretty well. He always gave to me the impression of a man of great force, far vision, extraordinary audacity of thought, strong confidence in himself, and rare power to discern the currents and quicken the velocity of public opinion. He was peremptory, versatile, untiring, and could stamp his views so indelibly on his co-workers as to make them feel they had always been their views, which he had drawn out of them, instead of forced into them by his dynamic personality. In finance, or exploration, or manufacturing, or any grand division of resourcefulness he might have addressed his genius and energy to results as single and signal as those he wrought in journalism.

 The latter calling, however, enabled what was within him to be expended on what was without him. The reciprocal impact of events and himself on one another produced effects of which the news pages of his paper were the evidence, pages in which he contributed not a little and to which he inspired his co-workers to contribute to the limit of his power to affect them and of their ambition as his unconscious imitators and understands to rival, please, and if possible, exceed him. That was the executive, achieving, creative, or magnified and picturesque news side of him.

 The editorial side of him, if I may so differentiate, was essentially idealistic. His red-hot earnestness on that side was extraordinary. What he saw or foresaw he did not wait for the trailing pace of slower intelligences gradually to approach. His was a glorious impatience and a magnificent precipitancy. Nor did it matter to him that his latest convictions might conflict with his former and discarded impressions. Them he could shed as events showed they were partial and imperfect. His trend was forward. His sentiency was acute. His political ideality was a part of his genius, his optimism, his intellectual mutability, his scorn for sheer consistency which he estimated as an infirmity of mediocre minds, opaque to vision, and regarding Deity as worthy of worship only as Deity was a slight extension of themselves.

 I knew Mr. Pulitzer as well as he allowed those he had no purpose to use to know him. Yet I doubt I knew him thoroughly, for he had reserves of intent and of intensity that those nearer to him than I could probably better know or more accurately surmise than I. Affairs, journalism, all divisions of energy and endeavor will miss him, but journalism can be glad to know that his paper was left to his successors in such form and under such conditions as will enable them to continue his work on the lines of his better or best sense, to which he always would have his staff attain and always regretted if he ever, under the temperature of interest or of passion or of competition, failed himself to attain.

 ST. CLAIR McKELWAY

 By HENRY L. STODDARD

 Publisher of The Evening Mail

 Joseph Pulitzer was the most aggressive and forceful figure in the journalism of his day and will always rank among the greatest the country has ever known. With tremendous earnestness he devoted his whole life to his calling, sacrificing friendship and all else to the one purpose of making a newspaper that drew its strength solely from the people and gave back that strength solely and intensely in the people's interest.

 Mr. Pulitzer knew no other interest and had no other. Nothing was permitted to stand between him and his sense of public duty. He attacked fearlessly and pursued relentlessly. He was often wrong, cruelly wrong, but he was much oftener right and his career is marked with triumphs that are notable advances in popular government.

 HENRY L. STODDARD

 By Gen. FELIX AGNUS

 Publisher of The Baltimore American and The Baltimore Star

 BALTIMORE, Md., Oct. 29.--American journalism has lost one of its ablest leaders by the death of Mr. Joseph Pulitzer. While I could not approve all of his methods and policies, I recognized in him a strong force that made for the real advancement of the press of the whole country. Some of his achievements were well-nigh marvelous and aroused in others a determination to match his successes by similar successes of their own. He took The New York World when it was well-nigh moribund, and transformed it into one of the best newspapers in the United States. Such a man can have no monument equal to the great paper that he made.

 FELIX AGNUS

 By CHARLES GRASTY

 Editor of The Baltimore Sun

 BALTIMORE, Md., Oct. 29.--Mr. Pulitzer was an editor with a sense of public responsibility. He had a genuine sympathy with and friendship for the people. Whatever may be thought of his judgment of news and his method of presenting it, his newspapers were always vital and vibrant. He was a great and fearless editor, knowing neither friend nor foe, and contemptuous of business office considerations.

 The last years of his life were clouded by physical affliction and suffering that would have broken any but a dauntless spirit.

 CHARLES GRASTY

 By JOHN R. McLEAN

 Owner of The Cincinnati Enquirer and The Washington Post

 WASHINGTON, Oct. 29.--Mr. Pulitzer's death is a loss to journalism. Always to the fore in journalistic enterprises, fearless in the conduct of his paper, he will be long remembered. Vigorous in thought and action, he was always to be reckoned with. Most able in the editorial room, he had full knowledge of the details of his great business. He was by nature a partisan. He had strong likes and dislikes. His great ability was acknowledged by all who knew him. His sons will be worthy successors of their great father.

 JOHN R. McLEAN

 By H. H. KOHLSAAT

 Publisher of The Chicago Record-Herald

 CHICAGO, Oct. 29.--The success of the great publications which he made such powerful factors in modern newspaperdom tells the story of Joseph Pulitzer's dominating characteristics better than any other possible eulogy. The story of his rise from poverty and obscurity to affluence and power is proof that there is opportunity in this country for those who are capable and ambitious.

 H. H. KOHLSAAT

 By GEORGE WHEELER HINMAN

 Editor of The Chicago Inter Ocean

 CHICAGO, Oct. 29.--The death of Joseph Pulitzer is a serious loss to journalism. His fairness in his business dealing and his editorial policy stand unparalleled. His success in building up the greatest newspaper in the country should stand as a monument. He overcame great odds and won in the face of criticism. His success, attributed to a never- varying principle of justice, is his vindication.

 GEORGE WHEELER HINMAN

 By HORATIO W. SEYMOUR

 Editor of The St. Louis Republic

 ST. LOUIS, Mo., Oct. 29.--In three respects Joseph Pulitzer's influence upon American journalism was very great. He systematized and established sensation; he was the most consistent advocate of the newspaper's duty of public service; he did a great deal to destroy the old idea of party organ grinding. There were some serious faults in his journalistic code, but it had distinguished virtues also which will live.

 HORATIO W. SEYMOUR

 By W. R. NELSON

 Owner of The Kansas City Star

 KANSAS CITY, Mo., Oct. 29.--Joseph Pulitzer, I believe, was the leading journalist of his day, the pioneer in modernizing the newspaper. It was his discovery that newspapers must be entertaining. His energy, ability, and originality in applying this idea brought unprecedented success to The World and made a lasting impression on journalism. Even newspapers that believed his methods extreme could not escape being profoundly influenced by them. Blind and ill as he was much of his life, he was a tremendous factor in American affairs.

 W. R. NELSON

 By VICTOR ROSEWATER

 Editor of The Omaha Bee

 OMAHA, Neb., Oct. 29.--I believe Joseph Pulitzer will be ranked by all historians with the foremost of American journalists, and that he has impressed his personality upon American newspaper making more than any other one man. Although self-made, he saw the possibilities of a journalistic profession, as is attested by his foundation for a school of journalism in conjunction with Columbia University.

 The resolution offered by me and adopted by the Associated Press in 1903 congratulating him upon his purpose was recognition of this far-sightedness.

 VICTOR ROSEWATER

 Praise by the Press for Mr. Pulitzer

 Called a Newspaper Genius Who Brought New Life Into American Journalism

 Active in Public Welfare

 His Championship of the People Meets General Approbation--How He Sobered The

 World

 From The New York World

 A man of wide culture, commanding intellect and compelling genius died yesterday in Joseph Pulitzer.

 That he was much more than this by reason of his tireless zeal in the public service, The World is the imperfect but sincere witness. This paper is his chief life-work. It has been his absorbing passion, not as an end, but solely as a means to the expression of his ideas and ideas for human welfare.

 Mr. Pulitzer brought from his Old World association with social wrongs and political abuses a deeper appreciation of free government than most men feel who were born to a share in its birthright. He brought also a high regard for order and authority, and this grew stronger with him to the end. He saw no true progress without law; no true growth without justice; no true democracy that was not broad enough to shelter all.

 He saw in our Government of checked and balanced powers the highest type of human administration yet devised; and against strange new doctrines, whether of executive usurpation, or of short-cuts to hasty popular action, or of conquest and dominion over men of other lands and races, he burned as a living flame.

 Not this the place or time to tell of Joseph Pulitzer's great services to peace; of the lash he laid upon corruption in high place; of his practical and persistent leadership in movements of political reform or public purification, of his intense devotion to liberty and his passionate hatred of wrong and injustice. These are an inseparable part of the history of the United States for thirty years.

 We would do-day dwell rather upon his many manifestations of warm-hearted interest in lesser things that would smooth the path of the helpless, but that will never live in the formal records.

 Of what has been good in The World more is due to Mr. Pulitzer's power and his personal attention than most men would deem possible, noting his heavy handicap of physical infirmity and his long wanderings in search of health. Of its shortcomings he had been the keenest critic, and his interest was unflagging to the very day of his death. The cable and the telegraph have brought to it his constant guidance, his ever-ready protest against hasty judgment, his inspiration to endeavor. The high ideal he set for himself he better told than any one can tell for him when from his sick-bed at Wiesbaden, the day the corner-stone of the Pulitzer

 Building was laid, Oct. 10, 1889, he cabled to The World this message:

 God grant that this structure be the enduring home of a newspaper forever unsatisfied with merely printing news--forever fighting every form of Wrong--forever Independent-- forever advancing in Enlightenment and Progress--forever wedded to truly Democratic ideas--forever aspiring to be a Moral Force---forever rising to a higher plane of perfection as a Public Institution.

 God grant that The World may forever strive toward the Highest Ideals--be both a daily schoolhouse and a daily forum, both a daily teacher and a daily tribune, and instrument of Justice, a terror to crime, an aid to education, an exponent of true Americanism.

 Let it ever be remembered that this edifice owes its existence to the public; that its architect is popular favor; that its cornerstone is Liberty and Justice; that its every stone comes from the people and represents public approval for public services rendered.

 God forbid that the vast army following the standard of The World should in this or in future generations ever find it faithless to those ideas and moral principles to which alone it owes its life and without which I would rather have it perish. That Mr. Pulitzer himself lived by these precepts and died true to them the editorial page and policy of The World have been the daily witness for twenty-eight years.

 From The New York Tribune

 Mr. Joseph Pulitzer brought to this city from the West new ideas and a definite purpose, and he had the boldness and energy to carry them out. A pioneer in paths which have become familiar, he proved that a very large constituency was ready to welcome a newspaper of the kind which he was prepared to produce.

 The methods which he employed were unpleasing to a great number of good citizens, partly, no doubt, because they exemplified a passion for publicity which shocked conservative instincts; and that antagonism, which he probably regarded as a decoration rather than a reproach, has not disappeared. But we think that in recent years there has been little disposition to underrate the value of the services which the World has rendered, not without unwarranted judgments and grave mistakes, to the general advancement of civic and political morality. Nor, however opinions might otherwise differ, has it been possible not to feel sympathy and admiration for a man who never permitted physical disabilities of a peculiarly depressing nature to impede the activities of a keen and powerful mind.

 From The New York Herald

 The death of Mr. Joseph Pulitzer ends a remarkable and dramatic career. His life was a romance, showing what can be accomplished in a country like America. He came to the United States a young man, very poor, quite unknown, and the unthinking who met him at that time might have said hopelessly handicapped. But instead of being handicapped he was powerfully equipped with wonderful originality, phenomenal insight, and bewildering energy. He was essentially the architect of his own fortune. When he reached the zenith of his power about twenty-four years ago he was 40 years old. Few men ever accomplished so much at that age.

 From The New York Press

 For years newspaper workers have known of the very delicate health of Mr. Joseph Pulitzer, proprietor of The New York World. Yet perhaps the shock of his death came to none with more force than to those of his own calling. And this because, though long virtually blind and sorely tried with other ills, he had continued to be a tremendous power in American journalism and politics.

 By all newspaper men of impartial judgment he was regarded as the foremost editor and publisher of his day. Incomparable was his success in winning readers to his publications. Beyond all other newspaper makers in the United States he held them to his way of thinking. Away from his paper, hundreds of miles in the United States or thousands on the other side of the Atlantic in search of better health, he never took his touch off the intimate details of the huge business of his properties.

 From The Buffalo Express

 Mr. Pulitzer's history differs only in detail from that of many successful newspaper men of his time. At the outset they cut their coat according to their cloth by making the sort of paper that is immediately salable--sensationally yellow, fighting to attract attention, neither too fair nor too truthful. At any rate the sobering process began in The World and has continued until now, when The New York World is one of the fairest and most accurate, as well as one of the most interesting, newspapers in the country. Nor is such virtue its own reward. The World is more prosperous now than it ever was before.

 From The Buffalo Courier

 A great journalist is dead and The World is his monument. His constructive ability was remarkable, so was his industry. Mr. Pulitzer's career closed before he became an old man, as literary and professional men are classed. The World's history and Mr. Pulitzer's for the last twenty-eight years are closely identified. He made his newspaper one of the powers of the continent. His clear understanding of the American people and their institutions, and his abundant genius gained him his extraordinary success.

 From The Boston Globe

 One of the giants of journalism, not only of this country, but of the world, passed on to his reward when Joseph Pulitzer died yesterday.

 His career ws one of the most brilliant, inspiring, and successful that has ever been known in the journalism of the world. From the time he started as a reporter in St. Louis he showed positive genius as a journalist. No obstacle was too great for him to overcome. He had the nerve to buy a bankrupt newspaper, which was sold by auction for $2,000, and in a few years made it a stanch and permanent success. In 1883 he had the pluck to buy a failing newspaper in New York, one which had lost hundreds of thousands of dollars, and in a single year put it on a sound, substantial basis.

 Personally, Mr. Pulitzer was one of the most charming and entertaining men of his time, as those who knew him intimately can readily testify. He was devoted to his profession. He believed in publicity as a means of promoting what was best for the people and to expose graft and wrongdoing. He was ever earnest in promoting with all his mighty power what he believed was for the greatest good of the greatest number.

 From The Springfield Republican

 Joseph Pulitzer had a genius for touching the heart through his newspapers. He was the father of modern yellow journalism, as the elder Bennett was of the earlier type, and he has had a vast influence in creating the character of the press of to-day, a mixture of good and evil qualities, with the evil rather dominating.

 Pulitzer was, however, a sincere Democrat, a real lover of the masses, and he honestly tried to serve them. He had been a valiant fighter in behalf of many popular causes. He had a tender heart and generous instincts, and a strongly sentimental nature. It must in justice be said that he had never attained the editorial influence upon the thought of the country of which he was ambitious.

 From The Pittsburgh Post

 In American journalism Joseph Pulitzer occupied a position that was unique. He transformed The World from a position of original sensationalism into one of the greatest newspapers of distinctive features that made it one of the most popular of the foremost journals of the country. He possessed a peculiar constructiveness that was his own, and which had an influence on journalism throughout the country.

 From The Cleveland Leader

 One of the greatest journalists that ever controlled an American newspaper or left his impression upon American life has closed a strenuous and brilliant career. Joseph Pulitzer leaves a gap in the public life of his adopted country which will be felt in the profession and out of it.

 It is not necessary to subscribe to Mr. Pulitzer's doctrines as to all great questions or to ignore the faults and mistakes of his able and masterful newspapers in order to recognize the heavy credit balance which his career piled up. He paid well for the opportunities his chosen country gave him. His rise, no less than his services as a great publisher and editor, must be an inspiration to a multitude of ambitious and stout-hearted young men.

 From The Cleveland Plain Dealer

 Joseph Pulitzer was without question one of the most important figures in the history of American journalism. The work that he did was great and varied. But perhaps his greatest achievement was his changing when he knew that the time had come to change.

 Aghast, perhaps, at the storm he had raised, but more probably firmly convinced that "yellowness" and extreme sensationalism could not retain a newspaper permanently in the esteem of the people,

 Mr. Pulitzer executed a remarkable right-about-face. The World editorially became one of the sanest, ablest, most unbiased newspapers ever published. Its news columns, while still delighting in playing the news for all it was worth, lost their distinctive "yellowness."

 The World to-day ranks as one of the most respected newspapers in America. It has quite lived down its former reputation. And, fortunately, Mr. Pulitzer lived to see the rehabilitation made complete.

 From The Charleston News and Courier

 But little known to the public at large, Joseph Pulitzer was nevertheless one of the most remarkable men of his generation. It may well be doubted whether any other exercised so extended an influence upon the journalism of the last thirty years. The transformation which was wrought in newspaper methods under his leadership is a story familiar to many. Not so generally known, but if anything more extraordinary, has been the manner in which Mr. Pulitzer has gained and controlled during the last twenty years the great newspaper property which he brought into existence.

 From The Boston Post

 With the death of Joseph Pulitzer, the greatest figure in American journalism passes from the scene.

 There have been notable newspaper men before him--Bennett, Greely, Raymond, Dana, Childs, Medill, and others, men of wonderful sagacity, capacity, and enterprise. But for the most part they were men of high development in one particular direction. Mr. Pulitzer had a many-sided personality, and he excelled in almost every direction.

 

