March 22, 1915

 OBITUARY

 F. W. Taylor, Expert in Efficiency, Dies

 BY THE NEW YORK TIMES

 PHILADELPHIA, March 21--Frederick Winslow Taylor, originator of the modern scientific management movement, died here today from pneumonia. He was 59 years old, and was a former President of the American Society of Mechanical Engineers. Among his numerous inventions and discoveries was the Taylor-White process of treating modern high-speed tools. He was the author of articles on scientific efficiency, and installed his system in many large industrial establishments.

 The writings and lectures of Frederic Winslow Taylor formed the basis of the recent reorganization of methods of handling labor In many of the largest industries in the country. The articles of Mr. Taylor on "Scientific Management" in 1911 had a good deal to do with giving its new, special meaning to the word "efficiency" and making it the watchword which it has become since that time.

 One of his leading doctrines which has made a deep impression on business and industry in this country since that time is that a man who proves incompetent at one job should be fitted in where he can give good service, instead of being discharged. His life work was chiefly devoted to the simplification of industrial processes to reduce costs and increase outputs.

 Mr. Taylor was born at Germantown, Philadelphia, on March 20, 1856, and was graduated from Stevens Institute of Technology in 1883. He won the doubles championship of the United States at tennis at Newport in 1881. He entered the employ of the Midvale

 Steel Company at Philadelphia in 1878 and was successively gang boss, assistant foreman, foreman of the machine shop, master mechanic, chief draughtsman, and chief engineer.

 In 1889 he began his special work of reorganizing the management of manufacturing establishments. A plant that he made over was made over from top to bottom. He laid out the system from the duties of the boy who carried drinking water to the unskilled laborers to the duties of the President, giving his solution to the problems of shop, office, accounting department and sales department, and emphasizing the necessity for the humane treatment of labor. Some of the big shops into which he introduced his theories of scientific management are the Bethlehem Steel Company, Cramp's Shipbuilding Company, and the Midvale Steel Company.

 For his invention of the Taylor-White process of treating modern high-speed tools he received a gold medal from the Paris Exposition of 1900. He had received about 100 patents for various inventions, many of which are in general use.

 He was President of the American Society of Mechanical Engineers in 1905 and 1906. He was the author of technical books and articles, but is best known by "The Principles of Scientific Management" and "Shop Management," both published in 1911.

 

