December 12, 1941

 OBITUARY

 Dr. Frank Conrad, Radio Pioneer, Dies

 Special to The New York Times

 MIAMI, Fla., Dec. 11--Dr. Frank Conrad, since 1921 assistant chief engineer of the Westinghouse Electric and Manufacturing Company of Pittsburgh, whose interest in wireless telegraphy led to the founding of Station KDKA, pioneer broadcast station, died here today in his Winter home, 1277 North Venetian Way, at the age of 67.

 He suffered a heart attack on Nov. 6 while driving here from Pittsburgh, and had been under a physician's care since. A funeral service will be held at the home in Pittsburgh on Monday.

 Dr. Conrad leaves a widow, Mrs. Flora Selheimer Conrad; two sons, Francis H. Conrad of New York and Crawford Conrad of Pittsburgh, and a daughter, Mrs. Edwin Durham of Massillon, Ohio.

 Airplane Radio Used in War

 Special to The New York Times

 PITTSBURGH, Dec. 11--Dr. Conrad devised the only airplane radio set to see much action during the World War.

 His connection with radio dates back to 1912, when he put together a crude receiving set which picked up time signals sent out at regular intervals by the naval radio station in Washington.

 After the war Dr. Conrad returned to his garage radio station and started broadcasting two-hour phonograph recordings twice a week. These programs gave the late Dr. Harry P. Davis the idea that regular broadcasts would be the means of creating a new field for radio development. They joined and created Pittsburgh's radio station KDKA.

 Radio Broadcast's "Father"

 Dr. Conrad, who was known as "the father of radio broadcasting," was born May 4, 1874, in Pittsburgh, the son of a railroad mechanic who sneered at formal education, but who had great faith in the worth of handicrafts. Thus, when he had finished the seventh grade at the Starrett Grammar School there, he was already imbued with a love for tools. He got a job in October, 1890, as a bench hand in the original plant of the Westinghouse Company in Garrison Alley.

 When his boss, Philip Lange, went to Europe he left young Conrad in charge of the deserted laboratory to watch over the apparatus. Left to himself, the youth began experimenting. He was an adept learner, soon astounding his older colleagues with his ability, and by the time he was 23 had invented the round-type electric meter for Westinghouse which is now in universal use.

 One day Dr. Conrad heard signals that were in no known code. These he traced to the home of John Coleman, a wireless experimenter, who had made them by toying with a spark coil. They became friends, built sets and began communicating with each other.

 During the World War Dr. Conrad was drafted. In service he built an airplane radio apparatus, one of the first of its kind, and also devised a special hand grenade and thrower.

 Commercial Radio Launched

 After the war he again took up his hobby of wireless. He enlarged his home-made station in his garage, and soon began broadcasting phonograph records, having tired of conversing with other wireless fans.

 When he ran out of records he borrowed some from a local music store, which stipulated he must tell his listeners where he got them--the first "sponsored broadcast."

 Later his sons began putting on home talent programs, enlisting amateur singers. One day a department store advertised sets on which you could hear the Conrad programs. This advertisement gave the inventor an idea. He in turn gave the idea to the Westinghouse publicity department. Westinghouse got a license for Station KDKA from the Federal radio authorities, a new station was built at East Pittsburgh and commercial radio was launched.

 

