"Ave Maria, A Tale" Burgess, Marie Louise 1895 Novella
" Rugged strength and radiant beauty — These were one in nature's plan : Humble toil and heavenward duty — These will make the perfect man."

Mrs. Hall The bells of St. Cecelia's Church rang at the close of vespers one joyous Lenten evening; the priest had pronounced his blessing and all had departed in peace. The old organist was playing the sweet strains of Ave Maria, Dolorosa, as he sat at the organ which was built in the right side of the chancel.

The strains soft and sweet fell on the still air, filling the church with an air of Heaven. One could not listen to Ave Maria without a feeling akin to sadness, stealing over him. Just outside the chancel railing, knelt a beautiful girl with the bloom of youth stamped on her rosy cheeks. A girl over whom, perhaps, twenty-one years had rolled, with large, dreamy, blue eyes, which had a glad light of their own in them. On this particular evening the bright eyes were filled with tears ; her heart was full of sorrow. Hers was not an unhappy face; a shadow apparently had fallen over her young life. As we find her, her attitude bespeaks a keen sorrow,— she kneels with head bowed and hands uplifted.

" O Father," she prayed as she knelt, " help me to bear my burden, help me to do the right. What would it profit me to gain the desire of my heart ? yet, how can I yield ! No, come what may I must bear my burden. Holy Mother, help me to do the right;" thus she prayed.

Again the sweet strains of Ave Maria swelled on the still air, fainter and fainter became each note till at last they died away. Silently the organist withdrew, and Marguerite Earle was left alone. We picture her just as the twilight deepens. The sun had long since sunk to rest, and only a faint light was visible. The windows of the Cathedral which were beautiful by daylight were more so in the twilight. One indeed must have a hard heart who could pass these pictures without a feeling of adoration for the Saviour stealing over him. The beautiful head was still bowed and the brown ringlets fell unconsciously around her face. Thus she knelt struggling against fate.

Every brick in this church was sacred to Marguerite. It was within these sacred walls that she was brought when only a few days old to receive her name, and when twelve years of age to receive the Rite of Confirmation and make her First Communion. Year after year she had knelt before the altar, and as she grew in years, and strength of mind and body, her love for this church grew stronger. She had watched her brothers grow up in this church, and they knew no other. Now with a weight of sorrow she knelt once more before the alter. How long she knelt there she knew not. She remembered nothing until a hand was laid gently on her bowed head, and when she looked up she saw Sister Dorothea looking earnestly at her.

" My child," she asked with gentleness, " what has caused thy sorrow ? Leave all your grief here and go forth as one anew, your Heavenly Father does. not intend such anguish."

Slowly Marguerite lifted her tear-stained face, and looking at the sister, said, " I cannot, my heart will break."

She told the sweet sister the cause of her grief; the sister smiled as she said : " Such grief seldom kills, do your duty and God will bless you."

The girl arose and with the hand of the sister gently clasped in hers, went towards the door. Smiling through her tears, she said to her: "Good-night, dear sister ; thank you for your kindness."

Her heart seemed lighter as homeward she turned. No mother came forth to share her sorrow, no one in whom she might confide. The children were asleep. She stole quietly into the room where little Jamie lay, sleeping that peaceful sleep of a child who knows no sorrow. Jamie was only about two years old when their mother died, and Marguerite had cared for him as only a loving sister can care for a baby brother. She smoothed back the curls from the tiny brow, and the tears began to fall gently on the bed. Littie Jamie stirred in his sleep, and Marguerite tripped gently out of the room. The happiest days of her life had been spent here as well as some of the saddest.

" I am very sad to-night," she said, as she sat in the little parlor thinking of her home and her pleasant surroundings. " I must be brave and make my decision. How can I look in those honest eyes and tell him ? How can I bear to see one cloud on that noble brow? Would I might give him the answer for which he pleads, but cost what it may I must not break my promise to my dying mother. Kneeling at her bedside, with the little ones around me, I promised to be faithful to my church and to train my little brothers as she had trained me. If, then, they choose a better, a different path, I will have done my duty. Had I foreseen what it would cost me, I wonder if I could have made the promise ? Mother died happy but her little daughter is miserable, not only one heart is crushed but two must suffer. Ronald's dear mother would not have him change his religion, it would break her heart and we must make the most of my decision." Just then the wicket gate swung open, a step which Marguerite must have recognized was heard on the porch, and she looked up and smiled.

"May I come in?" she heard some one ask.

" Certainly, Ronald, she answered. I have been expecting you."

" Expecting me ? what news ! " then you are pleased to see me ?

" Yes, Ronald, I am more pleased than ever before, for I know it will be a long time, if ever we meet again. It is very hard to say this, and to you, one whom I have loved from childhood. It does not seem possible for me to leave my dear old home, my loving friends and the associations of my childhood, but it must come."

" And why, Margie ? " asked Ronald, looking into her face, you have not ceased to care for me.

" No, nor never will; but you remember how we are divided, to some it seems trifling, but to me, brought up as I have been in my faith, I cannot change. When I think of it I feel as though I sin in thought, and mamma made ; me promise never to leave my church. I cannot, and yet your love for your faith is as strong as mine, so there is nothing for us to do but to part."

Ronald is surprised at such words from Marguerite. He thought her love for him was greater than her religion. He thought all he had to do was to plead his cause and be accepted. Alas, a bitter disappointment. Marguerite does not look up. The sweet face is lowered to hide the blushes, but he who knew for whom they were meant walked gently to her side and lifted her face in his hands. Never before had she seemed so dear to him. For years he had loved her, and no one else had ever had one thought. She was a Catholic and he a Presbyterian. In her eyes he was a perfect man, her ideal; but the training of her youth kept them divided.

" Margie, is it true you will let the question of religion divide us? Must we, who love each other so dearly, be separated because of that? God meant us for each other. He does not intend us to have this chasm divide us. If we are only true to Him we will see Him at last. Although we worship in different churches, there is but one gate ; all must enter through it. I do not feel worthy to touch a hair in your head, yet the love of an honest heart I freely give you."

" Ronald, it is useless. I cannot leave the doctrines of the church in which I was trained. I am grieved to know our paths in life must lie in different directions. You are all in all to me. I fear sometimes you have been almost my idol."

"Margie, do you think you can conquer fate ?"

" I would that I could. Why can't you come into my church ?"

" Remember, Margie, my dear old mother who trained me in the doctrines of her church ; it would hasten her end were I to change. Remember the depth of the chasm between Catholicism and the other religions. Were it any other church we would have no need of all this unhappiness. It is one God we serve; I wish it were through only one church. One of us must yield. Which shall it be ?"

" Ronald, I cannot leave my church. I realize the sacredness of my promise. I release you. Let us both forget this happy dream which ends so cruelly and abruptly."

" O, woman ! in our hours of ease, Uncertain, coy, ami hard to please, And variable as the shade.

By the light quivering aspen glade When pain and anguish rack the brow, A ministering angel art thou."—SCOTT.

Once more the bells of St. Cecelia's Church chime out in the twilight; once more the sweet face of Marguerite Earle is seen among its worshippers. It will perhaps be a very long time before her sweet voice will join in the "Pater Noster" in this church. To-morrow she will go to the House of Mercy to become a trained nurse. We would not recognize the soft, brown hair of a month ago, for her hair is as white as snow, and falls over her forehead in little ringlets ; her face has a placid expression, and her soul seems to show itself in her clear, blue eyes. Strange it may seem, but nevertheless a month had wrought many changes in Mar-guerite. After vespers she went to the grave of her dear mother, whose spirit was always with her, although tw'o years ago she had watched them carry her to her last resting place. Her tears fell like rain as she knelt by the side of the mound covered with the early grasses of spring. The stars had slowly come out, the moon rose, still she knelt, her sad face bowed as if whispering to her, who lay beneath : " Mother, could you speak to me, I fancy you would sanction the step which I have taken, and say, in your gentle manner, ' Marguerite, I know you are right. The hopes of your youth may be blasted, you may be destined to wander alone through the world, yet not alone, for your Heavenly Father has promised never to forsake you if you serve Him." How hard to believe this, even though we know it be true.

" Ronald must not be my idol. There are few idols which do not become shattered. Every rose is surrounded by its many thorns. Every heart must be bruised and bled, would that I had never known this."

The dew began to fall heavily on the grass, the silence was marked, and the chilly night air warned Marguerite to hasten home ere she too might meet an early death. No sleep came to her eyes: her little brother came before her, but she never flinched from duty. In the morning she started for the hospital; how strange for one so young and lovely. When she entered the ward she wore a blue and white gown. She seemed an angel sent to minister to suffering humanity. Her touch was pleasant, her countenance bespoke sweetness itself. Could the people help loving her? Could they help missing her at home ? Ah, no ! How sad must have been the home hearts, when no Marguerite gladdened the house with her sweet smile. Each day they missed her more and more. Her home was lonelv without her, but the hospital wards were brighter for her presence. The patients loved her devotedly, and her sister nurses loved her for her gentleness, and wondered at her loveliness. As they looked into those clear, blue eyes they could not help believing a story was hidden in their depths. If you stole upon her unawares, when quiet and alone, you would find her in deep thought, apparently away from this life.

The trials of hospital life , none can realize but those who have been through them. Unless you love your work it is hard to endure its many ups and downs. The poor, suffering creatures whom you see daily, draw the best and kindliest feelings out of you, and the grateful looks on the drawn faces is pleasant to see. One day Marguerite went into a ward where there was a poor woman, whose soul really was in a sadder condition than her body. She was a sinner, one whom Marguerite pitied ; it grieved her to see one astray. She went to the bedside of the poor girl, whose face bore lines of distress and sickness, and asked if the rector of the parish might be allowed to visit her. The young girl shook her head sadly, but Marguerite sent for the rector, who came and ministered to her.

She was motherless and alone in the world, and he pointed her to the mother of our Lord, who was the purest of women, and tried to impress upon her mind that she prayed for all of us with Jesus in Heaven. In the same room with her was a lady who thought kindness the way to win Ellen on the right side. She furnished her with little delicacies, fruit and berries. She once said, " It was worth a hundred dollars just to see Marguerite enter their room and smile. She always brought a ray of sunshine with her."

Thus, through the two years of hospital life she did good to all kinds and classes of people. When at last she left the hospital it was with a feeling of sadness. During that time she saw very little of Ronald. He dared not trust himself to visit her, and she felt that it was better so. His mother grieved for him. She loved Marguerite, but she was a thorough Puritan in her religious principles. With eager eyes and anxious heart, she watched his beautiful brow. She noticed the cloud that had gathered there. He never murmured, but fulfilled his filial duties, and was as kind and thoughtful as ever.

" When I forget that the stars shine in air— When I forget that beauty is in stars— When I forget that love with beauty is -Will 1 forget thee : till then all things else."

— BAILEY'S FESTUS.

Five years have elapsed since Marguerite Earle had left her home for a new work. Now, for the first time, she has returned to the dear ones again. She is sitting in her parlor with the little brother, now a bright child of seven years, on her knee, his little hands sticking with candy, his little face covered with dirt. Little Jamie forgets that Margie might not care to have her face smeared with candy. He proves fair to be a smart boy, and Margie is very proud of him.

While quietly rocking him before the fireplace, there was a fierce pull at the bell, and someone asked if Miss Earle were at home. She went to the door and found Dr. Burton, who wished her to go to a little child who had membranous croup.

Tired from her years of toil and hard nursing, she felt unable to go, but duty stared her in the face, and in a few moments she was on her way. She found her patient, a sweet little girl, suffering intensely. When croup of this form develops in a child it almost always proves fatal. This child had croup in its worst form, and Margie saw no possible way for recovery. She found a fairhaired woman kneeling by the crib, sobbing as if her heart would break.

" My dear woman," Margie said, gently, " I will look after the baby; you must be worn out."

I am heart-broken," the mother answered, sobbing; "my poor little Theresa."

Margie pursuaded her to leave the room, and then, with the doctor, began to work over the baby. They did every thing that human skill could do. It seemed as if the reaper, Death, had marked her for his own. All night long she watched over the dying child, praying that it might be spared for its mother's sake. The father she had not seen, but they told her he had paced the floor all the lonely hours of the night, so great was his anxiety for his little daughter.

In the morning, as Margie went across the hall, she looked up, and there, standing in the doorway of an opposite room, was Ronald Ives. She smiled at him, then hurried back to her patient. Her face became crimson, all the old love awoke, the tender feeling for him returned, and her face was a picture in its confusion.

" What relation was he to this child ? Merciful heaven, he could not be its father." She sighed and shook her head. "Can I be forgotten so soon ? I, who have had no thought for anyone else. Can this be his little child whom I am nursing?" These questions and numerous others flashed through her mind.

Just then Ronald said, in his old, pleasant manner, "Good morning, Margie, I hope you are very well ; you have had a hard night with my little Theresa. I am so glad to have you care for her. I felt as though I could trust her with you. You did not know I had become a benedict. We have just come from abroad, and have not been home a week. I have a sweet, young wife, an English girl, beautiful and accomplished. I try to make her happy. Our little girl is only a year old. I fear I have loved her too dearly. Forgive me for telling you all this, but I know you have forgotten me long before this."

" No, Ronald, that day will never come."

Just then Theresa cried. Margie went to the cradle. A great change had come over little Theresa ; she saw that in a short time the child would be no more. She expected Dr. Burton every minute, and anxiously she listened for his footstep.

" Ronald, has this baby been baptized ?" she asked.

" No, Margie, I am sorry to say."

She took some water and sprinkled it according to the doctrines of her church ; she believed baptism necessary before it died. She knelt and said a few prayers. She felt the little life ebbing away. The mother was prostrated with grief; she could not bear to see her darling suffer. When the doctor came he saw the child sinking fast.

Ronald paced the room like a mad man. God, who doeth ail things for the best, took the child, and left the parents to console each other. How hard it is to resign our loved ones, though it be but for a short time, Marguerite performed the last sad duties as carefully as though it were her own child. When her work was ended she left the parents alone in their sorrow, and returned to her charity patients.

Ronald had married Corinne Payne because he did not know what else to do. His mother begged him not to let her die without seeing someone to care for him and his home, so he married the first sweet girl whom he thought loved him. To say that he loved her would be untrue, yet he was as faithful to her as most men are. He did his duty. He had woed her in that methodical way that the lords of creation often do ; she, simple, trusting woman, believed she had his whole heart. He loved their little daughter, and now she being dead, he felt as though God had taken her because he did not love the mother as he ought. He inwardly resolved to be true to his wife, and never again be disturbed by the sweet face of Marguerite Earle. He had begun to love the Anglican Church, of which Corinne was a member, and accompanied her there whenever she attended service. One Sunday morning, a few months after the death of Theresa, they sat in the Church of the Messiah listening to a communion service. He was very much touched by the solemnity of the occasion. About twenty children were receiving their first communion. The white dresses and veils of the girls made the sight doubly impressive as they knelt before the altar.

The choir sang, " O, Lamb of God, that taketh away the sins of the world, have mercy upon us."

What was there in those words that brought tears to the eyes of Ronald Ives ? What was it that made him weep as he watched his wife kneeling? How many times had he watched Marguerite in the same attitude. He thought, after all, there was something in that religion which he did not have. As he wen t home he said very little, and Corinne was too sensible to disturb his thoughts.

One evening, a few days later, she asked him to be baptized, and promised to be one of his sponsors. He smiled mischieviously as he said : "A wee little wife to be sponsor for me. I will think about it!"

It was not long before Ronald was baptized. How it came about they never knew, and never worried him with enquiries. He was among the candidates for the next confirmation class.

Corinne dared not express herself, for her heart was too full. She determined not to breathe her thoughts until the work was done and the Bishop had laid his hands on Ronald's head.

" The summer day has closed—the sun is set, Well have they done their office, those bright hours. The latest of whose train goes softly out In the red west."—Bryant.

And what of Marguerite ; where is she all the while ?

If you go down in the slums of the city every morning you will see a tall, slender creature clad in dark blue serge, going among the Russians and Italians, ministering to the sick and afflicted. 'These people live like bees in a hive, but as dirty as can be, in the very atmosphere of disease. Sometimes there would be a mother and six or seven small children in two small rooms. Some of these cases are very heart-rending, and one feels as though too much cannot be done for them.

Sweet Marguerite Earle had plodded in this manner for over five weary years. It was beginning to tell on her. Her brothers were well up in the world. The little one was quite grown now, and her heart was filled with gratitude. Home seemed dearer than ever to her. One evening she read among the items of news in one of the daily papers an account of the coming confirmation at the Church of the Messiah. An intense longing filled her heart. " How I would like to go," she said, eagerly. " What a happy Palm Sunday for the candidates." Accordingly, on Palm Sunday evening the church was filled to overflowing, and among the worshippers was Margie. The processional hymn was,. " Ride on, ride on, in majesty ride on!" The procession moved slowly up the aisle, each choir boy bearing a branch of palm. The beautiful evening service was sung by the rector, and the " Magnificat " was never sung more beautifully by the choir boys. The sermon by the bishop was very interesting and touching. He impressed the candidates with the sacredness of the vows they were taking.

As the choir sung " Soldiers of Christ arise, and put your armor on," about forty girls came forward and about fifteen men and boys. Can you imagine the feeling that swelled in Marguerite's bosom as she saw the tall figure of Ronald come forward and kneel. As the bishop laid his hands on his head, one heart offered a prayer of thanks.

Corinne was very happy. Ronald knew the bowed head, and felt that no one was more welcome at the service. When she returned to her home she was happier than she had been for years.

She resumed her duties with a beautiful smile on her countenance; her'work seemed lighter than ever. All these years she had no vacation, and her doctor advised a rest and change of scene. She did not think her patients could spare her, but she decided to rest for a year. She went abroad with some friends and found her trip so pleasant she did not return for two years.

There were two spots especially dear to her—her mother's grave and St. Cecelia's church. As soon as she reached home she went to the church and knelt before the altar, with a heart much lighter than when last she knelt there.

She then turned her steps towards the cemetery. She could not help thinking of the many changes the years had brought. She left the cemetery feeling consecrated anew to the work, more willing than even to take up her life of duty. She forgot herself and her hopes, living only for others.

About ten years later there was an epidemic of diptheria in the district where she toiled. Patient after patient died of the dread disease.

Marguerite contracted it in its worst form, and was taken home one evening in a very critical condition. A sister came from St. Mary's home to care for her, but her work was finished.

One evening, just as the twilight was deepening and the bells of St. Cecelia's Church chimed once more the close of the vesper service, the soul of sweet Marguerite Earle took its flight into paradise. A smile lighted the wan face as she passed away with her eyes fixed on a picture of the Madonna opposite her bed.

They buried her beside the mother for love of whom she sacrificed so much, and when years after, a gray-haired man knelt by her grave, none knew but himself why he wept so bitterly.

THE END.