Of One Blood ; or, The Hidden Self, by Miss Hopkins

COLOREDAMERICAN MAGAZINE 

15 Cents a Number November, 1902 $1.50 a Year. 

OF ONE BLOOD. 



"Don't go home, uncle Sam. Drive 

directly to lawyer Payson's." Payson 

was a colored attorney and a friend of the 

Browne family. 

******* 

"Oh my God! my God! It's all a 
d — d lie they have concocted. Mr. Pay- 
son, for God's sake, can't you do any- 
thing?" 

"I didn't say I couldn't do anything, 
James. Be quiet. Let us talk the matter 
over calmly, like sensible men. You 
know Miss Browne and I are engaged 
and were to be married this month. Why 
should not my grief and indignation be 
as great as yours ?" 

"True, Mr. Payson, I forgot. But 
come, I can't stand this any longer. 
We'll go to the jail and— " 

A terrible uproar was heard up the 
street, cursing and firing of guns and 
pistols. 

"James," and Payson spoke with a 
strangely suppressed voice, "look in that 
drawer near you." He obeyed and a 
couple of loaded revolvers were pro- 
duced. "This evening," continued Pay- 
son, "I urged you to be calm and 
sensible, but this morning I did the most 
imprudent act in my life as the result of my indignation at Ethel's arrest. I wrote 
an article in my paper condemning the outrage in the strongest terms. It is 
my death warrant. I know no way of escape." 

"Never mind, Payson ; I'll die by your side. Ethel is my sister — " 

"And my sweetheart," spoke up the other man, with a strange glitter in his 
eyes. 

******* 

The next day two men riddled with bullets, mutilated parts of the fingers 
and toes having been taken as souvenirs, hung from an old gnarled oak hard by 
the public road, but on their faces, ghastly as they were, lingered a smile, for 
on the following evening a funeral procession, composed of the best citizens of 
the town, passed under these self-same 
oaks to the cemetery, where, in the midst 
of a sorrowing multitude was laid away 
Charles Waite, late clerk in the store of 
Ramseur & Co., Dealers in Dry Goods, 
Notions, etc. 

"Oh, he died like a hero," joyfully 
trumpeted Mrs. Wiggins. 

"Yes," echoed Mrs. Bentley, "killed 
them two desperate 'niggers.' " 



OF ONE BLOOD, * 

OR, THE HIDDEN SELF, 

Pauline Hopkins. 



CHAPTER I. 

The recitations were over for the day. 
It was the first week in November and it 
had rained about every day the entire 
week; now freezing temperature added 
to the discomforture of the dismal season. 
The lingering equinoctial whirled the 
last clinging yellow leaves from the trees 
on the campus and strewed them over the 

'Copyright, 1902, by Pauline E. Hopkins. 



deserted paths, while from the leaden sky 
fluttering snow-white flakes gave an un- 
expected touch of winter to the scene/ 

The east wind for which Boston and 
vicinity is celebrated, drove the sleet 
against the window panes of the room in 
which Reuel Briggs sat among his books 
and the apparatus for experiments. The 
room served for both living and sleeping. 
Briggs could have told you that the bareness and desolateness of the apartment 
were like his life, but he was a reticent 
man who knew how to suffer in silence. 
The dreary wet afternoon, the cheerless 
walk over West Boston bridge through 
the soaking streets had but served to 
emphasize the loneliness of his position, 
and morbid thoughts had haunted him all 
day : To what use all this persistent hard 
work for a place in the world — clothes, 
food, a roof ? Is suicide wrong ? he asked 
himself with tormenting persistency. 
From out the storm, voices and hands 
seemed beckoning him all day to cut the 
Gordian knot and solve the riddle of 
whence and whither for all time. 

His place in the world would soon be 
filled; no vacuum remained empty; the 
eternal movement of all things onward 
closed up the gaps, and the wail of the 
newly-born augmented the great army of 
mortals pressing the vitals of mother 
Earth with hurrying tread. So he had 
tormented himself for months, but the 
courage was yet wanting for strength to 
rend the veil. It had grown dark early. 
Reuel had not stirred from his room since 
coming from the hospital — had not eaten 
nor drank, and was in full possession of 
the solitude he craved. It was now five 
o'clock. He sat sideways by the bare 
table, one leg crossed over the other. His 
fingers kept the book open at the page 
where he was reading, but his attention 
wandered beyond the leaden sky, the 
dripping panes, and the sounds of the 
driving storm outside. 

He was thinking deeoly of the words he 
"had just read, and which the darkness had 
shut from his gaze. The book was called 
"The Unclassified Residuum," just pub- 
lished and eagerly sought by students of 
mvsticism, and dealing with the great 
field of new discoveries in psychology. 
Briggs was a close student of what might 
t>e termed "absurdities" of supernatural 
phenomena or mysticism, best known to 
the every-day world as "effects of the 



imagination," a phrase of mere dismissal, 
and which it is impossible to make pre- 
cise; the book suited the man's mood. 
These were the words of haunting signifi- 
cance : 

"All the while, however, the phenom- 
ena are there, lying broadcast over the 
surface of history. No matter where 
you open its pages, you find things re- 
corded under the name of divinations, 
inspirations, demoniacal possessions, ap- 
paritions, trances, ecstasies, miraculous 
healing and productions of disease, and 
occult powers possessed by peculiar indi- 
viduals over persons and things in their 
neighborhood. 

"The mind-curers and Christian scien- 
tists, who are beginning to lift up their 
heads in our communities, unquestionably 
get remarkable results in certain cases. 
The ordinary medical man dismisses 
them from his attention with the 
cut-and-dried remark that they are 
'only the effects of the imagination/ But 
there is a meaning in this vaguest of 
phrases. 

"We know a non-hysterical woman 
who in her trances knows facts which 
altogether transcend her possible normal 
consciousness, facts about the lives of 
people whom she never saw or heard of 
before. I am well aware of all the 
liabilities to which this statement exposes 
me, and I make it deliberately, having 
practically no doubt whatever of its 
truth." 

Presently Briggs threw the book down, 
and, rising from his chair, began pacing 
up and down the bare room. 

"That is it," at length he said aloud. 
"I have the power, I know the truth of 
every word — of all M. Binet asserts, and 
could I but complete the necessary ex- 
periments, I would astonish the world. 
O Poverty, Ostracism! have I not 
drained the bitter cup to the dregs!" he 
apostrophized, with a harsh, ironical 
laugh. 



OF ONE BLOOD. 



3i 



Mother Nature had blessed Reuel 
Briggs with superior physical endow- 
ments, but as yet he had never had rea- 
son to count them blessings. No one 
could fail to notice the vast breadth of 
shoulder, the strong throat that upheld 
a plain face, the long limbs, the sinewy 
hands. His head was that of an athlete, 
with close-set ears, and covered with an 
abundance of black hair, straight and 
closely cut, thick and smooth ; the nose 
was the aristocratic feature, although 
nearly spoiled by broad nostrils, of this 
remarkable young man; his skin was 
white, but of a tint suggesting olive, an 
almost sallow color which is a mark of 
strong, melancholic temperaments. His 
large mouth concealed powerful long 
white teeth which gleamed through lips 
even and narrow, parting generally in a 
smile at once grave, genial and singularly 
sweet; indeed Briggs' smile changed 
the plain face at once into one that inter- 
ested and fascinated men and women. 
True there were lines about the mouth 
which betrayed a passionate, nervous 
temperament, but they accorded well 
with the rest of his strong personality. 
His eyes were a very bright and piercing 
gray, courageous, keen and shrewd. 
Briggs was not a man to be despised — 
physically or mentally. 

None of the students associated to- 
gether in the hive of men under the fos- 
tering care of the "benign mother" knew 
aught of Reuel Briggs's origin. It was 
rumored at first that he was of Italian 
birth, then they "guessed" he was a Jap- 
anese, but whatever land claimed him as 
a son, all voted him a genius in his sci- 
entific studies, and much was expected 
of him at graduation. He had no money, 
for he was unsocial and shabby to the 
point of seediness, and apparently no rel- 
atives, for his correspondence was limited 
to the letters of editors of well known lo- 
cal papers and magazines. Somehow he 



lived and paid his way in a third-rate 
lodging-house near Harvard square, at 
the expense of the dull intellects or the 
idle rich, with which a great university 
always teems, to whom Briggs acted as 
"coach," and by contributing scientific 
articles to magazines on the absorbing 
subject of spiritualistic phenomena. A 
few of his articles had produced a pro- 
found impression. The monotonous 
pacing continued for a time, finally end- 
ing at the mantel, from whence he ab- 
stracted a disreputable looking pipe and 
filled it. 

"Well," he soliloquized, as he reseated 
himself in his chair, "Fate has done her 
worst, but she mockingly beckons me on 
and I accept her challenge. I shall not 
yet attempt the bourne. If I conquer, it 
will be by strength of brain and will- 
power. I shall conquer; I must and 
will." 

The storm had increased in violence; 
the early dusk came swiftly down, and 
at this point in his revery the rattling 
window panes, as well as the whistle and 
shriek of gusts of moaning wind, caught 
his attention. "Phew! a beastly night." 
With a shiver, he drew his chair closer to 
the cylinder stove, whose glowing body 
was the only cheerful object in the bare 
room. 

As he sat with his back half-turned to 
catch the grateful warmth, he looked out 
into the dim twilight across the square 
and into the broad paths of the campus, 
watching the skeleton arms of giant trees 
tossing in the wind, and the dancing 
snow-flakes that fluttered to earth in their 
fairy gowns to be quickly transformed in- 
to running streams that fairly overflowed 
the gutters. He fell into a dreamy state 
as he gazed, for which he could not ac- 
count. As he sent his earnest, penetrat- 
ing gaze into the night, gradually the 
darkness and storm faded into tints of 
cream and rose and soft moist lips. Sil- 



32 



THE COLORED AMERICAN MAGAZINE. 



houetted against the background of low- 
ering sky and waving branches, he saw 
distinctly outlined a fair face framed in 
golden hair, with soft brown eyes, deep 
and earnest — terribly earnest they 
seemed just then — rose-tinged baby lips, 
and an expression of wistful entreaty. O 
how real, how very real did the passing 
shadow appear to the gazer ! 

He tried to move, uneasily conscious 
that this strange experience was but "the 
effect of the imagination," but he was 
powerless. The unknown countenance 
grew dimmer and farther off, floating* 
gradually out of sight, while a sense of 
sadness and foreboding wrapped him 
about as with a pall. 

A wilder gust of wind shook the win- 
dow sashes. Reuel stared about him in 
a bewildered way like a man awakening 
from a heavy sleep. He listened to the 
wail of the blast and glanced at the fire 
and rubbed his eyes. The vision was 
gone ; he was alone in the room ; all was 
silence and darkness. The ticking of the 
cheap clock on the mantel kept time 
with his heart-beats. The light of his 
own life seemed suddenly eclipsed with 
the passing of the lovely vision of Venus. 
Conscious of an odd murmur in his 
head, which seemed to control his move- 
ments, he rose and went toward the win- 
dow to open it ; there came a loud knock 
at the door. 

Briggs did not answer at once. He 
wanted no company. Perhaps the 
knocker would go away. But he was 
persistent. Again came the knock end- 
ing in a double rat-tat accompanied by 
the words : 

"I know you are there; open, open, 
you son of Erebus! You inhospitable 
Turk!" 

Thus admonished Briggs turned the 
key and threw wide open the door. 

"It's you, is it ? Confound you, you're 1 
always here when you're not wanted," 
he growled. 



The visitor entered and closed the 
door behind him. With a laugh he stood 
his dripping umbrella back of the stove 
against the chimney-piece, and im- 
mediately a small stream began trickling 
over the uncarpeted floor; he then re- 
lieved himself of his damo outer gar- 
ments. 

"Son of Erebus, indeed, you ungrate- 
ful man. It's as black as Hades in this 
room; a light, a light! Why did you 
keep me waiting out there like a 
drowned rat?" 

The voice was soft and musical. 
Briggs lighted the student lamp. The 
light revealed a tall man with the beauti- 
ful face of a Greek God ; but the sculp- 
tured features did not inspire confidence. 
There was that in the countenance of 
Aubrey Livingston that engendered 
doubt. But he had been kind to Briggs, 
was, in fact, his only friend in the college, 
or, indeed, in the world for that matter. 

By an act of generosity he had helped 
the forlorn youth, then in his freshman 
year, over obstacles which bade fair to 
end his college days. Although the 
pecuniary obligation was long since paid, 
the affection and worship Reuel had con- 
ceived for his deliverer was dog-like in 
its devotion. 

"Beastly night," he continued, as he 
stretched his full length luxuriously in 
the only easy chair the room afforded. 
"What are you mooning about all alone 
in the darkness?" 

"Same old thing," replied Briggs 
briefly. 

"No wonder the men say that you 
have a twist, »<ReUer." 

'/Ah, man! but the problem of whence 
and whither ! To solve it is my life ; I 
live for that alone ; let'm talk." 

"You ought to be re-named the 
'Science of Trance-States,' Reuel. How 
a man can grind day and night beats 
me." Livingston handed him a cigar 
and for a time they smoked in silence. 



OF ONE BLOOD. 



At length Reuel said: 

"Shake hands with Poverty once, 
Aubrey, and you will solve the secret of 
many a student's success in life." 

"Doubtless it would do me good," re- 
plied Livingston with a laugh, "but just 
at present, it's the ladies, bless their 
sweet faces who disturb me, ana not 
delving in books nor weeping over ways 
and means. Shades of my fathers, forbid 
that I should ever have to work ! 

"Lucky dog!" growled Reuel, envious- 
ly, as he gazed admiringly at the hand- 
some face turned up to the ceiling and 
gazing with soft caressing eyes at the 
ugly whitewashed wall through rings of 
curling smoke. "Yet you have a greater 
gift of duality than I," he addded dream- 
ily. "Say what you will ; ridicule me, tor- 
ment me, but you know as well as I that 
the wonders of a material world cannot 
approach those of the undiscovered 
country within ourselves — the hidden self 
lying quiescent in every human soul." 

"True, Reuel, and I often wonder what 
becomes of the mind and morals, dis- 
tinctive entities grouped in the republic 
known as man, when death comes. Good 
and evil in me contend ; which will gain 
the mastery ? Which will accompany me 
into the silent land?" 

"Good and evil, God and the devil," 
suggested Reuel. "Yes, sinner or saint, 
body or soul, which wins in the life 
struggle ? I am not sure that it matters 
which," he concluded with a shrug of his 
handsome shoulders. "I should know if 
I never saw you again until the struggle 
was over. Your face will tell its own tale 
in another five years. Now listen to 
this:" He caught up the book he had 
been reading and rapidly turning the 
leaves read over the various passages 
that had impressed him. 

"A curious accumulation of data; the 
writer evidently takes himself seriously," 
Livingston commented. 

"And why not?" demanded Reuel. 



"You and I know efltrngit/tG credit the 
author with honest fitffcrton* 

"Yes ; but are we prepared to go so 
far?" 

"This man is himself a mystic. He 
gives his evidence clearly enough." 

"And do you credit it?" 

"Every word! Could I but get the 
necessary subject, I would convince you ; 
I would go farther than M. Binet in un- 
veiling the vast scheme of compensation 
and retribution carried about in the vast 
recesses of the human soul." 

"Find the subject and I will find the 
money," laughed Aubrey. 

"Do you mean it, Aubrey? Will you 
join me in carrying forward a search for 
more light on the mysteries of ex- 
istence ?" 

"I mean it. And now, Reuel, come 
down from the clouds, and come with me 
to a concert." 

"Tonight?" 

"Yes, 'tonight/ " mimicked the other. 
"The blacker the night, the greater the 
need of amusement. You go out too 
little." 

"Who gives the concert ?'" 

"Well, it's a new departure in the 
musical world; something Northerners 
know nothing of; but I who am a 
Southerner, born and bred, or as the vul- 
gar have it, 'dyed in the wool/ know and 
understand Negro music. It is a jubilee 
concert given by a party of Southern 
colored people at Tremont Temple. I 
have the tickets. Redpath has them in 
charge." 

"Well, if you say so, I suppose I must." 
Briggs did not seem greatly impresses. 

"Coming down to the practical, Reuel, 
what do you think of the Negro prob- 
lem ? Come to think of it, I have never 
heard you express an opinion about it. 
I believe it is the only burning question 
in the whole category of live issues and 
ologies about which you are silent." 



34 



THE COLORED AMERICAN MAGAZINE. 



"I have a horror of discussing the woes 
of unfortunates, tramps, stray dogs and 
cats and Negroes — probably because I 
am an unfortunate myself." 

They smoked in silence. 

CHAPTER II. 

The passing of slavery from the land 
marked a new era in the life of the nation. 
The war, too, had passed like a dream of 
horrors, and over the resumption of nor- 
mal conditions in business and living, the 
whole country, as one man, rejoiced and 
heaved a deep sigh of absolute content. 

Under the spur of the excitement oc- 
casioned by the Proclamation of Free- 
dom, and the great need of schools for 
the blacks, thousands of dollars were 
contributed at the North, and agents 
were sent to Great Britain, where 
generosity towards the Negroes was 
boundless. Money came from all direc- 
tions, pouring into the hands of philan- 
thropists, who were anxious to prove that 
the country was able, not only to free the 
slave, but to pay the great debt it owed 
him, — protection as he embraced free- 
dom, and a share in the great Govern- 
ment he had aided to found by sweat and 
toil and blood. It was soon discovered 
that the Negro possessed a phenomenal 
gift of music, and it was determined to 
utilize this ^ift in helping to support 
educational institutions of color in the 
Southland. 

A band of students from Fisk Univer- 
sity were touring the country, and those 
who had been fortunate enough to listen 
once to their matchless untrained voices 
singing their heartbreaking minor music 
with its grand and impossible intervals 
and sound combinations, were eager to 
listen again and yet again. 

Wealthy and exclusive society women 
everywhere vied in showering benefits 
and patronage upon the new prodigies 
who had suddenly become the pets of 



the musical world. The Temple was a 
blaze of light, and crowded from pit to 
dome. It was the first appearance of the 
troupe in New England, therefore it 
was a gala night, and Boston culture was 
out in force. 

The two friends easily found their 
seats in the first balcony, and from that 
position idly scanned the vast audience 
to beguile the tedious waiting. Reuel's 
thoughts were disturbed; he read over 
the program, but it carried no meaning 
to his pre-occupied mind; he was un- 
easy ; the face he had seen outlined in the 
twilight haunted him. A great nervous 
dread of he knew not what possessed 
him, and he actually suffered as he sat 
there answering at random the running 
fire of comments made by Livingston on 
the audience, and replying none too 
cordially to the greetings of fellow-stu- 
dents, drawn to the affair, like himself, by 
curiosity. 

"Great crowd for such a night/' ob- 
served one. 'The weather matches your 
face, Briggs ; why didn't you leave it out- 
side ? Why do you look so down ?" 

Reuel shrugged his shoulders. 

"They say there are some pretty girls 
in the troupe; one or two as white as 
we," continued the speaker unabashed by 
Reuel's surliness. 

"They range at home from alabaster 
to ebony," replied Livingston. "The re- 
sults of amalgamation are worthy the 
careful attention of all medical experts." 

"Don't talk shop, Livingston," said 
Briggs peevishly. 

"You are really more disagreeable 
than usual," replied Livingston, pleasant- 
ly. "Do try to be like the other fellows, 
for once, Reuel." 

Silence ensued for a time, and then 
the irrepressible one of the party re- 
marked : "The soprano soloist is great ; 
heard her in New York." At this 
there was a general laugh among the 
men. Good natured Charlie Vance was 



OF ONE BLOOD. 



35 



generally "stuck" once a month with the 
"loveliest girl, by jove, you know." 

"That explains your presence here, 
Vance; what's her name?" 

"Dianthe Lusk." 

"Great name. I hope she comes up to 
it, — the flower of Jove." 

"Flower of Jove, indeed! You'll say 
so when you see her," cried Charlie with 
his usual enthusiasm. 

"What! again, my son? 'Like Dian's 
kiss, unmasked, unsought, Love gives it- 
self " quoted Livingston, with a smile on 
his handsome face. 

"Oh, stow it ! Aubrey, even your cold 
blood will be stirred at sight of her ex- 
quisite face ; of her voice I will not speak ; 
I cannot do it justice." 

"If this is to be the result of emancipa- 
tion, I for one vote that we ask Con- 
gress to annul the Proclamation," said 
Reuel, drily. 

Now conversation ceased; a famous 
local organist began a concert on the 
organ to occupy the moments of waiting. 
The music soothed Reuel's restlessness. 
He noticed that the platform usually oc- 
cupied by the speaker's desk, now held a 
number of chairs and a piano. Certainly, 
the assiduous advertising had brought 
large patronage for the new venture, he 
thought as he idly calculated the finan- 
cial result from the number in the 
audience. 

Soon the hot air, the glare of lights, 
the mingling of choice perfumes emanat- 
ing from the dainty forms of elegantly at- 
tired women, acted upon him as an in- 
toxicant. He began to feel the pervad- 
ing excitement — the flutter of expecta- 
tion, and presently the haunting face left 
him. 

The prelude drew to a close ; the last 
chord fell from the fingers of the artist ; a 
line of figures — men and women— dark in 
hue. and neatly dressed in quiet evening 
clothes, filed noiselessly from the ante- 
rooms and filled the chairs upon the 



platform. The silence in the house was 
painful. These were representatives of 
the people for whom God had sent the 
terrible scourge of blood upon the land 
to free from bondage. The old aboli- 
tionists in the vast audience felt the blood 
leave their faces beneath the stress of 
emotion. 

The opening number was "The Lord's 
Prayer." Stealing, rising, swelling, 
gathering, as it thrilled the ear, all the 
delights of harmony in a grand minor ca- 
dence that told of deliverance from bond- 
age and homage to God for his wonderful 
aid, sweeping the awed heart with an ec- 
stasy that was almost pain; breathing, 
hovering, soaring, they held the vast mul- 
titude in speechless wonder. 

Thunders of applause greeted the 
close of the hymn. Scarcely waiting for 
a silence, a female figure rose and came 
slowly to the edge of the platform and 
stood in the blaze of lights with hands 
modestly clasped before her. She was 
not in any way the preconceived idea of 
a Negro. Fair as the fairest woman in 
the hall, with wavy bands of chestnut 
hair, and great, melting eyes of brown, 
soft as those of childhood; a willowy 
figure of exquisite mould, clad in a 
sombre gown of black. There fell a 
voice upon the listening ear, in celestial 
showers of silver that passed all concep- 
tions, all comparisons, all dreams ; a voice 
beyond belief — a great soprano of un- 
imaginable beauty, soaring heavenward 
in mighty intervals. 

"Go down, Moses, way down in Egypt's 
land, 

Tell ol' Pharaoh, let my people go." 
sang the woman in tones that awakened 
ringing harmonies in the heart of every 
listener. 

"By Jove!" Reuel heard Livingston 
exclaim. For himself he was dazed, 
thrilled; never save among the great 
artists of the earth, was such a voice 
heard alive with the divine fire. 



36 



THE COLORED AMERICAN MAGAZINE. 



Some of the women in the audience 
wept; there was the distinct echo of a 
sob in the deathly quiet which gave 
tribute to the power of genius. Spell- 
bound they sat beneath the outpoured 
anguish of a suffering soul. All the 
horror, the degredation from which a 
race had been delivered were in the 
pleading strains of the singer's voice. 
It strained the senses almost beyond en- 
durance. It pictured to that self- 
possessed, highly-cultured New England 
assemblage as nothing else ever had, the 
awfulness of the hell from which a people 
had been happily plucked. 

Reuel was carried out of himself; he 
leaned forward in eager contemplation of 
the artist ; he grew cold with terror and 
fear. Surely it could not be — he must be 
dreaming! It was incredible! Even as 
he whispered the words to himself the 
hall seemed to grow dim and shadowy; 
the sea of faces melted away; there be- 
fore him in the blaze of light — like a 
lovely phantom — stood a woman wearing 
the face of his vision of the afternoon ! 

CHAPTER III. 

It was Hallow-eve. 

The north wind blew a cutting blast 
over the stately Charles, and broke the 
waves into a miniature flood ; it swept the 
streets of the University city, and danced 
on into the outlying suburbs tossing the 
last leaves about in gay disorder, not 
even sparing the quiet precincts of 
Mount Auburn cemetery. A deep, clear, 
moonless sky stretched overhead, from 
which hung myriads of sparkling stars. 

It Mount Auburn, where the resi- 
dences of the rich lay far apart, darkness 
and quietness had early settled down. 
The main street seemed given over to 
die duskiness of the evening, and with 
one exception, there seemed no light on 
earth or in heaven save the cold gleam of 
the stars. 



The one exception was in the home 
of Charlie Vance, or "Adonis," as he was 
called by his familiars. The Vance 
estate was a spacious house with ramb- 
ling ells, tortuous chimney-stacks, and 
corners, eaves and iedges; the grounds 
were extensive and well kept telling 
silently of the opulence of its owner. Its 
windows sent forth a cheering light. Din- 
ner was just over. 

Within, on an old-fashioned hearth, 
blazed a glorious wood fire, which gave 
a rich coloring to the oak-pane!led walls, 
and fell warmly on a group cf young 
people seated and standing, chatting 
about the fire. At one side of it, in a 
chair of the Elizabethan period, sat the 
hostess, Molly Vance, only daughter of 
James Vance, Esq., and sister of 
"Adonis," a beautiful girl of eighteen. 

At the opposite side, leaning with 
folded arms against the high carved man- 
tel, stood Aubrey Livingston ; the beauty 
of his fair hair and blue eyes was never 
more marked as he stood there in the 
gleam of the fire and the soft candle 
light. He was talking vivaciously, his 
eyes turning from speaker to speaker, as 
he ran on, but resting chiefly with pride 
on his beautiful betrothed, Molly Vance. 

The group was completed by two or 
three other men, among them Reuel 
Briggs, and three pretty girls. Suddenly 
a clock struck the hour. 

"Only nine," exclaimed Molly. "Good 
people, what shall we do to wile the 
tedium of waiting for the witching hour ? 
Have any one of you enough wisdom to 
make a suggestion?" 

"Music," said Livingston. 

"We don't want anything so common- 
place." 

"Blind Man's Buff," suggested 
"Adonis." 

"Oh! please not that, the men are so 
rough!" 

"Let us," broke in Cora Scott, "tell 
ghost stories." 



OF ONE BLOOD. 



37 



"Good, Cora! yes, yes, yes." 
'*No, no!" exclaimed a chorus of 
voices. 

44 Yes, yes," laughed Molly, gaily, clap- 
ping her hands. "It is the very thing. 
Cora, you are the wise woman of the 
party. It is the very time, tonight is the 
new moon, and we can try our projects 
in the Hyde house." 

"The moon should be full to account 
for such madness," said Livingston. 

"Don't be disagreeable, Aubrey," re- 
plied Molly. "The 'ayes' have it. 
You're with me, Mr. Briggs?" 

"Of course, Miss Vance," answered 
Reuel, "to go to the North Pole or 
Hades — only please tell us where is 
'Hyde house.' " 

"Have you never heard? Why it's the 
adjoining estate. It is reputed to be 
haunted, and a lady in white haunts the 
avenue in the most approved ghostly 
style." 

"Bosh!" said Livingston. 

"Possibly," remarked the laughing 
Molly, "but it is the 'bosh' of a century." 

"Go on, Miss Vance; don't mind 
Aubrey. Who has seen the lady?" 

"She is not easily seen," proceeded 
Molly, "she only appears on Hallow-eve, 
when the moon is new, as it will be to- 
night. I had forgotten that fact when I 
invited you here. If anyone stands, to- 
night, in the avenue leading to the house, 
he will surely see the tall veiled figure 
gliding among the old hemlock trees." 

One or two shivered. 

" If, however, the watcher remain, the 
lady will pause, and utter some sentence 
of prophecy of his future." 

"Has any one done this?" queried 
Reuel. 

"My old nurse says she remembers 
that the lady was seen once." 

"Then, we'll test it again tonight!" ex- 
claimed Reuel, greatly excited over the 
chance to prove his pet theories. 

"Well, Molly, you've started Reuel off 



on his greatest hobby ; I wash my hands 
of both of you." 

"Let us go any way!" chorused the 
venturesome party. 

"But there are conditions," exclaimed 
Molly. "Only one person must go at a 
time." 

Aubrey laughed as he noticed the con- 
sternation in one or two faces. 

"So," continued Molly, "as we cannot 
go together, I propose that each shall 
stay a quarter of an hour, then whether 
successful or not, return and let another 
take his or her place. I will go first." 

"No—" it was Charlie who spoke— "I 
put my veto on that, Molly. If you are 
mad enough to risk colds in this mad 
freak, it shall be done fairly. We will 
draw lots." 

"And I add to that, not a girl leave 
the house; we men will try the charm 
for the sake of your curiosity, but not a 
girl goes. You can try the ordinary 
Hallow-eve projects while we are away." 

With many protests, but concealed re- 
lief, this plan was reluctantly adopted by 
the female element. The lots were pre- 
pared and placed in a hat, and amid much 
merriment, drawn. 

"You are third, Mr. Briggs," ex- 
claimed Molly who held the hat and 
watched the checks. 

"I'm first," said Livingston, "and 
Charlie second." 

"While we wait for twelve, tell us the 
story of the house, Molly," cried Cora. 

Thus adjured, Molly settled herself 
comfortably in her chair and began: 
"Hyde House is nearly opposite the cem- 
etery, and its land joins that of this house ; 
it is indebted for its ill-repute to one of 
its owners, John Hyde. It has been 
known for years as a haunted house, and 
avoided as such by the superstitious. It 
is low-roofed, rambling, and almost en- 
tirely concealed by hemlocks, having an 
air of desolation and decay in keeping 
with its ill-repute. In its dozen rooms 



3« 



THE COLORED AMERICAN MAGAZINE. 



were enacted the dark deeds which gave 
the place the name of the 'haunted 
house.' 

"The story is told of an unfaithful hus- 
band, a wronged wife and a beautiful 
governess forming a combination which 
led to the murder of a guest for his 
money. The master of the house died 
from remorse, under peculiar circum- 
stances. These materials give us the 
plot for a thrilling ghost story. " 

"Well, where does the lady come in?" 
interrupted "Adonis. " 

There was a general laugh. 

"This world is all a blank without the 
ladies for Charlie," remarked Aubrey. 
"Molly, go on with your storv, my 
child." 

"You may all laugh as much as you 
please, but what I am telling you is be- 
lieved in this section by every one. A 
local magazine speaks of it as follows, as 
near as I can remember : 

" 'A most interesting story is told by 
a woman who occupied the house for a 
short time. She relates that she had no 
sooner crossed the threshold than she 
was met by a beautiful woman in flowing 
robes of black, who begged permission 
to speak through her to her friends. The 
friends were thereupon bidden to be pres- 
ent at a certain time. When all were as- 
sembled they were directed by invisible 
powers to kneel. Then the spirit told the 
tale of the tragedy through the woman. 
The spirit was the niece of the murderer, 
and she was in the house when the 
crime was committed. She discov- 
ered blood stains on the door of 
the woodshed, and told her uncle 
that she suspected him of murder- 
ing the guest, who had mysteriously 
disappeared. He secured her promise 
not to betray him. She had always kept 
the secret. Although both had been 
dead for many years, they were chained 
to the scene of the crime, as was the 



governess, who was the man's partner in 
guilt. The final release of the niece from 
the place was conditional on her making 
a public confession. This done she 
would never be heard from again. And 
she never was, except on Hallow-eve, 
when the moon is new/ " 

"Bring your science and philosophy to 
bear on this, Reuel. Come, come, man, 
give us your opinion," exclaimed Au- 
brey. 

"Reuel doesn't believe such stuff ; he's 
too sensible," added Charlie. 

'Tf these are facts, they are only for 
those who have a mental affinity with 
them. I believe that if we could but 
strengthen our mental sight, we could 
discover the broad highway between this 
and the other world on which both good 
and evil travel to earth," replied Reuel. 

"And that first highway was beaten 
out of choas by Satan, as Milton has it, 
eh, Briggs?" 

"Have it as you hkc, Smith. No mat- 
ter. For my own part, I have never be- 
lieved that the whole mental world is 
governed by the faculties we understand, 
and can reduce to reason or definite feel- 
ing. But I will keep my ideas to my- 
self ; one does not care to be laughed at." 

The conversation was kept up for an- 
other hour about indifferent subjects, but 
all felt the excitement underlying the 
frivolous chatter. At quarter before 
twelve, Aubrey put on his ulster with the 
words: "Well, here goes for my lady." 
The great doors were thrown open, and 
the company grouped about him to see 
him depart. 

"Mind, honor bright, you go," laughed 
Charlie. 

"Honor bright," he called back. 

Then he went on beyond the flood of 
light into the gloom of the night. Muf- 
fled in wraps and ulsters they lingered 
on the piazzas waiting his return. 

"Would he see anything?" 



OF ONE BLOOD. 



39 



"Of course not!" laughed Charlie and 
Bert Smith. "Still, we bet he'll be sharp 
to his time." 

They were right. Aubrey returned at 
five minutes past twelve, a failure. 

Charlie ran down the steps briskly, but 
in ten minutes came hastening back. 

"Well," was the chorus, "did you see 
it?" 

"I saw something — a figure in Che 
trees !" 

"And you did not wait?" said Molly, 
scornfully. 

"No, I dared not ; I own it." 

"It's my turn ; I'm third," said Reuel. 

"Luck to you, old man," they called as 
he disappeared in the darkness. 

Reuel Briggs was a brave man. He 
knew his own great physical strength and 
felt no fear as he traversed the patch 
of woods lying between the two estates. 
As he reached the avenue of hemlocks 
he was not thinking of his mission, but 
of the bright home scene he had just left 
— of love and home and rest — such a life 
as was unfolding before Aubrey Living- 
ston and sweet Molly Vance. 

"I suppose there are plenty of men in 
the world as lonely as I am," he mused ; 
"but I suppose it is my own fault. A 
man though plain and poor can general- 
ly manage to marry ; and I am both. But 
I don't regard a wife as one regards 
bread — better sour bread than starva- 
tion ; better an uncongenial life-com- 
panion than none ! What a frightful mis- 
take! No! The woman I marry must 
be to me a necessity, because I love her ; 
because so loving her, 'all the current of 
my being flows to her/ and I feel she is 
my supreme need." 

Just now he felt strangely happy as 
he moved in the gloom of the hemlocks, 
and lie wondered many times after that 
whether the spirit is sometimes mysteri- 
ously conscious of the nearness of its 
kindred spirit; and feels, in anticipation, 



the "sweet unrest" of the master-passion 
that rules the world. 

The mental restlessness of three weeks 
before seemed to have possession of him 
again. Suddenly the "restless, unsatis- 
fied longing," rose again in his heart. 
He turned his head and saw a female 
figure just ahead of him in the path, com- 
ing toward him. He could not see her 
features distinctly, only the eyes — large, 
bright and dark. But their expression! 
Sorrowful, wistful — almost imploring — 
gazing straightforward, as if they saw 
nothing — like the eyes of a person entire- 
ly absorbed and not distinguishing one 
object from another. 

She was close to him now, and there 
was a perceptible pause in her step. Sud- 
denly she covered her face with her 
clasped hands, as if in uncontrollable 
grief. Moved by a mighty emotion, 
Briggs addressed the lonely figure : 

"You are in trouble, madam; may I 
help you?" 

Briggs never knew how he survived 
the next shock. Slowly the hands were 
removed from the face and the moon 
gave a distinct view of the lovely fea- 
tures of the jubilee singer— Dianthe 
Lusk. 

She did not seem to look at Briggs, 
but straight before her, as she said in a 
low, clear, passionless voice: 

"You can help me, but not now; to- 
morrow." 

Reuel's most prominent feeling was 
one of delight. The way was open to 
become fully acquainted with the woman 
who had haunted him sleeping and wak- 
ing, for weeks past. 

"Not now! Yet you are suffering. 
Shall I see you soon ? Forgive me — but 
oh! tell me—" 

He was interrupted. The lady moved 
or floated away from him, with her face 
toward him and gazing steadily at him. 

He felt that his whole heart was in his 



40 



THE COLORED AMERICAN MAGAZINE. 



eyes, yet hers did not drop, nor did her 
cheek color. 

"The time is not yet," she said in the 
same, clear, calm, measured tones, in 
which she had spoken before. Reuel 
made a quick movement toward her, but 
she raised her hand, and the gesture for- 
bade him to follow her. He paused in- 
voluntarily, and she turned away, and 
disappeared among the gloomy hemlock 
trees. 

He parried the questions of the merry 
crowd when he returned to the house, 
with indifferent replies. How they 
would have laughed at him — slave of a 
passion as sudden and romantic as that 
of Romeo for Juliet; with no more 
foundation than the "presentments" in 
books which treat of the "occult." He 
dropped asleep at last, in the early morn- 
ing hours, and lived over his experience 
in his dreams. 

CHAPTER IV. 

Although not yet a practitioner, Reuel 
Briggs was a recognized power in the 
medical profession. In brain diseases he 
was an authority. 

Early the next morning he was 
aroused from sleep by imperative knock- 
ing at his door. It was a messenger 



from the hospital. There had been a 
train accident on the Old Colony road, 
would he come immediately? 

Scarcely giving himself time for a cup 
of coffee, he arrived at the hospital al- 
most as soon as the messenger. 

The usual silence of the hospital was 
broken; all was bustle and movement, 
without confusion. It was a great call 
upon the resources of the officials, but 
they were equal to it. The doctors 
passed from sufferer to sufferer, dressing 
their injuries; then they were borne to 
beds from which some would never rise 
again. 

"Come with me to the women's ward, 
Doctor Briggs," said a nurse. "There is 
a woman there who was taken from the 
wreck. She shows no sign of injury, but 
the doctors cannot restore her to con- 
sciousness. Doctor Livingston pro- 
nounces her dead, but it doesn't seem 
possible. So young, so beautiful. Do 
something for her, Doctor." 

The men about a cot made way for 
Reuel, as he entered the ward. "It's no 
use Briggs," said Livingston to him in 
reply to his question. "Your science 
won't save her. The poor girl is already 
cold and stiff." 

He moved aside disclosing to Reuel's 
gaze the lovely face of Dianthe Lusk! 



THE BLACK MAN'S CLAIM/ 

Out of the wilderness, out of the night, 

Has the black man crawled to the dawn of light ; 

Beaten by lashes and bound by chains, 

A beast of burden with soul and brains, 

He has come through sorrow and need and woe, 

And the cry of his heart is to know, to know ! 

You took his freedom and gave it again ; 

But grudged as ye gave it, ye whitefaced man. 

Not all of freedom is being free, 

And a dangerous plaything is liberty 

•Klua Wheeler Wilcox, in " The New York American." 



102 



THE COLORED AMERICAN MAGAZINE. 



OF ONE BLOOD/ 



OR, THE HIDDEN SELF. 

l'AUMXli H. HOPKINS. 



CHAPTER IV. {Concluded.) 

The most marvellous thing to watch is 
the death of a person. At that moment 
the opposite takes place to that which 
took place when life entered the first unit, 
after nature had prepared it for the in- 
ception of life. I low the vigorous life 
watches the passage of the liberated life 
out of its earthly environment! What a 
change is this! How important the 
knowledge of whither life tends! Here is 
shown the setting free of a disciplined 
spirit giving up its mortality for immor- 
tality, — the condition necessary to know 
God. Death! There is no death. Life 
is everlasting, and from its reality can 
have no end. Life is real and never 
changes, but preserves its identity eter- 
nally as the angels, and the immortal 
spirit of man, which are the only reali- 
ties and continuities in the universe, God 
being over all, Supreme Ruler and Di- 
vine Essence from whom comes all life. 
Somewhat in this train ran Reuel's 
thoughts as he stood beside the seeming 
dead girl, the cynosure of all the medical 
faculty there assembled. 

To the majority of those men, the case 
was an ordinary death, and that was all 
there was to it. What did this young up- 
start expect to make of it? Of his skill 
and wonderful theories they had heard 
strange tales, but they viewed him coldly 
as we are apt to view those who chre to 
leave the beaten track of conventionality. 

Outwardly cool and stolid, showing no 
sign of recognition, he stood for some 
sccnnrls gazing down on Dianthc : every 
ncrvr* quivered, every pulse of his body 
throbbed. Her face held for him a won- 
derful charm, an extraordinary fascina- 
tion. As he gazed he knew that once 
more he beheld what he had vaguely 

? Copyright, 190.?, by Pauline E. Hopkins. 



sought and yearned for all his forlorn 
life. His whole heart went out to her; 
destiny, not chance, had brought him to 
her. He saw, too, that no one knew her, 
none had a clue to her identity ; he deter- 
mined to remain silent for the present, 
and immediately he sought to impress 
Livingston to do likewise. 

His keen glance swept the faces of the 
surrounding physicians. "No, not one/' 
he told himself, "holds the key to unlock 
this seeming sleep of death." He alone 
could do it. Advancing far afield in the 
mysterious regions of science, he had 
stumbled upon the solution of one of 
life's problems: the rcanimation of the 
body after seeming death. 

He had hesitated to tell of his discov- 
ery to any one; not even to Livingston 
had he hinted of the daring possibility, 
fearing ridicule in case of a miscarriage 
in his calculations. But for the sake of 
this girl he would make what he felt to be 
a premature disclosure of the results of 
his experiments. Meantime, Livingston, 
from his place at the foot of the cot, 
watched his friend with fascinated eyes. 
He. too. had resolved, contrary to his first 
intention, not to speak of his knowledge 
of the beautiful patient's identity. Curi- 
ositv was oti tiptoe ; expectancy was in 
the air. All felt that something unusual 
was about to happen. 

Now Reuel, with gentle fingers, 
touched rapidly the clammy brow, the icy, 
livid hands, the region of the pulseless 
heart. No breath came from between 
the parted lips; the life-giving organ was 
motionless. As he concluded his exami- 
nation, he turned to the assembled doc- 
tors: 

"As I diagnose this case, it is one of 
suspended animation. This woman has 
been long and persistently subjected to 



OF OSE BLOOD. 



mesmeric influences, and the nervous 
shock induced by the excitement of the 
accident has thrown her into a cataleptic 
sleep." 

"But, man !" broke from the head phy- 
sician in tones of exasperation, "rigor 
mortis in unmistakable form is here. The 
woman is dead!" 

At these words there was a perceptible 
smile on the faces of some of the stu- 
dents — associates who resented" his genius 
as a personal affront, and who considered 
these words as good as a reprimand for 
the daring student, and a settler of his 
pretensions. Malice and envy, from Ad- 
am's time until today, have loved a shin- 
ing mark. 

But the reproof was unheeded. Reuel 
was not listening. Absorbed in thoughts 
of the combat before him, he was oblivi- 
ous to all else as he bent over the lifeless 
figure on the cot. He was full of an ear- 
nest purpose. He was strung up to a 
high tension of force and energy. As he 
looked down upon the unconscious girl 
whom none but he could save from the 
awful fate of a death by post-mortem, 
and who by some mysterious mesmeric 
affinity existing between them, had drawn 
him to her rescue, he felt no fear that he 
should fail. 

Suddenly he bent down and took both 
cold hands into his left and passed his 
right hand firmly over her arms from 
shoulder to wrist. He repeated the move- 
ments several times; there was no re- 
sponse to the passes. He straightened 
up, and again stood silently gazing upon 
the patient. Then, like a man just 
aroused from sleep, he looked across the 
bed at Livingston and said abruptly : 

"Dr. Livingston, will you go over to 
my room and bring me the case of vials 
in my medicine cabinet? I cannot leave 
the patient at this point." 

Livingston started in surprise as he re- 
plied : "Certainly, Briggs, if it will help 
you any." 

"The patient does not respond to any 
of the ordinary methods of awakening. 



She would probably lie in this sleep for 
months, and death ensue from exhaus- 
tion, if stronger remedies are not used to 
restore the vital force to a normal condi- 
tion/' 

Livingston left the hospital ; he could 
not return under an hour; Reuel took up 
his station by the bed whereon was 
stretched an apparently lifeless body, and 
the other doctors went the rounds of the 
wards attending to their regular routine 
of duty. The nurses gazed at him curi- 
ously; the head doctor, upon whom the 
young student's earnestness and sinceri- 
ty had evidently made an impression, 
came a number of times to the bare little 
room to gaze upon its silent occupants, 
but there was nothing new. When Liv- 
ingston returned, the group again gath- 
ered about the iron cot where lay the pa- 
tient. 

"Gentlemen," said Reuel, with quiet 
dignity, when they were once more as- 
sembled, "will you individually examine 
the patient once more and give your ver- 
dicts?" 

Once more doctors and students care- 
fully examined the inanimate figure in 
which the characteristics of death were 
still more pronounced. On the outskirts 
of the group hovered the house-surgeon's 
assistants ready to transport the body to 
the operating room for the post-mortem. 
Again the head physician spoke, this time 
impatiently. 

"We are wasting our time, Dr. Briggs ; 
I pronounce the woman dead. She was 
past medical aid when brought here." 

"There is no physical damage, appar- 
ent or hidden, that you can see, Doctor ?" 
questioned Reuel, respectfully. 

"No; it is a perfectly healthful organ- 
ism, though delicate. I agree entirely 
with your assertion that death was in- 
duced by the shock." 

"Not death, Doctor," protested Briggs. 

"Well, well, call it what you like — call 
it what you like, it amounts to the same 
in the end," replied the doctor testily. 



THE COLORED AMERICAN MAGAZINE. 



104 

"Do you all concur in Doctor Hamil- 
ton's diagnosis ?" Briggs included all 
the physicians in his sweeping glance. 
There was a general assent. 

"I am prepared to show you that in 
some cases of seeming death — or even 
death in reality — consciousness may be 
restored or the dead brought back to life. 
I have numberless times in the past six 
months restored consciousness to dogs 
and cats after rigor mortis had set in," he 
declared calmly. 

"Bosh!" broke from a leading surgeon. 
In this manner the astounding statement, 
made in all seriousness, was received by 
the group of scientists mingled with an 
astonishment that resembled stupidity. 
But in spite of their scoffs, the young stu- 
dent's confident manner made a decided 
impression upon his listeners, unwilling 
as they were to be convinced. 

Reuel went on rapidly; his eyes kin- 
dled; his whole person took on the maj- 
esty of conscious power, and pride in the 
knowledge he possessed. "I have found 
by research that life is not dependent up- 
on organic functioh as a principle. It 
may be infused into organized bodies 
even after the organs have ceased to per- 
form their legitimate offices. Where 
death has been due to causes which have 
not impaired or injured or destroyed tis- 
sue formation or torn down the structure 
of vital organs, life may be recalled when 
it has become entirely extinct, which is 
not so in the present case. This I have 
discovered by my experiments in animal 
magnetism." 

The medical staff was fairly bewil- 
dered. Again Dr. Hamilton spoke : 

"You make the assertion that the dead 
can be brought to life, if I understand 
your drift, Dr. Briggs, and you expect 
us to believe such utter nonsense." He 
added significantly, "My colleagues and 
I are here to be convinced." 

"If you will be patient for a short time 
longer, Doctor, I will support my asser- 
tion by action. The secret of life lies in 



what we call volatile magnetism — it ex- 
ists in the free atmosphere. You, Dr. 
Livingston, understand my meaning; do 
you see the possibility in my words?" he 
questioned, appealing to Aubrey for the 
first time. 

"I have a faint conception of your 
meaning, certainly," replied his friend. 

"This subtile magnetic agent is con- 
stantly drawn into the body through the 
lungs, absorbed and held in bounds until 
chemical combination has occurred 
through the medium of mineral agents 
always present in normal animal tissue 
When respiration ceases this magnetism 
cannot be drawn into the lungs. It must 
be artificially supplied. This, gentlemen, 
is my discovery. I supply this magne- 
tism. I have it here in the case Dr. Liv- 
ingston has kindly brought me." He 
held up to their gaze a small phial 
wherein reposed a powder. Physicians 
and students, now eager listeners, gazed 
spell-bound upon him, straining their ears 
to catch every tone of the low voice and 
every change of the luminous eyes; they 
pressed forward to examine the contents 
of the bottle. It passed from eager hand 
to eager hand, then back to the owner. 

"This compound, gentler ~n, is an ex- 
act reproduction of the conditions exist- 
ing in the human body. It has common 
salt for its basis. This salt is saturated 
with oleo resin and then exposed for sev- 
eral hours in an atmosphere of free am- 
monia. The product becomes a powder, 
and that brings back the seeming dead to 
life." 

"Establish your theory by practical 
demonstration, Dr. Briggs, and the 
dreams of many eminent practitioners 
will be realized," said Dr. Hamilton, 
greatly agitated by his words. 

"Your theory smacks of the supernat- 
ural, Dr. Briggs, charlatanism, or dreams 
of lunacy," said the surgeon. "We leave 
such assertions to quacks, generally, for 
the time of miracles is past." 

"The supernatural presides over man's 



OF ONE BLOOD. 



I05 



formation always," returned Reuel, quiet- 
ly. "Life is that evidence of supernat- 
ural endowment which originally entered 
nature during the formation of the units 
for the evolution of man. Perhaps the 
superstitious masses came nearer to solv- 
ing the mysteries of creation than the fa- 
vored elect will ever come. Be that as it 
may, I will not contend. I will proceed 
with the demonstration." 

There radiated from the speaker the 
potent pressence of a truthful mind, a 
pure, unselfish nature, and that inborn 
dignity which repels the shafts of lower 
minds as ocean's waves absorb the drops 
of rain. Something like respect mingled 
with awe hushed the sneers, changing 
them into admiration as he calmly pro- 
ceeded to administer the so-calhd life- 
giving powder. Each man's wat.h was 
in his hand ; one minute passed — another 
— and still another. The body remained 
inanimate. 

A cold smile of triumph began to 
dawn on the faces of the older members 
of the profession, but it vanished in its 
incipiency, for a tremor plainly passed 
over the rigid form before them. An- 
other second — another convulsive move- 
ment of the chest 1 

"She moves!" cried Aubrey at last, 
carried out of himself by the strain on his 
nerves. "Look, gentlemen, she breathes ! 
She is alive; Briggs is right 1 Wonder- 
ful! Wonderful!" 

"We said there could not be another 
miracle, and here it is!" exclaimed Dr. 
Hamilton with strong emotion. 

Five minutes more and the startled 
doctors fell back from the bedside at a 
motion of Reuel's hand. A wondering 
nurse, with dilated eyes, unfolded a 
screen, placed it in position and came and 
stood beside the bed opposite Reuel. 
Holding Dianthe's hands, he said in a 
low voice: "Are you awake?" Her eyes 
unclosed in a cold, indifferent stare which 
gradually changed to one of recognition. 
She looked at him — she smiled, and said 



in a weak voice, "Oh, it is yoa ; I dreamed 
of you while I slept." 

She was like a child — so trusting that 
it went straight to the young man's heart, 
and for an instant a great lump seemed 
to rise in his throat and choke him. He 
held her hands and chafed them, but 
spoke with his eyes only. The nurse said 
in a low voice : "Dr. Briggs, a few spoon- 
fuls of broth will help her?" 

"Yes, thank you, nurse; that will be 
just right" He drew a chair close be- 
side the bed, bathed her face with water 
and pushed back the tangle of bright 
hair. He felt a great relief and quiet joy 
that his experiment had been successful. 

"Have I been ill? Where am I?" she 
asked after a pause, as her face grew 
troubled and puzzled. 

"No, but you have been asleep a long 
time ; we grew anxious about you. You 
must not talk until you are stronger." 

The muse returned with the broth; 
Dianthe drank it eagerly and called for 
water, then with her hand still clasped 
in Reuel's she sank into a deep sleep, 
breathing softly like a tired child. 
It was plain to the man of science that 
hope for the complete restoration of her 
faculties would depend upon time, nature 
and constitution. Her effort to collect 
her thoughts was unmistakable. In her 
sleep, presently, from her lips fell inco- 
herent words and phrases ; but through it 
all she clung to Reuel's hand, seeming to 
recognize in him a friend. 

A little later the doctors filed in noise- 
lessly and stood about the bed gazing 
down upon the sleeper with awe, listen- 
ing to her breathing, feeling lightly the 
fluttering pulse. Then they left the quiet 
house of suffering, marvelling at the mir- 
acle just accomplished in their presence. 
Livingston lingered with Briggs after 
the other physicians were gone. 

"This is a great day for you, Reuel," 
he said, as he laid a light caressing hand 
upon the other's shoulder. 

Reuel sei7<*H the hand in a quick con- 



io6 



THE COLORED AMERICAN MAGAZINE. 



vulsive clasp. 'True and tried friend, do 
not credit me more tlian I deserve. No 
praise is due me. I am an instrument — 
how I know not — a child of circum- 
stances. Do you not pcrcciw: something 
strange in this case? Can you not deduce 
conclusions from your own intimate 
knowledge of this science?" 

"What can you mean, Reuel ?" 

"I mean — it is a dual mesmeric trance ! 
The girl is only partly normal now. Binet 
speaks at length of this possibility in his 
treatise. We have stumbled upon an 
extraordinary case. It will take a year to 
restore her to perfect health." 

"In the meantime wc ought to search 
out her friends." 

"Is there any hurry, Aubrey?" pleaded 
Reuel, anxiously. 

"Why not wait until her memory re- 
turns; it will not be long, I believe, al- 
though she may still be liable to the 
trances.". 

"We'll put off the evil day to any date 
you may name, Briggs; for my part, I 
would preserve her incognito indefinite- 
ly." 

Reuel made no reply. Livingston was 
not sure that he heard him. 

CHAPTER V. 

The world scarcely estimates the ser- 
vice rendered by those who have un- 
locked the gates of sensation by the reve- 
lations of science; and yet it is to the 
clear perception of things which we ob- 
tain by the study of nature's laws that 
we are enabled to appreciate her varied 
gifts. The scientific journals of the next 
month contained wonderful and wonder- 
ing ( ?) accounts of the now celebrated 
case, — re-animation after seeming death. 
Reuel's lucky star was in the ascendant; 
fame and fortune awaited him; he had 
but to grasp them. Classmates who had 
once ingored him now sought familiar as- 
sociation, or else gazed upon him with 
awe and reverence. "How did he do it ?" 



was the query in each man's mind, and 
then came a stampede for all scientific 
matter bearing upon animal magnetism. 

How often do we look in wonder at the 
course of other men's lives, whose paths 
have diverged so widely from the beaten 
track of our own, that, unable to compre- 
hend the one spring upon which, perhaps, 
the whole secret of the diversity hinged, 
we have been fain to content ourselves 
with summing up our judgment in the 
common phrase. "Well, it's very strange; 
what odd people there are in the world 
to be sure !" 

Many times this trite sentence was ut- 
tered during the next few' months, gen- 
erally terminating every debate among 
medical students in various colleges. 

Unmindful of his growing popularity. 
Reuel devoted every moment of his spar^ 
time to close study of his patient. Al- 
though but a youth, the scientist might 
have passed for any age under fifty, and 
life for him seemed to have taken on a 
purely mechanical aspect since he had be- 
come first in this great cause. Under pre- 
tended indifference to public criticism, 
throbbed a heart of gold, sensitive to a 
fault ; desiring above all else the well- 
being of all humanity; his faithfulness to 
those who suffered amounted to complete 
self-sacrifice. Absolutely free from the 
vices which beset most young men of his 
age and profession, his daily life was a 
white, unsullied page to the friend ad- 
mitted to unrestricted intercourse, and 
gave an irresistible impetus to that friend- 
ship, for Livingston could not but admire 
the newly developed depths of nobility 
which he now saw unfolding day by day 
in Reuel's character. Nor was Living- 
ston far behind the latter in his interest 
in all that affected Dianthe. Enthused hv 
its scientific aspect, he vied with Reuel in 
close attention to the medical side of the 
case, and being more worldly did not ne- 
glect the material side. 

He secretly sought out and obtained 
the address of the manager of the jubi- 



OF ONE BLOOD. 



to7 



lee singers and to his surprise received 
the information that Miss Lusk had left 
the troupe to enter the service of a trav- 
eling magnetic physician — a woman — for 
a large salary. They (the troupe) were 
now in Europe and had heard nothing 
of Miss Lusk since. 

After receiving this information by 
cable, Livingston sat a long time smok- 
ing and thinking: people often disap- 
peared in a great city, and the police 
would undoubtedly find the magnetic 
physician if he applied to them. Of 
course that was the sensible thing to do, 
but then the publicity, and he hated that 
for the girl's sake. Finally he decided to 
compromise the matter by employing a 
detective. With him to decide that it was 
expedient to do a certain thing was the 
same as to act ; before night the case was 
in the hands of an expert detective who 
received a goodly retainer. Two weeks 
from that day — it was December twenty- 
fourth — before he left his boarding place, 
the detective was announced. He had 
found the woman in a small town near 
Chicago. She said that she had no knowl- 
edge of Miss Lusk's whereabouts. Di- 
anthe had remained with her three weeks, 
and at the end of that time had mysteri- 
ously disappeared ; she had not heard of 
her since. 

Livingston secured the woman's name 
and address, gave the man a second check 
together with an admonition to keep si- 
lence concerning Miss Lusk. That closed 
the episode. But of his observations and 
discoveries, Aubrey said nothing, noting 
every phase of this strange happening in 
silence. 

Strangely enough, none of the men 
that had admired the colored artist who 
had enthralled their senses by her won- 
derful singing a few weeks before, rec- 
ognized her in the hospital waif conse- 
crated to the service of science. Her in- 
cognito was complete. 

The patient was now allowed the free- 
dom of the corridors for exercise, and 



was about her room during the day. The 
returns of the trance-state were growing 
less regular, although she frequently fell 
into convulsions, thereby enduring mucn 
suffering, sometimes lying for hours in a 
torpid state. Livingston had never hap- 
pened to be present on these occasions, 
but he had heard of them from eye-wit- 
nesses. One day he entered the room 
while one was occurring. His entrance 
was unnoticed as he approached lightly 
over the uncarpeted floor, and stood 
transfixed by the scene before him. 

Dianthc stood upright, with closed 
eyes, in the middle of the room. Only the 
movement of her bosom betrayed breath. 
The other occupants of the room pre- 
served a solemn silence. She addressed 
Reuel, whose outstretched arms were ex- 
tended as if in blessing over her head. 

"Oh ! Dearest friend ! hasten to cure 
me of my sufferings. Did you not prom- 
ise at that last meeting? You said to me, 
'You are in trouble and I can help you/ 
And I answered, The time is not yet.' Is 
it not so?" 

"Yes," replied Reuel. "Patience a 
while longer; all will be well with you/ 1 

"Give me the benefit of your powerful 
will," she continued. "I know much but 
as yet have not the power to express it : 
I see much clearly, much dimly, of the 
powers and influences behind the Veil, 
and yet I cannot name them. Some time 
the full power will be mine; and mine 
shall be thine. In seven months the sick 
will be restored — she will awake to 
worldly cares once more." TTcr voice 
ceased ; she sank upon the cot in a re- 
cumbent position. Her face was pale; 
she appeared to sleep. Fifteen minutes 
passed in death-like stillness, then she 
extended her arms, stretched, yawned, 
rubbed her eyes — awoke. 

Livingston listened and looked in a 
trance of delight, his keen artistic sense 
fully aroused and appreciative, feeling 
the glamour of her presence and ethereal 
beauty like a man poring over a poem 



THE COLORED AMERICAN MAGAZINE. 



1 08 

that he has unexpectedly stumbled upon, 
losing himself in it, until it becomes, as 
it were, a part of himself. He felt as he 
watched her that he was doing a foolish 
thing in thus exposing himself to temp- 
tation while his honor and faith were 
pledged to another. But then, foolish- 
ness is so much better than wisdom, par- 
ticularly to a man in certain stages of life. 
And then he fell to questioning if there 
could be temptation for him through this 
girl — he laughed at the thought and the 
next instant dismay covered him with 
confusion, for like a flash he realized that 
the mischief was already done. 

As we have already hinted, Aubrey 
was no saint ; he knew that fickleness was 
in his blood; he had never denied him- 
self anything that he wanted very much 
in his whole life. Would he grow to want 
this beautiful woman very much? Time 
would tell. 

* * * * 

It was Christmas-time — a good, sensible 
seasonable day before Christmas, with frost 
and ice in abundance, and a clear, bright, 
wintry sky above. Boston was very full 
of people — mostly suburban visitors — 
who were rushing here and there bent on 
emptying their purses on the least provo- 
cation. Good-nature prevailed among 
the pedestrians; one poor wretch stood 
shivering, with blue, wan face, on the 
edge of the sidewalk, his sightless eyes 
staring straight before him, trying to 
draw a tune from a consumptive violin 
— the embodiment of despair. He was, 
after all, in the minority, to judge by the 
hundreds of comfortably-clad forms that 
hurried past him, breathing an atmos- 
phere of peace and prosperity. 

Tomorrow the church bells would ring 
out tidings that another Christmas was 
born, bidding all rejoice. 

This evening, at six o'clock, the two 
friends went to dine in a hotel in a fash- 
ionable quarter. They were due to spend 
the night and Christmas day at the Vance 
house. As they walked swiftly along 



with the elastic tread of youth, they 
simultaneously halted before the blind 
musician and pressed into his trembling 
hand a bountiful gift ; then they hurried 
away to escape his thanks. 

At the hotel Livingston called for a pri- 
vate dining room, and after the coffee 
was served, he said : 

"Tell me, Briggs, what is the link be- 
tween you and your patient. There is a 
link, I am sure. Her words while in the 
trance made a great impression upon 
me. 

There was a pause before Reuel re- 
plied in a low tone, as he rested his arm 
on the opposite side of the table and 
propped his head up on his hand : 

"Forgive me, Aubrey!" 

"For what?" 

"This playing with your confidence. I 
have not been entirely frank with you." 

"Oh, well! you are not bound to tell 
me everything you know. You surely 
have the right to silence about your af- 
fairs, if you think best." 

"Listen, Aubrey. I should like to tell 
you all about it. I would feel better. 
What you say is true ; there is a link ; but 
I never saw her in the flesh before that 
night at the Temple. With all our 
knowledge, Aubrey, we are but barbari- 
ans in our ideas of the beginning, interim 
and end of our creation. Why were we 
created? for whose benefit? can anyone 
answer that satisfactorily? 

" Tew things are hidden from the man 
who devotes himself earnestly and seri- 
ously to the solution of a mystery/ Haw- 
thorne tells us," replied Aubrey. "Have 
not you proved this, Reuel?" 

"Well, yes— or, we prove rather, that 
our solution but deepens the mystery or 
mysteries. I have surely proved the last. 
Aubrey, I look natural, don't I ? There ^ 
nothing about me that seems wrong?" 

"Wrong! No." 

"Well, if I tell you the truth you will 
call me a lunatic. You have heard of 
people being haunted by hallucinations?" 



OF ONE BLOOD. 



109 



Aubrey nodded. "I am one of those per- 
sons. Seven weeks ago I saw Dianthe 
first, but not in the flesh. Hallow-eve I 
spoke to her in the garden of the haunted 
house, but not in the flesh. I thought : t 
strange to be sure, that this face should 
lurk in my mind so much of the time; 
but I never dreamed what a crisis it was 
leading up to. The French and German 
schools of philosophy have taught us 
that going to places and familiar passages 
in books, of which we have had no pre- 
vious knowledge, is but a proof of 
Plato's doctrine — the soul's transmigra- 
tion, and reflections from the invisible 
world surrounding us. 

"Finally a mad desire seized me to find 
that face a living reality that I might 
love and worship it. Then I saw her at 
the Temple — I found her at the hospital 
— in the flesh! My desire was realized/' 

"And having found her, what then?" 
He waited breathlessly for the reply. 

"I am mightily pleased and satisfied. I 
will cure her. She is charming; and if it 
is insanity to be in love with her, I don't 
care to be sane." 

Livingston did not reply at once. His 
face was like marble in its impassiveness. 
The other's soft tremulous tones, fearless 
yet moist eyes and broken sentences, ap- 
peared to awaken no response in his 
breast. Instead, a far-off gleam came in- 
to his blue eyes. At last he broke the si- 
lence with the words : 

"You name it well; it is insanity in- 
deed, for you to love this woman." 

"Why?" asked his friend, constrain- 
edly. 

"Because it is not for the best" 
"For her or me?" 

"Oh, for her !" he finished the 

sentence with an expressive gesture. 

"I understand you, Aubrey. I should 
not have believed it of you. If it were 
one of the other fellows; but you are 
generally so charitable." 

"You forget your own words : Tramps, 
stray dogs and Negroes ,' " he 



quoted significantly. "Then there is your 
professional career to be considered, — you 

mean honorable, do you not? How 

can you succeed if it be hinted abroad that 
you are married to a Negress?" 

"I have thought of all that. I am de 
termined. I will marry her in spite of hell 
itself ! Marry her before she awakens to 
consciousness of her identity. I'm not 
unselfish ; I don't pretend to be. There 
is no sin in taking her out of the sphere 
where she was born. God and science 
helping me, I will give her life and love 
and wifehood and maternity and perfect 
health. God, Aubrey! you, with all you 
have had of life's sweetness, petted idol 
of a beautiful world, you who will soon 
feel the heart-beats of your wife against 
your breast when lovely Molly is eternally 
bound to you, what do you know of a 
lonelly, darkened life like mine? I have 
not the manner nor the charm which 
wins women. Men like me get love from 
them which is half akin to pity, when 
they get anything at all. It is but the 
shadow. This is my opportunity for hap- 
piness ; I seize it. Fate has linked us to- 
gether and no man and no man's laws 
shall part us." 

Livingston sipped his wine quietly, in- 
tently watching Reuel's face. Now he 
leaned across the table and stretched out 
his hand to Briggs; his eyes looked full 
into his. As their hands met in a close 
clasp, he whispered a sentence across the 
board. Reuel started, uttered an exclama- 
tion and flushed slowly a dark, dull red. 

"How — where — how did you know 
it?" he stammered. 

"I have known it since first we met ; but 
the secret is safe with me." 

CHAPTER VI. 

The scene which met the gaze when an 
hour later the young men were ushered 
into the long drawing-room of the Vance 
house was one well-calculated to remove 
all gloomy, pessimistic reasoning. 



I IO 



THE COLORED AMERICAN MAGAZINE. 



Warmth, gaiety, pretty women, luxury, — 
all sent the blood leaping through the 
veins in delightful anticipation. 

Their entrance was greeted by a shout 
of welcome. 

"Oh, Aubrey! I am so glad you are 
come," cried Molly from the far end of 
the room. 44 Fancy tomorrow being 
Christmas ! Shall we be ready for all that 
company tomorrow night and the ball- 
room, dining room and hall yet to be 
trimmed? Is it possible to be ready?" 

"Not if we stand dwadling in idle talk. ' 
This from "Adonis," who w r as stretched 
full length on the sitting-room sofa, with 
a cigarette between his lips, his hands 
under his handsome head, surrounded by 
a bevy of pretty, chattering girls, promi- 
nent among whom was Cora Scott, who 
aided and abbetted Charlie in every piece 
of mischief. 

Molly curled her lip but deigned no 
reply. 

Bert Smith, from a corner of the room 
where he was about ascending a step-lad- 
der, flung a book heavily at Adonis's lazy 
figure. 

"Don't confuse your verbs," exclaimed 
Aubrey. "How can you stand when you 
are lying clown, and were you ever known 
to do anvthing else but dwadle, Adonis — 
eh ?" 

'I ti\t: it up," said Charlie, sleepily, 
kicking the buok off the sofa. 

"Is this an amateur grocery shop, may 
I ask, Miss Vance?" continued Aubrey as 
he and Briggs made their way to their 
hostess through an avalanche of parcels 
and baskets strewn on the tables and the 
floor. 

Molly laughed as she greeted them. 
"No wonder you are surprised. I am 
superintending the arrangement of tny 
poor people's gifts," she explained. "Thev 
must all be sent out tonight. I don't 
know what I should have done without al! 
these good people to help me. But there 
are piles to be done yet. There is the 



tree, the charades, etc., etc.," she contin- 
ued, in a plaintive little voice. 

"More particularly cetra, cetra," said 
Aubrey from Bert's corner where he had 
gone to help along the good works of 
placing holly wreaths. 

"Oh, you, Aubey — stop being a maq 
pie." Aubrey and Molly were very mat- 
ter of fact lovers. 

"Molly," again broke in Charlie, "sa;*.- 
l^ose the box from Pierson's has n*ver 
ccme, won't you be up a tree?" and the 
speaker opened his handsome eyes wide, 
and shook off his cigarette-ash. 

Molly maintained a dignified silence to- 
ward her brother. The firelight danced 
and dwelt upon her lovingly. She was so 
pretty, so fair, so slender, so graceful. 
Now in her gray plush tea-gown, with her 
hair piled picturesquely on the top of her 
small head, and fixed there with a big 
tortoise-shell pin, it would have been dif- 
ficult to find a more delightful object for 
the gaze to rest upon. 

"We shall have to fall back upon the 
wardrobes," she said at length. "You 
are a horrid wet-blanket, Charlie! I am 
sure I " 

Her remarks were cut short as the door 
opened, and with laughter and shouting 
a bevy of young people who had been at 
work in another part of the house rushed 
in. "It is come; it's all right; don't 
worry, Molly !" they sang in chorus. 

"Do be quiet all of you ; one can hardly 
hear oneself speak !" 

The box from the costumer's had ar- 
rived ; the great costume party was saved ; 
in short, excitement and bustle were in 
full swing at Vance Hall as it had been at 
Christmas-time since the young people 
could remember. 

Adonis lifted himself from the sofa 
and proposed to open the box of dresses 
at once, and try them on. 

"Charlie, you are a brick! — the verv 
thing!" 

"Oh ! yes, yes ; let us try them on !" 
Molly broke through the eager voices : 



OF ONE BLOOD. 



1 1 1 



"And we have not done the ball-room 
yet!" she said reproachfully. 

"( )h! bother the ball-room !" declared 
Adonis, now thoroughly aroused. "We 
have all night. We can't do better than 
to don our finery/' 

•Molly sat down with an air of resigned 
patience. "I promised Mr. Pierson," she 
observed quietly, "that the box should not 
l»o touched until he was here to superin- 
tend matters/' 

"Oh, Pierson be blowed !" elegantly ob- 
served her brother. 15 tit Ketiel Priggs 
suddenly dropped his work, walked over, 
and sided with Molly. 

"Von are quite right, Miss Molly; and 
y.- ;ii Charlie and Aubrey and the rest of 
\ou men. if you want to open the box to- 
night you must first decorate the ball- 
room, business before pleasure." 

"Saved! — saved! Sec my brave, true 
knight defends his lady fair." Molly 
danced, practising the step she was about 
to astonish the company with on Christ- 
mas-night. "I think I am what the Scotch 
call 'fev/ " she laughed. "I don't know 
why I fee! so awfully jolly tonight. I 
C"uld pns ; tivelv fly from sheer excitement 
and delight/' 

"Don't you know why ?" observed Cora. 
"T will tell you. It is because this is 
\-fv t :r last Christmas as Molly Vance; next 
vcar " 

"Ah. rlo not !" interrupted Molly, quick- 
!v. "Who knows what a year may bring 
f'rth. Is it not so. Dr. Priggs?" she 
turned popealingly to Reuel. 

"Crief follows joy as clouds the sun- 
r-^ht. * Woe ! woe ! each heart must bleed, 
must break/ " was his secret thought as 
he br v.cd gravely. Put on his face was a 
look of startled perplexity, for suddenly 
as she c v-ke to him it appeared that a 
dark veil .-ettied like a nail over the laugh- 
ing f-'cc a f \v< sirle. IT? slrvered. 

"Whm's the matter. Priggs?" called 
<v*t Adonis. They had reached the ball- 
room and were standing over the piles 
of !i« -l!v and evergreen, ready for an on- 
^ao. ht n the walls. 



"Don't be surprised if Priggs acts 
strangely/' continued Charlie. "It is in 
order for him to whoop it up in the spirit 

line." 

"Why, Charlie! What do you mean?" 
questioned Molly with an anxious glance 
at Reuel. 

"Anything interesting, Charlie?" called 
out a jolly girl across the room. 

"Priggs is our 'show' man. Haven t 
you heard, girls, what a celebrity is with 
yon tonight? Priggs is a philosopher — 
mesmerism is his specialty. Say, old 
man, give the company a specimen of 
your infernal art, can't you? He goes the 
whole hog, girls ; can even raise the 
dead." 

"Let up, Charlie," said Aubrey in a 
low tone. It's no joking matter." 

There were screams and exclamations 
from the girls. With reckless gaiety 
Adonis continued, 

"What is to be the outcome of the 
great furore you have created, Priggs?" 

"Nothing of moment, I hope," smiled 
Reuel, good-naturedly. I have been 
simply an instrument ; I leave results to 
the good angels who direct events. What 
does Longfellow' say about the arrow 
and the song? 

'Long:, lone: afterwards, in an r.ak 
I found the arrow still unbroUe; 
And the sons:, from bosrinnins to end, 
I found in the heart of a friend/ 

May it be so with my feeble efforts." 

"Put circumstances alter cases. Tn this 
rase, the 'arrow' is a girl and a devilish 
handsome one, too; and the 'air' is the 
whole scientific world. Your philosophy 
and mysticism gave way before Beauty. 
Argument is a stubborn man's castle, but 
the heart is still unconvinced." 

" 'I mixed those children up, and not 
a creature knew it,' " hummed Pert 
Smith. "Your ideas are mixed, Don ; 
stick to the ladies, you understand girls 
and horseflesh; philosophy isn't in your 
lire." 



112 



THE COLORED AMERICAN MAGAZINE. 



"Oh, sure!" said Adonis unruffled by 
his friend's words. 

"Charlie Vance," said Molly severely, 
"if we have any more swearing from you 
to night, you leave the room until yuu 
learn to practice good manners. I'm sur- 
prised at your language!" 

"Just the same, Briggs is a fraud. I 
shall keep my eye on him. It's a case of 
beauty and the beast. Oh," he continued 
in malicious glee, "wouldn't you girls 
turn green with envy, every man jack of 
you, if you could see the beauty!" 

Thereupon the girls fell to pelting him 
with holly wreaths and evergreen fes- 
toons, much to the enjoyment of Mr. 
Vance, who had entered unperceived in 
the general melee. 

"What is it all about, Dr. Briggs?" 
asked Molly in a low voice. 

"It is the case of a patient who was in 
a mesmeric sleep and I was fortunate 
enough to awaken her. She is a waif; 
and it will be months before she will be 
well and strong, poor girl." 

"Do you make a study of mesmerism, 
Doctor ?" asked Mr. Vance from his arm- 
chair by the glowing fire. 

"Yes sirjand a wonderful science it is." 
Before Mr. Vance could continue, Liv- 
ingston said : "If you folks will be still for 
about ten minutes, I'll tell you what 
happened in my father's house when I 
was a verv small boy; I can just remem- 
ber it." 

"If it's a ghost story, make it strong, 
Aubrey, so that not a girl will sleep to- 
night. Won't the dears look pretty blink- 
ing and yawning tomorrow night ? We'H 
hear 'em, fellows, in the small hours of 
the morning, 'Molly, Molly! I'm so 
frightened. I do believe someone is in my 
room ; may I come in with you, dear ?' " 

"Charlie, stop your nonsence," laughed 
his father, and Adonis obediently sub- 
sided. 

"My father was Dr. Aubrey Livingston 
too," began Aubrey, "and he owned a 
large plantation of slaves. My father was 



deeply interested in the science of medi- 
cine, and I believe made some valuable 
discoveries along the line of mesmeric 
phenomena, for some two or three of his 
books are referred to even at this ad- 
vanced stage of discovery, as marvellous 
in some of their data. 

"Among the slaves was a girl who was 
my mother's waiting maid, and I have 
seen my father throw her into a trance- 
state many times when I was so small that 
I had no conception of what he was do- 
ing. 

"Many a time I have known him to cail 
her into the parlor to perform tricks of 
mind-reading for the amusement of visi- 
tors, and many wonderful things were 
done by her as the record given in his 
books shows. 

"One day there was a great dinner 
party given at our place, and the elite 
of the county were bidden. It was about 
two years before the civil war, and our 
people were not expecting war ; thinking 
that all unpleasantness must end in their 
favor, they gave little heed to the omi- 
nous rumble of public opinion that was 
arising at the North, but went on their 
way in all their pride of position and 
wealth without a care for the future. 

"Child as I was I was impressed by the 
beauty and wit of the women and the 
chivalric bearing of the men gathered 
about my father's hospitable board on that 
memorable day. When the feasting and 
mirth began to lag, someone called for 
Mira — the maid — and my father sent for 
her to come and amuse the guests. 

"My father made the necessarv passes 
and from a serious, rather sad Negress, 
very mild with everyone, Mira changed to 
a gay, noisy, restless woman, full of irony 
and sharp jesting. In this case this 
peculiar metamorphosis always occurred. 
Nothing could be more curious than to 
see her and hear her. 'Tell the com- 
pany what you see, Mira,' commanded 
my father. 

"You will not like it, captain ; but if I 



THE TEST OF MANHOOD. 



113 



must, I must. All the women will be 
widows and the men shall sleep in early 
graves. They come from the north, from 
the east, from the west, they sweep to the 
gulf through a trail of blood. Your 
houses shall burn, your fields be laid 
waste, and a down-trodden race shall rule 
in your land. For you, captain, a prison 
cell and a pauper's grave. " 

The dinner-party broke up in a panic, 
and from that time my father could not 
abide the girl. He finally sold her just 
a few months before the secession of the 
Confederate States, and that was the last 
we ever knew of her." 

''And did the prophecy come true aboiu 
your father? asked Mr. Vance. 

'Too true, sir; my father died while 
held as a prisoner of war, in Boston Har- 
bor. And every woman at the table was 
left a widow. There is only too much 
truth in science of mesmeric phenomena. 
The world is a wonderful place." 

''Wonderful !" declared his hearers. 

"I am thinking of that poor, pretty 
creature lying ill in that gloomv hospital 
without a friend. Men are selfish ! I tell 
you what, folks, tomorrow after lunch 
we'll make a Christmas visit to the 
patients, and carry them fruit and flowers. 
As for your beautiful patient, Dr. Briggs, 
she shall not be friendless any longer, she 



shall come to us at Vance Hall." 

"Molly!" broke simultaneously from 
Aubrey and Charlie. 

"Oh, I mean it. There is plcntv 01 
room in this great house, and here she 
shall remain until she is restored to 
health." 

Expostulation was in vain. The petted 
heiress was determined, and when Mr. 
Vance was appealed to he laughed and 
said, as he patted her hand : 

"The queen must have her own." 

At length the costumcr's box was 
opened amidst jest, song and laughter. 
The characters were distributed by the 
wilful Molly. Thus attired, to the music 
of Tannhauser's march, played by one of 
the girls on the piano, the gay crowd 
marched and counter-marched about the 
spacious room. 

In the early morning hcu:s, Aubrey 
Livingston slept and dreamed of Dianthe 
Lusk, and these words haunted his sleep 
and lingered with him when he woke : 

"She had the glory cf heaven in her 
voice, and in her face the fatal beauty of 
man's terrible sins." 

Aubrey Livingston knew that he was 
as hopelessly lost as was Adam when he 
sold his heavenly birthright for a 
woman's smile. 

( To be continued. ) 



THE TEST OF MANHOOD. 

A CHRISTMAS STORY. 

SARAH A. ALLEN. 



The shed door creaked softly, and 
Mark Myers stood for a moment peering 
into the semi-darkness of the twilight. 
He was a stalwart lad of about eighteen, 
with soft dark curls, big dark eyes, and 
the peach-like complexion of a girl, but 
he was only a Negro, what the colored 
people designate as "milk an' molasses, 
honey: neither one thing nor t'other," 



and he was leaving his home to try his 
fortune at the North. 

On day Mark had carried a white gen- 
tleman's bag to the steamboat landing and 
as he loitered abou the pier after pocketing 
a generous fee, the words of the patron 
in conversation with another white man 
sank in his heart : 

"After all this wasted blood and trea- 



OF ONE BLOOD. 191 

OF ONE BLOOD.* 

OR THE HIDDEN SELF. 

PAUUNB E. HOPKINS. 



SYNOPSIS OF CHAPTERS I TO VI. 
Reuel Briggs, a young medical student, interested in 
mysticism, sees a face that haunts him. He attends a 
concert with his friend Aubrey Livingston, and there 
discovers in a negro concert-singer the owner of the 
mysterious face. He sees this woman again on Hallow 
Eve while playing at charms with a party of young 
people at Vance Hall, the home of Livingston's be- 
trothed. Early the next morning he is called to attend 
the victims of a railroad disaster at the hospital. He 
hnds among them the girl whose face haunts him, in a 
cataleptic sleep which the doctors call death. He suc- 
ceeds in restoring her to consciousness, but with a 
complete loss of memory. She loses her identity as a 
negress. Reuel falls deeply in love with her. 

CHAPTER VII. 

Through days and days, and again 
through days and days, over and over 
again, Reuel Briggs fought to restore his 
patient to a normal condition of health. 
Physically, he succeeded ; but mentally his 
treatment was a failure. Memory re- 
mained a blank to the unhappy girl. Her 
life virtually began with her awakening 
at the hospital. A look of wonder and a 
faint smile were the only replies that 
questions as to the past elicited from her. 
Old and tried specialists in brain diseases 
and hypnotic states came from every part 
of the Union on bootless errands. It was 
decided that nothing could be done ; rest, 
freedom from every care and time might 
eventually restore the poor, violated mind 
to its original strength. Thus it was that 
Dianthe became the dear adopted daugh- 
ter of the medical profession. Strange to 
say, Molly Vance secured her desire, and 
wearing the name of Felice Adams. 
Dianthe was domiciled under the roof of 
palatial Vance hall, and the small annuity 
provided by the generous contributions of 
the physicians of the country was placed 
in the hands of Mr. Vance, Sr., to be ex- 
pended for their protege. 

The astonishing nature of the startling 
problems he had unearthed, the agitation 

? Copyright, 1902, by Pauline B. Hopkins. 



and indignation aroused in him by the 
heartless usage to which his patient must 
have been exposed, haunted Briggs day 
and night. He believed that he had been 
drawn into active service for Dianthe by 
a series of strange coincidencies, and the 
subtle forces of immortality ; what future 
acts this service might require he knew 
not, he cared not ; he registered a solemn 
promise to perform all tasks allotted him 
by Infinity, to the fullest extent of his 
power. 

The brilliant winter days merged them- 
selves into spring. After one look into 
Dianthe's eyes, so deep, clear and true, 
Molly Vance had surrendered uncondi- 
tionally to the charm of the beautiful 
stranger, drawn by an irresistible bond of 
sympathy. "Who would believe," she ob- 
served to Livingston, "that at this stage 
of the world's progress one's identity 
could be so easily lost and one still be 
living. It is like a page from an excit- 
ing novel. ,, 

With the impulsiveness of youth, 1 
wonderful friendship sprang up between 
the two; they rode, walked and shopped 
together; in short, became inseparable 
companions. The stranger received every 
attention in the family that could be given 
an honored guest. Livingston and Briggs 
watched her with some anxiety; wouli 
she be able to sustain the position of in- 
timate friendship to which Molly had 
elected her? But both breathed more 
freely when they noted her perfect man- 
ners, the ease and good-breeding dis- 
played in all her intercourse with those 
socially above the level to which they 
knew this girl was born. She acceded 
the luxury of her new surroundings a? 
one to the manner born. 



192 



THE COLORED AMERICAN MAGAZINE. 



"We need not have feared for her; by 
Jove, she's a thorough-bred!" exclaimed 
Aubrey one day to Reuel. The latter 
nodded as he looked up from his hook. 

"And why not? Probably the best 
blood of the country flows in the poor 
girl's veins. Who can tell ? Why should 
she not be a thorough-bred." 

•True," replied Aubrey, as a slignt 
frown passed over his face, 

"I am haunted by a possibility, Au- 
brey," continued Reuel. "What if mem- 
ory suddenly returns? Is it safe to risk 
the unpleasantness of a public reawaken- 
ing of her sleeping faculties? I have 
read of such things." 

Aubrey shrugged his handsome shoul- 
ders. "We must risk something for the 
sake of science ; where no one is injured 
by deception there is no harm done." 

"Now that question has presented itself 
to me repeatedly lately: Is deception 
justifiable for any reason? Somehow it 
haunts me that trouble may come from 
this. I wish we had told the exact truth 
about her identity." 

" 'If 'twere done when 'tis done, then 
'twere well it were done quickly " mur- 
mured Aubrey with a sarcastic smile jii 
his face. "How you balk at nothing, 
Reuel," he drawled mockingly. 

"Oh, call me a fool and done with it, 
Aubrey: I supose I am; but one didn't 
make one's self." 

Drives about the snow-clad suburbs of 
Cambridge with Briggs and Molly, at 
first helped to brighten the invalid ; then 
came quiet social diversions at which 
Dianthe was the great attraction. 

It was at an afternoon function that 
Reuel took courage to speak of his love. 
A dozen men buzzed about "Miss Adams" 
in the great bay window where Molly had 
placed Dianthe, her superb beauty set off 
by a simple toilet. People came and went 
constantly. Musical girls, generally with 
gold eyeglasses on aesthetic noses, played 
grim classical preparations, which have as 
cheerful an effect on a gay crowd as the 



perfect, irreproachable skeleton of a by- 
gone beauty might have; or articulate, 
with cultivation and no voices to speak of, 
arias which would sap the life of a true 
child of song to render as the maestro in- 
tended. 

The grand, majestic voice that had 
charmed f he hearts from thousands of 
bosoms, was pinioned in the girl's throat 
like an imprisoned song-bird. Dianthe's 
voice was completely gone along with her 
memory. But music affected her strange- 
ly, and Reuel watched her anxiously. 

Her face was a study in its delicate, 
quickly changing tints, its sparkle of 
smiles running from the sweet, pure 
tremor of the lovely mouth to the swift 
laughter of eyes and voice. 

Mindful of her infirmity, Reuel led her 
to the conservatory to escape the music. 
She lifted her eyes to his with a curious 
and angelic light in them. She was con- 
scious that he loved her with his whole 
most loving heart. She winced under the 
knowledge, for while she believed in him, 
depended upon him and gathered strength 
from his love, what she gave in return 
was but a slight, cold affection compared 
with his adoration. 

He brought her refreshments in the 
conservatory, and then told his love and 
asked his fate. She did not answer at 
once, but looked at his plain face, at the 
stalwart elegance of his figure, and again 
gazed into the dark, true, clever eyes, and 
with the sigh of a tired child crept into 
his arms, and into his heart for all time 
and eternity. Thus Aubrey Livingston 
found them when the company had de- 
parted. So it was decided to have the 
wedding in June. What need for these 
two children of misfortune to wait? 

Briggs, with his new interest in life, 
felt that it was good just to be alive. The 
winter passed rapidly, and as he threaded 
the streets coming and going to his hos- 
pital duties, his heart sang. No work was 
now too arduous ; he delighted in the duty 
most exacting in its nature. As the spring 



OF OXE BLOOD. 



193 



came in it brought with it thoughts of the 
future. He was almost penniless, and he 
saw no way of obtaining the money he 
needed. He had not been improvident, 
but his lonely life had lived a reckless 
disregard of the future, and the value of 
money. He often lived a day on bread 
and water, at the same time sitting with- 
out a fire in the coldest weather because 
his pockets were empty and he was too 
proud to ask a loan, or solicit credit from 
storekeepers. He now found himself in 
great difficulty. His literary work and 
the extra cases which his recent triumph 
had brought him, barely sufficed for his 
own present needs. Alone in his bachelor 
existence he would call this luxury, but it 
was not enough to furnish a suitable es- 
tablishment for Dianthe. As the weeks 
rolled by and nothing presented itself, he 
grew anxious, and finally resolved to con- 
sult Livingston. 

All things had become new to him, and 
in the light of his great happiness the very 
face of old Cambridge was changed. Fate 
had always been against him> and had 
played him the shabbiest of tricks, but 
now he felt that she might do her worst, 
he held a talisman against misfortune 
while his love remained to him. Think- 
ing thus he walked along briskly, and 
the sharp wind brought a faint color into 
his sallow face. He tried to think and 
plan, but his ideas were whirled away be- 
fort they had taken form, and he felt a 
giant's power to overcome with each in- 
spiring breath of the crisp, cool March 
air. Aubrey should plan for him, but he 
would accomplish. 

Livingston had apartments on Dana 
Hill, the most aristocratic portion of 
Cambridge. There he would remain till 
the autumn, when he would marry Molly 
Vance, and remove to Virginia and re- 
new the ancient splendor of his ancestral 
home. He was just dressing for an even- 
ing at the theatre when Briggs entered 
his rooms. He greeted him with his usual 
genial warmth. 



"What!" he said gaily, "the great sci- 
entist here, at this hour ?" 

Then noticing his visitor's anxious 
countenance he added: 

"What's the matter?" 

"I am in difficulties and come to you 
for help," replied Reuel. 

"How so? What is it? I am always 
anxious to serve you, Briggs." 

"I certainly think so or I would not be 
here now," said Reuel. "But you are just 
going out, an engagement perhaps with 
Miss Molly. My business will take some 
time—" 

Aubrey interrupted him, shaking his 
head negatively. "I was only going out 
to wile away the time at the theatre. Sit 
down and free your mind, old man." 

Thus admonished, Reuel flung himself 
among the cushions of the divan, and be- 
gan to state his reasons for desiring as- 
sistance: when he finished, Livingston 
asked : 

"Has nothing presented itself?" 

"O yes ; two or three really desirable 
offers which I wrote to accept, but to my 
surprise, in each case I received polite re- 
grets that circumstances had arisen to pre- 
vent the acceptance of my valuable ser- 
vices. That is what puzzles me. What 
the dickens did it mean?" 

Aubrey said nothing but continued a 
drum solo on the arm of his chair. Final- 
ly he asked abruptly: "Briggs, do you 
think anyone knows or suspects your 
origin ?" 

Not a muscle of Reuel's face moved as 
he replied, calmly : "I have been wonder- 
ing if such can be the case." 

"This infernal prejudice is something 
horrible. It closes the door of hope and 
opportunity in many a good man's face. 
I am a Southerner, but I am ashamed of 
my section," he added warmly. 

Briggs said nothing, but a dark, dull 
red spread slowly to the very roots of his 
hair. Presently Aubrey broke the painful 
silence. 

"Briggs, I think I can help you." 



194 



THE COLORED AMERICAN MAGAZINE. 



"Hew?" 

"There's an expedition just about start- 
ing from England for Africa; its final 
destination is, I believe, the site of ancient 
Ethiopian cities; its object to unearth 
buried cities and treasure which the shift- 
ing sands of Sahara have buried for cen- 
turies. This expedition lacks just such a 
medical man as you ; the salary is large, 
but you must sign for two years ; that is 
my reason for not mentioning it before. 
It bids fair to be a wonderful venture and 
there will be plenty of glory for those 
who return, beside the good it will do to 
the Negro race if it proves the success in 
discovery that scholars predict. I don't 
advise you to even consider this oppor- 
tunity, but you asked for my help and this 
is all I can offer at present." 

"But Dianthe !" exclaimed Reuel faint- 

iy. 

"Yes," smiled Aubrey. "Don't I know 
how I would feel if it were Molly and I 
was in your place? You are like all other 
men, Reuel. Passion does not calculate, 
and therein lies its strength. As long as 
common sense lasts we are not in love. 
Now the answer to the question of ways 
and means is with you; it is in your 
hands. You will choose love and pov- 
erty I suppose ; I should. There are peo- 
ple fools enough to tell a man in love to 
keep cool. Bah ! It is an impossible thing." 

"Does true love destroy our reasoning 
faculties ?" Reuel asked himself as he sat 
there in silence after his friend ceased 
speaking. He felt then that he could not 
accept this offer. Finally he got upon his 
feet, still preserving his silence, and made 
ready to leave his friend. When he 
reached the door, he turned and said : "I 
will see you in the morning." 

For a long time after Briggs had gone, 
Aubrey sat smoking and gazing into the 
glowing coals that filled the open grate. 

All that night Reuel remained seated in 
his chair or pacing the cheerless room, 
conning ways and means to extricate him- 
self from his dilemma without having re- 



course to the last extremity proposed by 
Aubrey. It was a brilliant opening; 
there was no doubt of that; a year — six 
months ago — he would have hailed it with 
delight, but if he accepted it, it would 
raise a barrier between his love and him 
which could not be overcome — the ocean 
and thousands of miles. 

"Oh, no!" he cried, "a thousand times 
no! Rather give up my ambitions." 

Then growing more rational he gazed 
mournfully around the poor room and 
asked himself if he could remain and see 
his wife amid such surroundings? That 
would be impossible. The question then, 
resolved itself into two parts: If he re- 
mained at home, they could not marry, 
therefore separation ; if he went abroad, 
marriage and separation. He caught at 
the last thought eagerly. If then they 
were doomed to separate, of two evils 
why not choose the least? The African 
position would at least bind them ir- 
revocably together. Instantly hope re- 
sumed its sway in Reuel's breast so fertile 
is the human mind in expedients to calm 
the ruffled spirit; he began to estimate 
the advantages he would gain by accept- 
ing the position: He could marry 
Dianthe, settle a large portion of his 
salary upon her thus rendering her in- 
dependent of charity, leave her in the care 
of the Vance family, and return in two 
years a wealthy man no longer fearing 
poverty. He had never before builded 
golden castles, but now he speculated up- 
on the possibility of unearthing gems and 
gold from the mines of ancient Meroe 
and the pyramids of Ethiopia. In the 
midst of his fancies he fell asleep. In the 
morning he felt a wonderful relief as he 
contemplated his decision. Peace had re- 
turned to his mind. He determined to 
see Aubrey at once and learn all the par- 
ticulars concerning the expedition. Provi- 
dentially, Aubrey was just sitting down 
to breakfast and over a cup of steaming 
coffee Reuel told his decision, ending with 
these words: "Now, my dear Aubrey, it 



OF OyE BLOOD. 



195 



may be the last request I may ever ask 
of you, for who can tell what strange ad- 
ventures may await me in that dark and 
unknown country to which Fate has 
doomed me?" 

Livingston tried to remonstrate with 
him. 

"I know what I am saying. The 
climate is murderous, to begin with, and 
there are many other dangers. It is bet- 
ter to be prepared. I have no friend but 
you." 

"Between us, Reuel, oaths are useless ; 
you may count upon my loyalty to all your 
interests," said Aubrey with imprcssive- 
ness. 

"I shall ask you to watch over Dianthe. 
I intrust her to you as I would intrust her 
to my brother, had I one. This is all 1 
ask of vou when I am in that far coun- 
try." 

With open brow, clear eyes and grove 
face, Aubrey Livingston replied in solemn 
tones : 

"Reuel, you may sail without a fear. 
Moliy and I will have her with us always 
like a dear sister." 

Hand clasped in hand they stcod a mo- 
ment as if imploring heaven's blessing on 
the solemn compact. Then they turned 
the conversation on the business of secur- 
ing the position at once. 

CHAPTER VIII. 

Reuel was greatly touched during the 
next three months by the devotion of his 
friend Livingston, whose unselfishness in 
his behalf he had before had cause to 
notice. Nor was this all; he seemed 
capable of any personal sacrifice that the 
welfare of Briggs demanded. 

Before many days had passed he had 
placed the young rpan in direct communi 
cation with the English officials in charge 
of the African expedition. The salary 
was most generous; in fact, all the ar- 
rangements were highly satisfactory. 
Whatever difficulties really existed 
melted, as it were, before Aubrey's influ- 



ence, and Reuel would have approached 
the time of departure over a bed of roses 
but for the pain of parting with Dianthe. 

At length the bustle of graduation was 
over. The last article of the traveler's 
outfit was bought. The morning of the 
day of departure was to see the ceremony 
performed that would unite the young 
people for life. It was a great comfort to 
Reuel that Charlie Vance had decided to 
join the party as a tourist for the sake of 
the advantages of such a trip. 

The night before their departure Au- 
brey Livingston entertained the young 
men at dinner in his rooms along with a 
number of college professors and other 
learned savans. The most complimentary 
things were said of Reuel in the after- 
dinner toasts, the best of wishes were 
uttered together with congratulations on 
the marriage of the morrow for they all 
admired the young enthusiast. His su- 
periority was so evident that none dis- 
puted it; they envied him, but were not 
jealous. The object of their felicitations 
smiled seldom. 

"Come, for heaven sake shake off your 
sadness; he the happy groom upon whom 
Fortune, fickle jade, has at last consented 
to smile," cried Adonis. So, amid laugh- 
ter and jest, the night passed and the mor- 
row came. 

After his guests had departed, Aubrey 
Livingston went to the telegraph office 
and sent a message : 
"To Jim Titus, 

"Laurel Hill, Virginia: — 

"Be on hand at the New York dock, 
Trans-Atlantic Steamship Co., on the 
first. I will be there to make things right 
for you. Ten thousand if you succeed the 
first six months. 

A. L." 



It was noon the next day and the new- 
ly wedded stood with clasped hands ut- 
tering their good-byes. 

"You must not be unhappy, dear. The 
time will run by before you know it, and 



THE COLORED AMERICAN MAGAZINE. 



i -hail be with you again. Meanwhile 
ti.crv.- is plenty to occupy yon. You have 
Ivioiiy and Aubrey to take you about. But 
pray remember my advice, — don't at- 
tempt too much; you're not strong by 
any means. 19 

"No, I am not strong!" she interrupted 
with a wild burst of tears. "Reuel, if you 
knew how weak I am you would not leave 
me/' 

Her husband drew the fair head to his 
bosom, pressing back the thick locks with 
a lingering lover's touch. 

* 4 I wish to God I could take you with 
me/' he said tenderly after a silence. 
Dear girl, you know this grief of yours 
would break my heart, only that it shows 
how well you love me. I am proud of ev- 
ery tear/' She looked at him with an 
expression he could not read ; it was full 
of unutterable emotion — love, anguish, 
compassion. 

"Oh," she said passionately, "nothing 
remains long with us but sorrow and re- 
gret Every good thing may be gone to- 
morrow — lost! Do you know, I some- 
times dream or have waking visions of a 
past time in my life? But when I try to 
grasp the fleeting memories they leave me 
groping in darkness. Can't you help me, 
Reuel?" 

With a laugh he kissed away her 
anxieties, although he was dismayed to 
know that at most any time full memory 
might return. He must speak to Aubrey. 
Then he closed her lips with warm lin- 
gering kisses. 

"Be a good girl and pray for your hus- 
band's safety, that God may let us meet 
again and be happy! Don't get excited. 
That you must guard against." 

And Reuel Briggs, though his eyes 
were clouded with tears, was a happy man 
at heart that day. Just that once he 
tasted to the full all that there is of happi- 
ness in human life. Happy is he who is 
blessed with even one perfect day in a 
lifetime of sorrow. His last memory of 
her was a mute kiss and a low "God bless 



you," broken by a sob. And so they 
parted. 

In the hall below Molly Vance met him 
with a sisterly kiss for good-bye ; outside 
in the carriage sat Mr. Vance, Sr., Chi.rlie 
and Aubrey waiting to drive to d-.-pot. 

Reuel Briggs, Charlie Vance and their 
servant, Jim Titus, sailed from Xew York 
for Liverpool, England, on the first day 
of July. 

The departure of the young men made 
a perceptible break in the social circle at 
Vance Hall. Mr. Vance buried himself 
in the details of business and the two 
girls wandered disconsolately about the 
house and grounds attended by Liv- 
ingston, who was at the Hall constantly 
and pursued them with delicate atten- 
tions. 

By common consent it was determined 
tiiat no summer exodus could be thought 
of until after the travellers had reached 
August, all being well, they would seek 
the limit of civilized intercourse in Africa. 
While waiting, to raise the spirits of the 
family, it was decided to invite a house 
party for the remainder of July, and in 
the beauties of Bar Harbor. Soon gaiety 
and laughter filled the grand old rooms; 
the days went merrily by. 

Two men were sitting in the billiard 
loom lounging over iced punch. Light, 
perfumed and golden, poured from the 
rooms below upon the summer night, and 
the music of a waltz made its way into 
the darkness. 

"What an odd fish Livingston has 
grown to be," said one, relighting a thin, 
delicate-looking cigar. "I watched him 
out of curiosity a while ago and was 
struck at the change in him." 

"Ah!" drawled the other sipping the 
cooling beverage. "Quite a Priuli on the 
whole, eh?" 

" Y-e-s ! Precisely. And I have fancied 
that the beautiful Mrs. Briggs is his 
Clarisse. What do you think ? She shud- 



OF ONE BLOOD. 



197 



ders every time he draw s near, and sinks 
to the ground under the steady gaze of 
his eye. Odd, isn't it?" 

"Deucedly odd! About to marry Miss 
Vance, isn't he ?" 

"That don't count. Love is not always 
legitimate. If there's anything in it, it is 
only a flirtation probably; that's the 
style." 

" What you say is true, Skelton. Let's 
drink the rest of this stuff and go down 
again. I know we're missed already." 

When they had swallowed the punch 
and descended, the first person they saw 
was Livingston leaning against the door 
of the salon. His face was abstracted 
and in dead repose, there lurked about the 
corners of his full lips implacable resolu- 
tion. The waltz was ended. 

Some interminable argument was go- 
ing on, generally, about the room. Con- 
versation progressed in sharp, brisk sen- 
tences, which fell from the lips like the 
dropping shots of sharpshooters. There 
was a call for music. Molly mentally cal- 
culated her available talent and was about 
to give up the idea and propose something 
else, when she was amazed to see Dianthe 
rise hurriedly from her seat on an otto- 
man, go to the piano unattended and sit 
down. Unable to move with astonish- 
ment she watched in fascination the slen- 
der white fingers flash over the keys. 
There was a strange rigid appearance 
about the girl that was unearthly. Never 
once did she raise her eyes. At the first 
sharp treble note the buzz in the room 
was hushed at stillness. Livingston 
moved forward and rested his arm upon 
the piano fastening his gaze upon the 
singer's quivering lips. 

Slowly, tremulously at first, pealed 
forth the notes : 

"Go down, Moses, way down in Egypt's 
land, 

Tell or Pharaoh, let my people go." 

Scarcely was the verse begun when ev- 
ery person in the room started suddenly 



and listened with eager interest. As the 
air proceeded, some grew visibly pale, 
and not daring to breathe a syllable, 
looked horrified into each other's faces. 
''Great heaven !" whispered Mr. Vance to 
his daughter, "do you not hear another 
voir-- beside Mrs. Briggs'?" 

T vas true, indeed. A weird contralto, 
veiled as it were, rising and falling upon 
every wave of the great soprano, and 
reaching the ear as from some strange 
distance. The singer sang on, her voice 
dropping sweet and low, the echo follow- 
ing it, and at the closing word, she fell 
back in a dead faint. Mr. Vance caught 
her in his arms. 

"Mrs. Briggs has the soul of an artiste. 
She would make a perfect prima donna 
for the Grand Opera," remarked one man 
to Molly. 

"We are as surprised as anyone," re- 
plied the young girl ; "we never knew 
that Mrs. Briggs was musical until this 
evening. It is a delightful surprise. ,, 

They carried her to the quiet, jzool li- 
brary away from the glaring lights and 
the excitement, and at her request left her 
there alone. Her thoughts were painful. 
Memory had returned in full save as to 
her name. She knit her brow in painful 
thought, finally leaning back among her 
cushions wearily, too puzzled for further 
thought. Presently a step paused beside 
her chair. She looked up into Living- 
ston's face. 

"Are you feeling better?" he asked, 
gently taking in his slender wrist and 
counting the pulse-beats. 

Instead of answering his question, she 
began Abruptly: "Mr. Livingston, Reuel 
told me to trust you implicitly. Can you 
and will you tell me what has happened 
to me since last I sang the song I have 
sung here tonight? I try to recall the 
past, but all is confusion and mystery. It 
makes my head ache so to think." 

Livingston suddenly drew closer to 
her. 



THE COLORED AMERICA* MAGAZINE. 



4, Yes, Felice, there is a story in your 
life ! I can save you." 

''Save me!" e::ciainied the girl. 

"Yes, and will! Listen to me." In 
gentle accents lie recounted to her there 
in the stillness, with the pulsing music 
of the viols beating and throbbing in her 
ears like muffled drums, the story of 
Dianthe Lusk as we have told it here. At 
the close of the tale the white-faced girl 
turned to him in despair the more elo- 
quent because of her quietness. 

"Did Reuel know that I was a Ne- 
gress?" 

"No; no one recognized you but my- 
self." 

She hid her face in her hands. 

"Who ever suffered such torture as 
mine?" she cried, bitterly. "And there is 
no rest out of the grave !" she continued. 

"Yes, there is rest and security in my 
love! Felice, Dianthe, I have learned to 
love you !" 

She sprang from his touch as if stung. 

He continued : "I love you better than 
all in the world. To possess you I am 
prepared to prove false to my friend — I 
am prepared to save you from the fate 
that must be yours if ever Reuel learns 
your origin." 

"You would have me give up all for 
you ?" she asked with a shudder. 

"Ay, from your husband — from the 
world ! We will go where none can ever 
find us. If you refuse, I cannot aid you." 

"Pity me!" 

She sank upon her knees at his feet. 

"I give you a week to think it over. I 
can love, but cannot pity." 

In vain the girl sought to throw off the 
numbing influence of the man's presence. 
In desperation she tried to defy him, but 
she knew that she had lost her will-power 
and was but a puppet in the hands of this 
false friend. 

CHAPTER IX. 

"The Doctor is so good to you about let- 
ters; so different from poor Charlie. I 



can't imagine what he finds to write 
about." 

It was the first of August, and the last 
guest had left the mansion; tomorrow 
they started for Bar Harbor. Molly, 
Dianthe and Livingston sat together in 
the morning room. 

"He tells me the incidents of the jour- 
ney. This is the last letter for three 
months," said Dianthe, with a sigh. 

"Of course, there is no love-making," 
said Aubrey, lazily letting fall his news- 
paper, and pushing his hands through his 
bright hair. He was a sight for gods and 
men. His handsome figure outlined 
against the sky, as he stood by the win- 
dow in an attitude of listless grace, hi* 
finely-cut face, so rich in cblor and the 
charm of varying expression, turned in- 
dolently toward the two women to whom 
the morning mail had brought its offer- 
ing. 

"Have you ever read one of Reuel's let- 
ters?" Dianthe said, quietly. "You may 
see this if you like." A tap sounded on 
the door. 

"Miss Molly, if you please, the dress- 
maker has sent the things." 

"Oh, thank you, Jennie, Til come at 
once !" and gathering up her letters, Mol- 
ly ran off with a smile and a nod of 
apology. 

Aubrey stood by the window reading 
Reuel's letter. His face was deadly white, 
and his breath came quick and short. 
He read half the page; then crushed it 
in his hand and crossed the room to 
Dianthe. She, too, was pale and there 
was something akin to fear in the gaze 
that she lifted to his face. 

"How dare you ?" he asked breathless- 
ly; "but you are a woman! Not one of 
you has any delicacy in her heart! Not 
one!" 

He tore the letter across and flung it 
from him. 

"I do not suffer enough," he said in a 
suffocated voice. "You taunt me with 
this view of conjugal happiness — with 
his right to love and care for you." 



OF ONE BLOOD. 



199 



"I did not do it to hurt you," she an- 
swered. "Do you have no thought for 
Molly's sufferings if I succumb to your 
threats of exposure and weakly allow my- 
self to be frightened into committing the 
great wrong you contemplate toward two 
true-hearted people? I thought you 
could realize if you could know how 
Reuel loves and trusts me, and how true 
and noble is his nature/' 

"Do you think I have room to pity 
Reuel — Molly — while my own pain is 
more than I can bear? Without you my 
ambition is destroyed, my hope for the 
future — my life is ruined." 

He turned from her and going to a dis- 
tant part of the room, threw himself into 
a chair and covered his face with his 
hands. Against her will, better prompt- 
ings and desires, the unfortunate girl is 
drawn by invisible influences across the 
room to the man's side. Presently he 
holds her in his eager, strong embrace, 
his face and tears hidden against her 
shoulder. She does not struggle in his 
clasp, only looks into the future with the 
hopeless agony of dumb despair. 

At length he broke the silence. "There 
is nothing you can feel, or say to me that 
I do not realize — the sin, the shame, the 
lasting disgrace. I know it all. I told 
you once I loved you; I tell you now 
that I cannot live without you !" 

An hour later Dianthe sat alone in the 
pleasant room. She did not realize the 
beauty of the lanquid mid-summer day. 
She thought of nothing but the wicked- 
ness of betraying her friends. Her per- 
fect features were like marble. The dark 
eyes had deep, black circles round them 
and gazed wistfully into the far, far dis- 
tance, a land where spirit only could com- 
pass the wide space. As she sat there in 
full possession of all her waking faculties, 
suddenly there rose from out the very 
floor, as it were, a pale and lovely woman. 
She neither looked at Dianthe nor did 
she speak; but walked to the table and 
opened a book lying upon it and wrote; 



then coming back, stood for a moment 
fixed; then sank, just as she rose, and 
disappeared. Her dress was that of a 
servant. Her head was bare; her hair 
fell loosely around her in long black 
curls. Her complexion was the olive of 
mulattoes or foreigners. As the woman 
passed from her view, Dianthe rose and 
went to the table to examine the book. 
She did not feel at all frightened, recog- 
nizing instantly the hand of mysticism in 
this strange occurrence. There on the 
open page, she perceived heavy marks in 
ink, under-scoring the following quota- 
tion from the 12th chapter of Luke: "For 
there is nothing covered that shall not be 
revealed." On the margin, at the end of 
this passage was written in a fine female 
hand, the single word, "Mira." 



After luncheon Aubrey proposed that 
they go canoeing on the river. The idea 
was eagerly embraced and by five o'clock 
the large and luxurious canoe floated out 
from the boat-house upon the calm 
bosom of the lovely Charles rocking soft- 
ly to the little waves that lapped her 
sides. 

The day had been oppressive, but upon 
the river a refreshing breeze was blowing 
now that the sun had gone down. For 
the time all Dianthe's cares left her and 
her tortured mind was at peace. Molly 
was full of life and jested and sang and 
laughed. She had brought her mandolin 
with her and gave them soft strains of 
delicious waltzes. 

On, on they glided under the impetus 
of the paddle-strokes in Aubrey's skilful 
hands, now past the verdure-clad pine 
hills, now through beds of fragrant water- 
lilies getting gradually farther and 
farther from the companionship of other 
pleasure-seekers. On, into the unin- 
habited portion where silent woods and 
long green stretches of pasture-land 
added a wild loneliness to the scene. 

How lovely was the evening sky with 



200 



THE COLORED AMERICAN MAGAZINE. 



its white clouds dotting the azure and the 
pink tinting of the sunset casting over all 
its enlivening glow ; how deep, and dark 
was the green of the water beneath the 
shadowing trees. From the land came 
the lowing of cows and the sweet scent 
of freshly sprc.it) hay. 

Suddenly Aubrey's paddle was caught 



and held in the meshes of the water-lilv 
stems that floated all about them. He 
leaned far over to extricate it and in a 
moment the frail craft was bottom up, its 
living freight struggling in the river. 
Once, twice, thrice a thrilling call for help 
echoed over the darkening land ; then all 
was still. 



( To be continued. ) 



THE ANGLO-SAXON 

PROP. KELLY MILLER 

The recent deliverance of Mr. James 
Bryce, in his now famous Oxford lecture, 
serves to emphasize anew the urgency of 
the race problems whose solution is per- 
haps the chief duty of the twentieth cen- 
tury. Although Mr. Bryce has presented 
littie that is new to the student of this 
phase of sociologic inquiry, nevertheless 
his width of information, his unusual 
power of clear statement, and his high 
personal authority have already focused 
the matter upon the world's attention. 
The lecture is made to hinge upon the 
race question in the United States, al- 
though the author has studied, at first 
hand, the relations of the various races 
of mankind in "the ends of all the earth." 
It is in this country, however, that we 
have the two races of the widest ethnic 
divergence thrown into the closest inti- 
macy of contact. 

In dealing with this problem we must 
take cognizance of the fact that there are 
certain clearly ascertained sociologic fac- 
tors that have well-nigh the force and 
persistency of natural law as it operates 
in the physical world. True, there may 
be no absolute sociologic constants that 
have no variableness or shadow of turn- 
ing; nevertheless, they are so slowly 

* Prom The Arena. Published by special arranges) 



AND THE AFRICAN * 

P HOWARD UNIVERSITY. 

modifiable that we may regard them as 
fixed factors so far as concerns their 
practical bearing upon our present-day 
problems. 

Our notion of the race problem has 
grown, hitherto, mainly out of the anti- 
slavery conflict, in which the advocates, 
on the one hand, exalted the negro as far 
above his real status as those on the other 
hand debased him below it. In all vio- 
lent controversy the truth is apt to lie 
midway between the extreme claims of 
the disputants. As the anti-slavery 
advocates were triumphant in the outcome 
of the issue, their views were lauded as 
containing the whole truth, while the 
contentions of their adversaries were 
treated as pure diabolism born of bitter- 
ness and iniquity. But the heat of feel- 
ing is slowly dying away. The North is 
becoming disillusioned as to its too fervid 
conclusions and is beginning to view the 
situation in a calmer and more rational 
light. We can never be on the right road 
to solution of this problem until the 
North, the South, and the negro — the 
three parties in interest — are willing to 
stand and work together on the common 
basis of ascertained fact. 

at with the Alliance Publishing Co., New York, N. Y. 



264 



THE COLORED AMERICAN MAGAZINE. 



OF ONE BLOOD* * 

OR, THE HIDDEN SELF. 



bYXOI'SIS OF CHAl'TKRS I TO X. 

Reuel Brings, a young medical student, interested in 
mysticism, sees a face that haunts him He attends a 
conceit with his friend Aubiey I,i\ ingston. and tht-re 
discovers in a uegro conccrt-Mtiger tiie ownc: of the 
mysterious face, lie sci'i this woman u^.iin 011 Hallow 
Eve while playing at charms with a party of \oung 
people at Vance Hall, the home of Livingston s be- 
trothed. Karly the next morning he is called to attend 
the victims of a railroad disaster at the hospital. He 
finds among them the girl whose face haunt* him. in a 
cataleptic sieep which the doctors call death. He suc- 
ceeds in restoring her to consciousness, hut with a 
complete loss of memory she 'o-.es her identity as a 
negiess. Reuel falls deeply in love with her. He 
finally restores her to health and determines to marry 
her. but finds his circumstances too straitened Au- 
brey Livingston helps him out by offering to obtain 
for him a place in an expedition about to explore the 
ancient city of Meroe in Africa Reuel accepts, but 
marries Diauthe before goiug^ on a two years' venture. 
After his departure Dianthe finds that Livingston is in 
love with her. and he acquires a power over her that 
she cannot resist. She agrees to fly with him against 
her will ; but before the time set they with Molly 
Vance go out canoeing and are overturned in the river, 
and all three are supposed to have been drowned. 

CHAPTER X. 

The expedition with which Reuel 
Briggs found himself connected was made 
up of artists, savans and several men — 
capitalists — who represented the business 
interests of the venture. Before the white 
cliffs of the English coast were en- 
tirely lost to view, Reuel's natural pro- 
pensities for leadership were being fullv 
recognized by the students about him. 
There was an immediate demand for his 
professional services and he was kept 
busy for many days. And it was the 
best panacea for a nature like his — dceo 
and silent and self-suppressing. He had 
abandoned happiness for duty ; he had 
stifled all those ominous voices which rose 
from the depth of his heart, and said to 
him: "Will you ever return? and if you 
return will you find your dear one? and, 
if you find her, will she not have 
changed? will she have preserved your 
memory as faithfully as you will preserve 
hers? 

A thousand times a day while he per- 

?Copyright, 1902, by Pauline E. Hopkins. 



formed his duties mechanically, his fate 
haunted him — the renunciation which 
called on him to give up happiness, to 
open to mishap the fatal door absence. 
All the men of the party were more or 
less silent and distrait, even Charlie 
V ance was subdued and thoughtful. But 
Briggs suffered more than any of them, 
although he succeeded in affecting a cer- 
tain air of indifference. As he gradually 
calmed down and peace returned to his 
mind, he was surprised to feel the resig- 
nation that possessed him. Some unseen 
presence spoke to his inner being words 
of consolation and hope. He was shown 
very clearly his own inability *o control 
events, and that his fate was no longer in 
his own hands but ordered by a being of 
infinite pity and love. After hours spent 
in soul-communion with the spirit of 
Diar. *, he would sink into refreshing 
slun.oer and away in peace. Her letters 
were bright spots, very entertaining and 
describing minutely her life and daily oc- 
cupation since his departure. He lived 
upon them during the voyage to Tripoli, 
sustained by the hope of finding one upon 
arriving at that city. 

One fine evening when the sun was 
setting, they arrived at Tripoli. Their 
course lay toward the southward, and 
standing on deck, Reuel watched the 
scene — a landscape strange in form, 
which would have delighted him and 
filled him with transports of joy ; now he 
felt something akin to indifference. 

The ripples that flit the burnished sur- 
face of the long undulating billows tinkled 
continually on the sides of the vessel. He 
was aware of a low-lying spectral-pale 
band of shore. That portion of Africa 
whose nudity is only covered by the fal- 
low mantle of the desert gave a most sad 



OF ONE BLOOD. 



265 



impression to the gazer. The Moors call 
it "Bled el Ateusch," the Country of 
Thirst ; and, as there is an intimate rela- 
tion between the character of a country 
and that of its people, Reuel realized 
vividly that the race who dwelt here must 
be different from those of the rest of the 
world. 

"Ah! that is our first glimpse of Af- 
rica, is it?" said Adonis's voice, full of 
delight, beside him. 

He turned to see his friend offering him 
a' telescope. "At last we are here. In the 
morning we shall set our feet on the en- 
chanted ground." 

In the distance one could indeed make 
out upon the deep blue of the sky the pro- 
file of Djema el Gomgi, the great mosque 
on the shores of the Mediterranean. At a 
few cable lengths away the city smiles at 
them with all the fascination of a mod- 
ern Cleopatra, circled with an oasis of 
palms studded with hundreds of domes 
and minarets. Against a sky of amethyst 
the city stands forth with a penetrating 
charm. It is the eternal enchantment of 
the cities of the Orient seen at a distance ; 
but, alas! set foot within them, the illu- 
sion vanishes and disgust seizes you. Like 
beautiful bodies they have the appearance 
of life, but within the worm of decay and 
death eats ceaselessly. 

At twilight in this atmosphere the city 
outlines itself faintly, then disappears in 
dusky haze. One by one the stars came 
into the sky until the heavens were a 
twinkling blaze ; the sea murmured even 
her soft refrain and slept with the trans- 
parency of a mirror, flecked here and 
there with fugitive traces of phosphores- 
cence. 

The two young men stood a long time 
on the deck gazing toward the shore. 

"Great night!" exclaimed Adonis at 
length with a long-drawn sigh of satis- 
faction. "It promises to be better than 
anything Barnum has ever given us even 
at a dollar extra reserved seat." 

Reuel smiled in Rpite of himself ; after 



all, Charlie was a home-line warranted to 
ward off homesickness. On board there 
was the sound of hurrying feet and a 
murmur of suppressed excitement, but it 
had subsided shortly ; an hour later "sleep 
and oblivion reigned over all." 

In the morning, amid the bustle of de- 
parture the mail came on board. There 
were two letters for Reuel. He seated 
himself in the seclusion of the cabin safe 
from prying eyes. Travelling across the 
space that separated him from America, 
his thoughts were under the trees in the 
garden of Vance Hall. In the fresh morn- 
ing light he thought he could discern the 
dress of his beloved as she came toward 
him between the trees. 

Again he was interrupted by Charlie's 
jolly countenance. He held an open letter 
in his hand. "There, Doc, there's Molly's 
letter. Read it, read it; don't have any 
qualms of conscience about it. There's a 
good bit in it concerning the Madam, see? 
I thought you'd like to read it." Then 
he sauntered away to talk with Jim Titus 
about the supplies for the trip across the 
desert. 

Jim was proving himself a necessary 
part of the expedition. He was a Negro 
of the old regime who felt that the Anglo- 
Saxon was appointed by God to rule over 
the African. He showed his thoughts in 
his obsequious manner, his subservient 
"massa," and his daily conversation with 
those about him. Jim superintended the 
arrangement of the table of the exploring 
party, haggled over prices with the huck- 
sters, quarreled with the galley cooks and 
ended by doing all the cooking for his 
party in addition to keeping his eye on 
"Massa Briggs." All of this was very 
pleasant, but sometimes Reuel caught a 
gleam in Jim's furtive black eye which 
set him thinking and wondering at the 
latter 's great interest in himself ; but he 
accounted for this because of Livingston's 
admonitions to Jim to "take care of Dr. 
Briggs." 

Willing or not, the company of travel- 



266 



THE COLORED AMERICAN MAGAZINE. 



lcrs were made to take part in the noisy 
seerie on deck when a hunle of dirty ra>- 
cals waylaid them, and after many use.-> 
and combination of all sorts over a few 
cents, they and their luggage were trans- 
ported t(j the Custom J loii.>e. "Ye gods!" 
exclaimed Charlie in deep disgust, "what 
a jostling, and what a noi^e." 

All the little world about them was in 
an uproar, everyone signalling, gesticu- 
lating, speaking at once. Such a fray 
bewilders a civilized man, but those fa- 
miliar with Southern exuberance regard 
it tranquilly, well knowing the disorder is 
more apparent than real. Those of the 
party who were familiar with the scene, 
looked on highly amused at the bewilder- 
ment of the novices. 

Most of them had acquired the neces- 
sary art of not hurrying, and under their 
direction the examination of the baggage 
proceeded rapidly. Presently, following 
a robust porter, they had traversed an 
open place filled with the benches and 
chairs of a "cafe," and soon the travel- 
lers were surprised and amused to find 
themselves objects of general curiosity. 
( uhVcand nargiles were there merely as a 
orelext, in reality the gathering was in 
their honor. The names of the members 
of the expedition were known, together 
with its object of visiting Meroe of an- 
cient fame, the arrival of such respect-'Ke 
visitors is a great event. Then, too, Trip- 
oli is the natural road by which Africa 
has been attacked by many illustrious ex- 
plorers because of the facility of commu- 
nication with the country of the Black's. 
Xowhere in northern Africa does the 
(ireat Desert advance so near the sea. 
The Atlas range rises from the Atlantic 
coast, extending far eastward.. This range 
loses itself in the gulf of Little Svrta. and 
the vast, long-pent-up element, knowing 
no more barrier, spreads its yellow, sandy 
waves as far as the Xile. enveloping the 
last half-submerged summits which form 
a rosary of oases. 

t nder the Sultan's rule Tripoli has re- 



mained the capital of a truly barbaric 
state, virgin of improvements, with just 
enough dilapitated abandon, dirt and pic- 
ture>queness to make the delight of the 
artisi. Arabs were everywhere; veiled 
v omen looked at the Christians with 
melting eyes above their wrappings. Mo- 
hammedanism, already twelve centuries 
old, has, after a period of inactivity, 
awakened anew in Africa, and is rapidly 
spreading. Very unlike the Christians, 
the faithful of today are the same fervid 
Faithful of Omar and Mohammed. In- 
credulity, indifference, so widely spread 
among other sects are unknown to them. 

Supper-time found the entire party 
seated on the floor around a well-spread 
tray, set on a small box. They had taken 
posses-ion of the one living-room of a 
mud house. It was primitive but clean. 
A post or two supported the thatched ceil- 
ing. There were no windows. The fur- 
niture consisted of a few rugs and cush- 
ions. But the one idea of the party hSv g 
sleep, they were soon sunk in a prof air i 
and dreamless slumber. 

The next day and the next were spe;.t 
in trying to gain an audience with ill ? 
Sheik Mohammed Abd:dlah. and iN- d: v, 
lengthened into week's and a month final- 
ly rolled into oblivion. Meantime llv:\ 
were no letters for 'Dr. Rriggs and Char- 
lie Vance. I '.very one else in the part' 
had been blessed with many letters, even 
Jim was not forgotten. 

Reuel had learned to 1>e patient in tin 
dolce far miente of the Iv'st. but :vt s • 
Charlie. He fumed pud frette 1 c> n'inu- 
allv after the first weeks had n-isscd. Rut 
promptl v at two, one hot afternoon the 
Sheik knocked at the (\mv of their hut. 
lie was a handsome man of forty vcts 
— tall, straight, with clear brown eyes, 
good features, a well-shaped moustache 
and well-trimmed black beard. Authori- 
ty surrounded him like an atmosphere. 
He greeted the party in French and Ara- 
bic and invited them to his house where a 
feast was spread for them. Presents were 



OF ONE BLOOD. 



267 



given and received and then they were in- 
troduced to Ababdis, an owner of camels 
who was used to leading parties into the 
wilderness. After much haggling over 
prices, it was decided to take lit teen cam- 
els and their drivers. Supplies were to 
consist of biscuit, rice, tea, sugar, coiTee, 
wax candles, charcoal and a copious sup- 
ply of water bags. It was decided not to 
start until Monday, after the coming of 
the mail, which was again due. After 
leaving Tripoli, it was doubtful when 
they would receive news from America 
again. The mail came. Again Jim was 
the only one who received a letter from 
the United States. Reuel handed it to 
him with a feeling of homesickness and 
a sinking of the heart. 

Monday morning found them mounted 
and ready for the long journey across the 
desert to the first oasis. From the back 
of a camel Charlie Vance kept the party 
in good humor with his quaint remarks. 
"Say, Doc, it's worth the price. How I 
wish the pater, your wife and Molly could 
see us now, Livingston wouldn't do a 
thing to these chocolate colored gentry of 
Arabia." 

"And Miss Scott? where does she come 
in?" questioned Reuel with an assump- 
tion of gaiety he was far from feeling. 

"Oh," replied Charlie, not at all non- 
plussed. "Cora isn't in the picture; I'm 
thinking of a houri." 

"Same old thing, Charlie— the ladies?" 

"Xo," said Charlie, solemnly. "It's 
business this time. Say, Briggs, the sight 
of a camel always makes me a child again. 
The long-necked beast is inevitably asso- 
ciated in my mind with Barnum's circus 
and playing hookey. Pop wants me to 
put out my sign and go in for business, 
but the show business suits me better. For 
instance," he continued with a wave of 
his hand including the entire caravan, 
"Arabs, camels, stray lions, panthers, 
scorpions, serpents, explorers, etc., with a 
few remarks by yours truly, to the accom- 
paniment of the band — always the band 



you know, would make an interesting 
show — a sort of combination of Barnui.i 
and Kiralfy. The houris would do Kiral- 
fy s act, you know. There's money in it. ' 

"Were you ever serious in your life, 
Charlie?" 

"\\ hat the deuce is the need of playing 
funeral all the time, tell me that, Briggs, 
will you ?" 

The great desert had the sea's monoto- 
ny. They rode on and on hour after 
hour. The elements of the view were 
simple. Narrow valleys and plains bound- 
ed by picturesque hills lay all about them. 
The nearer hills to the right had shoul- 
ders and hollows at almost regular inter- 
vals, and a sky-line of an almost regular 
curve. Under foot the short grass always 
seemed sparse, and the low sage-shrubs 
rather dingy, but as they looked over the 
plain stretching away in every direction, 
it had a distinctly green tint. They saw 
occasionally a red poppy and a purple iris. 
Not a tree was to be seen, nor a rock. 
Sometimes the land lay absolutely level 
and smooth, with hardly a stone larger 
than a bean. The soft blue sky was cloud- 
less, the caravan seemed to be the only 
living creature larger than a gazelle in 
the great solitude. Even Reuel was 
aroused to enthusiasm by the sight of a 
herd of these graceful creatures skim- 
ming the plain. High in the air the larks 
soared and sang. 

As they went southward the hot sun 
poured its level rays upon them, and the 
song of the drivers was a relief to their 
thoughts. The singing reminded travel- 
lers of Venetian gondoliers, possessing as 
it did the plaintive sweetness of the most 
exquisite European airs. There was gen- 
erally a leading voice answered by a full 
chorus. Reuel thought he had never 
heard music more fascinating. Ababdis 
would assume the leading part. "Ah, 
when shall I see my family again; the 
rain has fallen and made a canal between 
me and my home. Oh, shall I never see 
it more?" Then would follow the chorus 



268 



THE COLORED AMERICAS MAGAZ1XE. 



of drivers: "Oh, what pleasure, what de- 
light, to see my family again ; when 1 see 
my father, mother, brothers, sisters, I will 
hoist a tlag on the head of my camel fur 
joy!" About the middle of the week they 
were making their way over the Great 
bescrt where it becomes an elevated pla- 
teau crossed by rocky ridges, with in 
veiling sandy plains mostly barren, b, ' 
with here and there a solitary tree, and 
sometimes a few clumps of grass. The 
caravan was skirting the ba>e of one of 
these ridges, which culminated in a cliff 
looking, in the distance, like a half-ruined 
castle, which the Arabs believed to be en- 
chanted. Reuel determined to visit this 
cliff, and saving nothing to any one, and 
accompanied only by Jim and followed by 
the warnings of the Arabs to beware of 
lions, they started for the piles of mason- 
ry, which they reached in a couple of 
hours. The moon rose in unclouded 
splendor, and Moore's lines came to his 
heart : 

"O, such a blessed night as this, 
I often think if friends were near, 

How we should feel, and gaze with bliss 
Upon the moonlight scenery here." 

He strolled into the royal ruin, stumb- 
ling over broken carvings, and into hol- 
lows concealed by luminous plants, be- 
neath whose shades dwelt noisome things 
that wriggled away in the marvelous 
white light. Climbing through what was 
once a door, he stepped out on a ledge of 
masonry, that hung sheer seven hundred 
feet over the plain. Reuel got out his 
pipe and it was soon in full blast, while 
the smoker set to building castles in the 
curls of blue smoke, that floated lightly 
into space. Jim with the guns waited for 
him at the foot of the hill. 

Under the influence of the soothing 
narcotic and the spell of the silver moon, 
Reuel dreamed of fame and fortune he 
would carry home to lay at a little wom- 
an's feet. Presently his castle-building 
was interrupted by a low vail — not exact- 
ly the mew of a cat, nor yet the sound of 
a lute. 



.Again the sound. 
What could it be? 

"Ah, I have it!" muttered Reuel; "it's 
the Arabs singing in the camp." 

Little did he imagine that within ten 
paces of him crouched an enormous 
le< 'pard. 

Little did he imagine that he was creep- 
ing, creeping toward him, as a cat 
«pirms at a bird. 

i 'e sat on the ruined ledge of the para- 
pet, within two feet of the edge; seven 
hundred feet below the desert sand glit- 
tered like molten silver in the gorgeous 
nr.-' mlight. 

I fe was unarmed, having given Jim his 
revolver to hold. 

Reuel sat there entirely unconscious of 
danger; presently a vague feeling strucK 
him. not of fear, not of dread, but a feel- 
ing that if he turned his head he would 
see an enemy, and without knowing why, 
he slowly turned his head. 

Great heavens! what did he see? A 
i brill of horror passed through him as his 
eyes rested upon those of an enormous 
brute, glaring like hot coals set in blood- 
red circles. 

Its mouth was wide open, its whiskers 
moving like the antennal of a lobster. It 
by on its belly, its hindquarters raised, its 
forcnaws planted in the tawny sand ready 
to spring. 

The moon played on the spots of its 
body. The dark spots became silvered, 
and relapsed into darkness as the animal 
breathed, while its tail lashed about, occa- 
sionally whipping the sand with a pe- 
culiar whish. 

How was he to withstand its spring? 

The weight of its body would send him 
over the precipice like a shot. 

Strange to say a grim satisfaction came 
to him at the thought that the brute must 
go down with him. Where could he 
hold? Could he clutch at anything? he 
asked himself. 

He dared not remove his eyes from 
those of the leopard. He could not in 



OF ONE BLOOD. 



269 



fact. But in a sort of introverted glance 
he saw that nothing stood between him 
and space but a bare, polished wall, that 
shone white beneath the moonbeams. 

"Was there a loose stone — a stone that 
would crush in the skull of the blood- 
thirsty animal ?" Not so much as a pebble 
to cast into the depths, for he had already 
searched for one to fling over, as people 
do when perched on imminences. He 
cried for help, "Jim ! Jim ! O-o-o-h, Jim !" 

There came no reply ; not the slightest 
sound broke the stillness as the scund of 
his cries died away. 

Reuel was now cool — cool as a cucum- 
ber — so cool that he deliberately placed 
himself in position to receive the rush of 
the terrific brute. He felt himself mov- 
ing gently back his right foot, shuffling it 
back until his heel came again an uneven- 
ness in the rock, which gave him a sort of 
purchase — something to back it. 

He gathered himself together for a su- 
preme effort, every nerve being at the 
highest condition of tension. 

It is extraordinary all the thoughts that 
pass like lightning in a second of time, 
through the mind, while face to face with 
death. Volumes of ideas flashed through 
his brain as he stood on the stone ledge, 
with eternity awaiting him, knowing that 
this would be the end of all his hopes and 
fears and pleasant plans for future hap- 
piness, that he would go down to death 
in the embrace of the infuriated animal 
before him, its steel-like claws buried in 
his flesh, its fetid breath filling his nos- 
trils. He thought of his darling love, and 
of how the light would go out of her ex- 
istence with his death. He thought of 
Livingston, of the fellows who had gath- 
ered to bid him God speed, of the para- 
graphs in the papers. All these things 
came as harrowing pictures as he stood at 
bay in the liquid pearl of the silent moon. 

The leopard began to move its hind- 
quarters from side to side. A spring was 
at hand. 

Renel yelled then — yelled till the walls 



of the ruined castle echoed again — yelled 
as if he had 10,000 voices in his throat — 
yelled, as a man only yells when on his 
being heard depends his chance for dear 
life. 

The beast turned its head sharply, and 
prepared to spring. For a second Briggs 
thought that a pantomime trick might 
give him a chance. What if he were to 
wait until the animal actually leaped, and 
then turn aside? 

Carried forward by its own weight and 
momentum it would go over the ledge 
and be dashed to pieces on the rocks be- 
low. 

It was worth trying. A drowning man 
catches at a straw. Instinctively Reuel 
measured his distance. He could step 
aside and let the brut^u^.. -but that was 
all. The ledge was narrow. Ht >yas, un- 
happily, in very good addition. Tfre s#a- 
voyage had fattened torn, and it' was just 
a chance that he could escaper4>eing car- 
ried over by the brute. 

He accepted the chance. 

Then came the fearful moment. 

The leopard swayed a little backward f 

Then, to his intense delight, he heard a 
shout of encouragement in Vance's well- 
known voice, "Coming, Briggs, coming !" 

The next moment a hand was laid on 
his shoulder from a window above ; it was 
Charlie, who trembling with anxiety had 
crept through the ruin, and, oh, blessed 
sight! handed Reuel his revolver. 

Briggs made short work of the leopard : 
he let him have three barrels — all in the 
head. 

Vance had become alarmed for the 
safety of his friend, and had gone to the 
ruin to meet him. When very nearly 
there, he had heard the first cry for help, 
and had urged his camel forward. Ar- 
rived at the castle he had found Tim ap- 
parently dead with sleep, coiled up on the 
warm sand. How he could sleep within 
sound of the piercing cries uttered by 
Briggs was long a mystery to the two 
friends. 



2 7 0 



THE COLORED AMERICAN MAGAZINE. 



CHAPTER XL 

The caravan had halted for the night. 
Professor Stone, the leader of the expe- 
dition, sat in Reliefs tent enjoying a pipe 
and a talk over the promising features of 
the enterprise. The nearer thev ap- 
proached the goal of their hopes — the an- 
cient Ethiopian capital Meroe — the gre .it- 
er was the excitement among the leaders 
of the party. Charlie from his bed of 
rugs listened with ever-increasing curi- 
osity to the conversation between the two 
men. 

"It is undoubtedly true that from its 
position as the capital of Ethiopia and 
the entcrpret of trade between the North 
and South, between the East and West, 
Meroe must have held vast treasures. Af- 
rican caravans poured ivory, frankincense 
and gold into the city. My theory is that 
somewhere under those pyramids we shall 
find invaluable records and immense 
treasure. " 

44 Your theories may be true, Professor, 
but if so, your discoveries will establish 
the primal existence of the Negro as the 
most ancient source of all that you value 
in modern life, even antedating Egypt. 
Plow can the Anglo-Saxon world bear the 
establishment of such a theory?" There 
was a hidden note of sarcasm in his voice 
which the others did not notice. 

The learned savan settled his glasses 
and threw back his head. 

"You and I, Briggs, know that the the- 
ories of prejudice are swept away by the 
great tide of facts. It is a fact that Egypt 
drew from Ethiopia all the arts, sciences 
and knowledge of which she was mistress. 
The very soil of Egypt was pilfered by 
the Nile from the foundations of Meroe. 
I have even thought," he continued medi- 
tatively, "that black was the original color 
of man in prehistoric times. You remem- 
ber that Adam was made from the earth ; 
what more natural than that he should 
have retained the color of the earth? 
What puzzles me is not the origin of the 



Blacks, but of the Whites. Miriam was 
made a leper outside the tents for pun- 
ishment ; Naaman was a leper until 
cleansed. It is a question fraught with 
big possibilities which Cod alone can 
solve. But of this we are sure — all rec- 
ords of history, sacred and profane,, unite 
in placing the Ethiopian as the primal 
race." 

"Gee whiz!" exclaimed Charlie from 
his bed on the flooi "Count me out!" 

"Don't touch upon the origin of the 
Negro: you will find yourself in a laby- 
rinth, Professor. That qiu'^i-n has pro- 
voked more discussion than any < ther 
concerning the different races of man on 
the globe. Speculation has exhausted it- 
self, yet the mystery appears to remain 
unsolved." 

"Nevertheless the Biblical facts are 
very explicit, and so simple as to force 
the very difficulties upon mankind that 
Divinity evidently designed to avoid." 

"The relationship existing between the 
Negro and other people of the world is 
a quest inn of absorbing interest. For my 
part, I shall be glad to add to my ethno- 
logical knowledge by anything we may 
learn at Meroe." Thus speaking Reuel 
seemed desirous of dismissing the sub- 
ject. More conversation followed on in- 
different subjects, and presently the Pro- 
fessor bade them good night and retired 
to his own tent. 

Reuel employed himself in making en- 
tries in his journal, Charlie continued to 
smoke, at times evincing by a musical 
snore that he was in the land of dreams. 
Jim sat at some distance reading a letter 
that he held in his hand. 

The night was sultry, the curtains of 
the tent undrawn ; from out the silent soli- 
tude came the booming call of a lion to 
his mate. 

Suddenly a rush of balmy air seemed 
to pass over the brow of the scribe, and 
a dim shadow fell across the tent door. 
It was the form of the handsome Negress 
who had nnneared to Dianthe, and signed 
herself "Mira" 



OF ONE BLOOD. 



271 



There was no fear in Reuel's gaze, no 
surprise ; it was as if a familiar and wel- 
come visitor had called upon him. For a 
moment an impulse to spring away into 
the wide, wide realms of air, seemed to 
possess him; the next, the still, dreamy 
ecstasy of a past time; and then he saw 
Jim — who sat directly behind him — 
placed like a picture on his very table. He 
saw him knit his brow, contract his lip, 
and then, with a face all seamed with dis- 
content, draw from his vest a letter, seem- 
ingly hidden in a private pocket, reading 
thus : — 

"Use your discretion about the final act, 
but be sure the letters are destroyed. I 
have advised the letters sent in your care 
as you will probably be detailed for the 
mail. But to avoid mishap call for the 
mail for both parties. Address me at 
Laurel Hill — Thomas Johnson." 

"A. L." 

Twice did the visionary scene, passing 
behind the seer, recross his entranced 
eyes ; and twice did the shadowy finger of 
the shining apparition in the tent door 
point, letter by letter, to the pictured page 
of the billet, which Jim was at that very 
moment perusing with his natural, and 
Reuel Briggs with his spiritual eyes. 
When both had concluded the reading, 
Jim put up his letter. The curtains of the 
tent slightly waved ; a low, long sigh, like 
the night's wind wail, passed over the 
cold, damp brow of the seer. A shudder, 
a blank. He looked out into the desert 
beyond. All was still. The stars were 
out for him, but the vision was gone. 

Thus was explained to Reuel, by mes- 
meric forces, the fact that his letters had 
been withheld. 

He had not once suspected Jim of per- 
fidy. What did it mean? he asked him- 
self. The letter was in Livingston's hand- 
writing! His head swam; he could not 
think. Over and over again he turned 
the problem and then, wishing that some- 
thing more definite had been given him, 
retired, but not to sleep. 



Try as he would to throw it off, the 
most minute act of Jim since entering his 
service persisted in coming before his in- 
ner vision. The night when he was at- 
tacked by the leopard and Jim's tardiness 
in offering help, returned with great sig- 
nificance. What could he do but con- 
clude that he was the victim of a con- 
spiracy. 

"There is no doubt about it," was his 
last thought as he dropped into a light 
doze. How long he slept he could not tell, 
but he woke with a wild, shrill cry in his 
ears : "Reuel, Reuel, save me!" 

Three times it was repeated, clear, dis- 
tinct, and close beside his ear, a pause be- 
tween the repetitions. 

He roused his sleeping friend. "Char- 
lie, Charlie ! wake up and listen !" 

Charlie, still half asleep, looked with 
blinking eyes at the candle with dazzled 
sight. 

"Charlie, for the love of God wake 

up!" 

At this, so full of mortal fear were his 
words, Adonis shook off his drowsiness 
and sat up in bed, wide awake and staring 
at him in wonder. 

"What the deuce!" he began, and then 
stopped, gazing in surprise at the white 
face and trembling hands of his friend. 

"Charlie," he cried, "some terrible 
event has befallen Dianthe, or like a 
sword hangs over our heads. Lister, lis- 
ten!" 

Charlie did listen but heard nothing but 
the lion's boom which now broke the still- 
ness. 

"I hear nothing, Reuel." 

"O Charlie, are you sure?" 

"Nothing but the lion. But that '11 be 
enough if he should take it into his mind 
to come into camp for his supper." 

"I suppose you are right, for you can 
hear nothing, and I can hear nothing now. 
But, oh Charlie ! it was so terrible, and I 
heard it so plainly; though I daresay it 
was only my — Oh God ! there it is again ! 
listen! listen!" 



?J2 



THE COLORED AMERICAN MAGAZINE. 



This time Charlie heard — heard clearly 
and unmistakably, and hearing, felt the 
blood in his veins turn to ice. 

Shrill and clear above the lion's call 
rose a prolonged wail, or rather shriek, 
as of a human voice rising to heaven in 
passionate appeal for mercy, and dying 
away in sobbing and shuddering despair. 
Then came the words : 

"Charlie, brother, save me!" 

Adonis sprang to his feet, threw back 
the curtain of the tent and looked out. 
All was calm and silent, not even a cloud 
flecked the sky where the moon's light 
cast a steady radiance. 

Long he looked and listened ; but noth- 
ing could be seen or heard. But the cry 
still rang in his ears and clamored at his 
heart ; while his mind said it was the ef- 
fect of imagination. 

Reuel's agitation had swallowed up his 
usual foresight. He had forgotten his 
ability to resort to that far-seeing faculty 
which he had often employed for Char- 
lie's and Aubrey's amusement when at 
home. 

Charlie was very calm, however, and 
soothed his friend's fears, and after sev- 
eral ineffectual attempts to concentrate his 
powers for the exercise of the clai rvoy- 
ant sight of the hypnotice trance, was 



finally able to exercise the power. 

In low, murmuring cadence, sitting 
statuesque and rigid beneath the magnetic 
spell, Reuel rehearsed the terrible scene 
which had taken place two months before 
in the United States in the ears of his 
deeply-moved friend. 

"Ah, there is Molly, poor Molly ; and 
see your father weeps, and the friends are 
there and they too weep, but where is my 
own sweet girl, Dianthe, love, wife! No, 
I cannot see her, I do not find the poor 
maimed body of my love. And Aubrey ! 
What ! Traitor, false friend ! I shall re- 
turn for vengeance. 

"Wake me, Charlie," was his conclud- 
ing sentence. 

A few upward passes of his friend's 
hands, and the released spirit became lord 
of its casket once more. Consciousness 
returned, and with it memory. In short 
whispered sentences Reuel told Vance of 
his suspicions, of the letter he read while 
it lay in Jim's hand, of his deliberate in- 
tention to leave him to his fate in the 
leopard's claws. 

The friends laid their plans, — they 
would go on to Meroe, and then return 
instantly to civilization as fast as steam 
could carry them, if satisfactory letters 
were not waiting them from America. 



(To he continued.) 



ABRAHAM LINCOLN. — AN ESTIMATE. 

NAHl'M DANIKT, BRASCHER. 



Daniel Webster once said : "A true lov- 
er of the virtue of patriotism delights to 
contemplate its truest models." The same 
may be said of the lover of any virtue, 
ind when it is our rare privilege to con- 
sider a character that embodies in high 
form so many excellent virtues, it should 
appeal to us most touchingly and awaken 
an honest desire to emulate them so far as 
God may be our helper. 



It is to be hoped in a general way, the 
life and deeds of Abraham Lincoln are 
not unfamiliar to us. Since repeated con- 
sideration of such a life always awakens 
to greater appreciation and new admira- 
tion, let us for a short time banish all vain 
thoughts and reverently re-consider the 
life of the man who lived "with malice 
toward none, with charity for all." 

It probably would have taken a person 



OF ONE BLOOD. 



339 



OF ONE BLOOD, * 

OR, THE HIDDEN SELF* 

PAULINE B. HOPKINS. 



SYNOPSIS OP CHAPTERS I TO XI. 

Reuel Briggs, a voung medical student, interested in 
mysticism, sees a face that haunts him. He attends a 
concert with his friend Aubrey Livingston, and there 
discovers in a negro concert-singer the owner of the 
mysterious face. He sees this woman again on Hallow 
Eve while playing at charms with a party of young 
people at Vance Hall, the home of Livingston's be- 
trothed. Early the next morning he is called to attend 
the victims of a railroad disaster at the hospital. He 
finds among them the girl whose face haunts him, in a 
cataleptic sleep which the doctors call death. He suc- 
ceeds in restoring her to consciousness, but with a 
complete loss of memory She loses her identity as a 
negress. Reuel falls deeply in love with her. He 
finally restores her to health and determines to marry 
her, but finds his circumstances too straitened Au- 
brey Livingston helps him out by offering to obtain 
for him a place in an expedition about to explore the 
ancient city of Meroe in Africa. Reuel accepts, but 
marries Dianthe before going on a two years' venture. 
After his departure Dianthe finds that Livingston is in 
love with her, and he acquires a power over her that 
she cannot resist. She agrees to fly with him against 
her will ; but before the time set they with Molly 
Vance go out canoeing and are overturned in the river, 
and all three are supposed to have been drowned. 

The expedition reaches Africa. In crossing the Great 
Desert Reuel Briggs visits old ruins and is rescued 
from a leopard's claws by Vance. They are suspicious 
of Jim Titus, who pretended not to hear Briggs* calls 
for help. They receive no letters from home after leav- 
ing England, and one night, by clairvoyant aid, Reuel 
reads a letter that Titus has received. That same 
night, by mediumistic power, Bribes describes the 
overturning of the boat containing Molly, Dianthe and 
Aubrey, on the Charles River months before. 

CHAPTER XII. 

Late one afternoon two weeks later, the 
caravan halted at the edge of the dirty 
Arab town which forms the outposts to 
the island of Meroe. 

Charlie Vance stood in the door of his 
tent and let his eyes wander over the land- 
scape in curiosity. Clouds of dust swept 
over the sandy plains; when they disap- 
peared the heated air began its dance 
again, and he was glad to re-enter the 
tent and stretch himself at full length in 
his hammock. The mail was not yet in 
from Cairo, consequently there were no 
letters; his eyes ached from straining 
them for a glimpse of the Ethiopian ruins 
across the glassy waters of the tributaries 
of the Nile which encircled the island. 

It was not a simple thing to come all 
these thousands of miles to look at a pile 
of old ruins that promised nothing of in- 

*Copy right, 1902, by Pauline It. Hopkins. 



terest to him after all. This was what 
he had come for — the desolation of an 
African desert, and the companionship of 
human fossils and savage beasts of prey. 
The loneliness made him shiver. It was 
a desolation that doubled desolateness, 
because his healthy American organiza- 
tion missed the march of progress attested 
by the sound of hammers on unfinished 
buildings that told of a busy future and 
cosy modern homeliness. Here there was 
no future. No railroads, no churches, no 
saloons, no schoolhouses to echo the 
voices of merry children, no promise or 
the life that produces within the range of 
his vision. Nothing but the monotony 
of past centuries dead and forgotten save 
by a few learned savans. 

As he rolled over in his hammock, 
Charlie told himself that next to seeing 
the pater and Molly, he'd give ten dollars 
to be able to thrust his nose into twelve 
inches of whiskey and soda, and remain 
there until there was no more. Then a 
flicker of memory made Charlie smile as 
he remembered the jollities of the past 
few months that he had shared with Cora 
Scott. 

"Jolly little beggar," he mentally 
termed her. "I wonder what sort of a 
fool she'd call me if she could see me now 
whistling around the ragged edge of this 
solid block of loneliness called a desert." 

Then he fell asleep and dreamed he 
was boating on the Charles, and that Mol- 
ly was a mermaid sporting in a bed of 
water-lilies. 

Ancient writers, among them Strabo, 
say that the Astabora unites its stream 
with the Nile, and forms the island of 
Meroe. The most famous historical city 
of Ethiopia is commonly called Carthage, 
but Meroe was the queenly city of this an- 



34° 



THE COLORED AMERICAN MAGAZINE. 



cient people. Into it poured the traffic 
of the world in gold, frankincense and 
ivory. Diodorus states the island to be 
three hundred and seventy-five miles long 
and one hundred and twenty-five miles 
wide. The idea was borne in upon our 
travellers in crossing the Great Desert 
that formerly wells must have been estab- 
lished at different stations for the conven- 
ience of man and beast. Professor Stone 
and Reuel had discovered traces of a 
highway and the remains of cisterns 
which must have been marvellous in skill 
and prodigious in formation. 

All was bustle and commotion in the 
camp that night. Permission had been 
obtained to visit and explore the ruins 
from the Arab governor of the Province. 
It had cost money, but Professor Stone 
counted nothing as lost that would aid in 
the solution of his pet theories. 

The leaders of the enterprise sat to- 
gether late that night, listening to the 
marvellous tales told by the Professor of 
the city's ancient splendor, and examining 
closely the chart which had remained hid- 
den for years before it fell into his hands. 
For twenty-five years this apostle of 
learning had held the key to immense 
wealth, he believed, in his hands. For 
years he had tried in vain to interest the 
wealthy and powerful in his scheme for 
finding the city described in his chart, 
wherein he believed lay the gold mines 
from which had come the streams of pre- 
cious metal which made the ancient Ethi- 
opians famous. 

The paper was in a large envelope 
sealed with a black seal formed to re- 
semble a lotus flower. It was addressed : 

TO THE STUDENT WHO, HAVING COUNT- 
ED THE COST, IS RESOLUTE TO ONCE MORE 
REVEAL TO THE SCEPTICAL, THE ANCIENT 
GLORY OF HOARY MEROE. 

Within the envelope was a faded 
parchment which the Professor drew 
forth with trembling hands. The little 
company drew more closely about the im- 



provised table and its flickering candle 
which revealed the faded writing to be in 
Arabic. There was no comment, but 
each one listened intently to the reader, 
who translated very fully as he went 
along. 

"Be it known to you, my brother, that 
the great and surpassing wealth men- 
tioned in this parchment is not to be won 
without braving many dangers of a dead- 
ly nature. You who may read this mes- 
sage, then, I entreat to consider well the 
perils of your course. Within the mines 
of Meroe, four days' journey from the 
city toward Arabia, are to be found gold 
in bars and gold in flakes, and diamonds, 
and rubies whose beauty excels all the 
jewels of the earth. For some of them 
were hidden by the priests of Osiris that 
had adorned the crown of the great Semi- 
ramis, and the royal line of Queen Can- 
dace, even from ancient Babylon's pillage 
these jewels came, a spectacle glorious be- 
yond compare. There, too, is the black 
diamond of Senechus's crown (Senechus 
who suflfered the captivity of Israel by the 
Assyrians), which exceeds all imagina- 
tion for beauty and color. 

"All these jewels with much treasure 
beside you will gain by following my 
plain directions. 

"Four days' journey from Meroe to- 
ward Arabia is a city founded by men 
from the Upper Nile ; the site is near one 
of its upper sources, which still has one 
uniform existence. This city is situated 
on a forked tributary, which takes its rise 
from a range of high, rocky mountains, 
almost perpendicular on their face, from 
which descend two streams like cataracts, 
about two miles apart, and form a tri- 
angle, which holds the inner city. The 
outer city occupies the opposite banks on 
either side of the streams, which after 
joining, form a river of considerable size, 
and running some five miles, loses itself 
in the surrounding swamps. The cities 
are enclosed within two great walls, run- 



OF ONE BLOOD. 



341 



ning parallel with the streams. There are 
also two bridges with gates, connecting 
the inner and outer cities ; two great gates 
also are near the mountain ranges, con- 
necting the outer city with the agricul- 
tural lands outside the walls. The v whoIe 
area is surrounded by extensive swamps, 
through which a passage, known only to 
the initiated runs, and forms an impas- 
sible barrier to the ingress or egress of 
strangers. 

"But there is another passage known to 
the priests and used by them, and this is 
the passage which the chart outlines be- 
neath the third great pyramid, leading 
directly into the mines and giving access 
to the city. 

"When Egypt rose in power and sent 
her hosts against the mother country, 
then did the priests close with skill and 
cunning this approach to the hidden city 
of refuge, where they finally retired, car- 
rying with them the ancient records of 
Ethiopia's greatness, and closing forever, 
as they thought, the riches of her marvel- 
lous mines, to the world. 

"Beneath the Sphinx' head lies the se- 
cret of the entrance, and yet not all, for 
the rest is graven on the sides of the cav- 
ern which will be seen when the mouth 
shall gape. But beware the tank to the 
right where dwells the sacred crocodile, 
still living, although centuries have rolled 
by and men have been gathered to the 
shades who once tended on his wants. 
And beware the fifth gallery to the right 
where abide the sacred serpents with jew- 
elled crowns, for of a truth are they ter- 
rible. 

"This the writer had from an aged 
priest whose bones lie embalmed in the 
third pyramid above the Sphinx." 

With this extraordinary document a 
chart was attached, which, while an enig- 
ma to the others, seemed to be perfectly 
clear to Professor Stone. 

The letter ended abruptly, and the chart 
was a hopeless puzzle to the various eyes 



that gazed curiously at the straggling out- 
lines. 

"What do you make of it, Professor?" 
asked Reuel, who with all his knowledge, 
was at sea with the chart. "We have been 
looking for mystery, and we seem to have 
found it." 

"What do I make of it ? Why, that we 
shall find the treasure and all return home 
rich," replied the scholar testily. 

"Rubbish!" snorted Charlie with fine 
scorn. 

"How about the sacred crocodile and 
the serpents? My word, gentlemen, if 
you find the back door key of the Sphinx* 
head, there's a chance that a warm wel- 
come is awaiting us." 

Charlie's words met with approval 
from the others, but the Professor and 
Reuel said nothing. There was silence 
for a time, each man drawing at his pipe 
in silent meditation. 

"Well, I'm only travelling for pleasure, 
so it matters not to me how the rest of 
you elect to shuffle off this mortal coil, I 
intend to get some fun out of this thing," 
continued Charlie. 

There was a shout of laughter from his 
companions. 

"Pleasure!" cried one. "O Lord! 
You've come to the wrong place. This is 
business, solid business. If we get out 
with our skins it will be something to be 
thankful for." 

"Well, said Reuel, rousing himself from 
a fit of abstraction, "I come out to do 
business and I have determined to see the 
matter through if all is well at home. 
We'll prove whether there's a hidden city 
or not before we leave Africa." 

The Professor grasped his hand in 
gratitude, and then silence fell upon the 
group. The curtains of the tent were 
thrown back. Bright fell the moonlight 
on the sandy plain, the Nile, the indistinct 
ruins of Meroe, hiding all imperfections 
by its magic fingers. It was a wonderful 
sight to see the full moon looking down 



342 



THE COLORED AMERICAN MAGAZINE. 



on the ruins of centuries. The weird 
light increased, the shadows lengthened 
and silence fell on the group, broken only 
by the low tones of Professor Stone as he 
told in broken sentences the story of an- 
cient Ethiopia. 

"For three thousand years the world 
has been mainly indebted for its advance- 
ment to the Romans, Greeks, Hebrews, 
Germans and Anglo-Saxons; but it was 
otherwise in the first years. Babylon and 
Egypt — Nimrod and Mizraim — both de- 
scendants of Ham — led the way, and 
acted as the pioneers of mankind in the 
untrodden fields of knowledge. The 
Ethiopians, therefore, manifested great 
superiority over all the nations among 
whom they dwelt, and their name became 
illustrious throughout Europe, Asia and 
Africa. 

"The father of this distinguished race 
was Cush, the grandson of Noah, an Ethi- 
opian. 

"Old Chaldea, between the Euphrates 
and Tigris rivers, was the first home of 
the Cushites. Nimrod, Ham's grandson, 
founded Babylon. The Babylonians early 
developed the energy of mind which 
made their country the first abode of civ- 
ilization. Canals covered the land, serv- 
ing the purposes of traffic, defense and 
irrigation. Lakes were dug and stored 
with water, dykes built along the banks 
of rivers to fertilize the land, and it is not 
surprising to learn that from the earliest 
times Babylonia was crowded with popu- 
lous cities. This grandeur was brought 
about by Nimrod the Ethiopian." 

"Great Scott!" cried Charlie, "you 
don't mean to tell me that all this was 
done by nigger st" 

The Professor smiled. Being English, 
he could not appreciate Charlie's horror 
at its full value. 

"Undoubtedly your Afro-Americans 
are a branch of the wonderful and mys- 
terious Ethiopians who had a prehistoric 
existence of magnificence, the full record 
of which is lost in obscurity. 



"We associate with the name 'Chaldea' 
the sciences of astronomy and philosophy 
and chronology. It was to the Wise Men 
of the East to whom the birth of Christ 
was revealed; they were Chaldeans — of 
the Ethiopians. Eighty-eight years be- 
fore the birth of Abraham, these people, 
known in history as 'Shepherd Kings,' 
subjugated the whole of Upper Egypt, 
which they held in bondage more than 
three hundred years." 

"It is said that Egyptian civilization 
antedates that of Ethiopia," broke in Reu- 
el. "How do you say, Professor?" 

"Nothing of the sort, nothing of the 
sort. I know that in connecting Egypt 
with Ethiopia, one meets with most bit- 
ter denunciation from most modern schol- 
ars. Science has done its best to separate 
the race from Northern Africa, but the 
evidence is with the Ethiopians. If I 
mistake not, the ruins of Meroe will prove 
my words. Traditions with respect to 
Memnon connect Egypt and Ethiopia 
with the country at the head of the Nile. 
Memnon personifies the ethnic identity of 
the two races. Ancient Greeks believed 
it. All the traditions of Armenia, where 
lies Mt. Ararat, are in accordance with 
this fact. The Armenian geography ap- 
plies the name of Cush to four great re- 
gions — Media, Persia, Susiana, Asia, or 
the whole territory between the Indus and 
the Tigris. Moses of Chorene identifies 
Belus, king of Babylon with Nimrod 

"But the Biblical tradition is para- 
mount to all. In it lies the greatest au- 
thority that we have for the affiliation of 
nations, and it is delivered to us very sim- 
ply and plainly : 'The sons of Ham were 
Cush and Mizraim and Phut and Canaan 
. . . and Cush begot Nimrod . . . 
and the beginning of his kingdom was 
Babel and Erech and Accad and Calneh, 
in the land of Shinar/ It is the best in- 
terpretation of this passage to understand 
it as asserting that the four races- 
Egyptians, Ethiopians, Libyans and Ca- 



OF ONE BLOOD. 



343 



naanites — were ethnically connected, be- 
ing all descended from Ham; and that 
the primitive people of Babylon were a 
subdivision of one of these races ; namely, 
of the Cushite or Ethiopian. 

"These conclusions have lately received 
important and unexpected confirmation 
from the results of linguistic research. 
After the most remarkable of Mesopota- 
mian mounds had yielded their treasures, 
and supplied the historical student with 
numerous and copious documents, bear- 
ing upon the history of the great Assyrian 
and Babylonian empires, it was deter- 
mined to explore Chaldea proper, where 
mounds of considerable height marked 
the site of several ancient cities. 
Among unexpected results was the dis- 
covery of a new form of speech, differing 
greatly from the later Babylonian lan- 
guage. In grammatical structure this an- 
cient tongue resembles dialects of the Tu- 
ranian family, but its vocabulary has been 
pronounced to be decidedly Cushite or 
Ethiopian ; and the modern languages to 
which it approaches nearest are thought 
to be the Mahen of Southern Arabia ancr 
the Galla of Abyssinia. Thus compara- 
tive philology appears to confirm old tra- 
ditions. An Eastern Ethiopia instead of 
being the invention of bewildered igno- 
rance, is rather a reality which it will re- 
quire a good deal of scepticism to doubt, 
and the primitive race that bore sway in 
Chaldea proper belongs to this ethnic 
type. Meroe was the queenly city of this 
great people." 

"It is hard to believe your story. From 
what a height must this people have fall- 
en to reach the abjectness of the Ameri- 
can Negro/' exclaimed a listener. 

"True," replied the Professor. "But 
from what a depth does history show 
that the Anglo-Saxon has climbed to the 
position of the first people of the earth to- 
day." 

Charlie Vance said nothing. He had 
suffered so many shocks from the shatter- 



ing of cherished idols since entering the 
country of mysteries that the power of 
•expression had left him. 

"Twenty-five years ago, when I was 
still a young man, the camel-driver who 
accompanied me to Thebes sustained a fa- 
tal accident. I helped him in his distress, 
and to show his gratitude he gave me the 
paper and chart I have shown you to- 
night. He was a singular man, black hair 
and eyes, middle height, dark-skinned, 
face and figure almost perfect, he was 
proficient in the dialects of the region, be- 
sides being master of the purest and most 
ancient Greek and Arabic. I believe be 
was a native of the city he described. 

"He believed that Ethiopia antedated 
Egypt, and helped me materially in fixing 
certain data which time has proved to be 
correct. He added a fact which the man- 
uscript withholds, — that from lands be- 
yond unknown seas, to which many de- 
scendants of Ethiopia had been borne as 
slaves, should a king of ancient line — an 
offspring of that Ergamenes who lived in 
the reign of the second Ptolemy — return 
and restore the former glory of the race 
The preservation of this hidden city is for 
his reception. This Arab also declared 
that Cush was his progenitor." 

"That's bosh. How would they know 
their future king after centuries of ob- 
scurity passed in strange lands, and amal- 
gamation with other races?" remarked 
the former speaker. 

"I asked him that question ; he told me 
that every descendant of the royal line 
bore a lotus-lily in the form of a birth- 
mark upon his breast." 

It might have been the unstable shad- 
ows of the moon that threw a tremulous 
light upon the group, but Charlie Vance 
was sure that Reuel Briggs started vio- 
lently at the Professor's words. 

One by one the men retired to rest, each 
one under the spell of the mvsterious 
forces of a past life that brooded like a 
mist over the sandy plain, the dark Nile 



344 



THE COLORED AMERICAN MAGAZINE. 



rolling sluggishly along within a short 
distance of their camp, and the ruined 
city now a magnificent Necropolis. The 
long shadows grew longer, painting the 
scene into beauty and grandeur. The 
majesty of death surrounded the spot and 
its desolation spoke in trumpet tones of 
the splendor which the grave must cover, 
when even the memory of our times shall 
be forgotten. 



CHAPTER XIII. 

Next morning the camp was early astir 
before the dawn ; and before the sun was 
up, breakfast was over and the first boat- 
load of the explorers was standing on the 
site of the ruins watching the unlfading of 
the apparatus for opening solid masonry 
and excavating within the pyramids. 

The feelings of every man in the party 
were ardently excited by the approach to 
the city once the light of the world's civ- 
ilization. The great French writer, Vol- 
ney, exclaimed when first his eyes beheld 
the sight, "How are we astonished when 
we reflect that to the race of Negroes, 
the object of our extreme contempt, we 
owe our arts, sciences and even the use of 
speech 1" 

From every point of view rose magnifi- 
cent groups of pyramids rising above py- 
ramids. About eighty of them remaining 
in a state of partial preservation. The 
principal one was situated on a hill two 
and a half miles from the river, com- 
manding an extensive view of the plain. 
The explorers found by a hasty examina- 
tion that most of them could be ascended 
although their surfaces were worn quite 
smooth. That the pyramids were places 
of sepulture they could not doubt. From 
every point of view the sepulchres were 
imposing ; and they were lost in admira- 
tion and wonder with the first superficial 
view of the imposing scene. 

One of the approaches or porticoes was 



most interesting, the roof being arched in 
regular masonic style, with what may be 
called a keystone. Belonging without 
doubt to the remotest ages, their ruined 
and defaced condition was attributed by 
the scientists to their great antiquity. The 
hieroglyphics which covered the monu- 
ments were greatly defaced. A knowl- 
edge of these characters in Egypt was 
confined to the priests, but in Ethiopia 
they were understood by all showing that 
even in that remote time and place learn- 
ing and the arts had reached so high a 
state as to be diffused among the common 
people. 

For a time the explorers wandered 
from ruin to ruin, demoralized as to 
routine work, gazing in open astonish- 
ment at the wonders before them. Many 
had visited Thebes and Memphis and the 
Egyptian monuments, but none had 
hoped to find in this neglected corner, so 
much of wonder and grandeur. Within 
the pyramids that had been opened to the 
curious eye, they found the walls covered 
with the pictures of scenes from what 
must have been the daily life, — death, 
burial, marriage, birth, triumphal proces- 
sions, including the spoils of war. 

Reuel noticed particularly the figure 
of a queen attired in long robe, tight at 
neck and ankles, with closely fitted legs. 
The Professor called their attention to the 
fact that the entire figure was dissimilar 
to those represented in Egyptian sculp- 
ture. The figure was strongly marked by 
corpulency, a mark of beauty in Eastern 
women. This rotundity is the distin- 
guishing feature of Ethiopian sculpture, 
more bulky and clumsy than Egypt, but 
pleasing to the eye. 

The queen held in one hand the lash 
of Osiris, and in the other a lotus flower. 
She was seated on a lion, wearing sandals 
resembling those specimens seen in The- 
ban figures. Other figures grouped about 
poured libations to the queen, or carried the 
standards graced and ornamented by the 



OF ONE BLOOD. 



345 



figures of the jackal, ibis and hawk. At 
the extremity of each portico was the rep- 
resentation of a monolithic temple, above 
which were the traces of a funeral boat 
filled with figures. 

Professor Stone told them that Dio- 
dorus mentions that some of the Ethiopi- 
ans preserved the bodies of their relatives 
in glass cases (probably alabaster), in or- 
der to have them always before their eyes. 
These porticoes, he thought, might have 
been used for that purpose. The hair of 
the women was dressed in curls above the 
forehead and in ringlets hanging on their 
shoulders. 

One who had visited the chief galleries 
of Europe holding the treasures accumu- 
lated from every land, could not be un- 
moved at finding himself on the site of the 
very metropolis where science and art had 
their origin. If he had admired the ar- 
chitecture of Rome and the magnificent 
use they had made of the arch in their 
baths, palaces and temples, he would be, 
naturally, doubly interested at finding in 
desolate Meroe the origin of that discov- 
ery. The beautiful sepulchres of Meroe 
would give to him evidence of the correct- 
ness of the historical records. And then 
it was borne in upon him that where the 
taste for the arts had reached such per- 
fection, one might rest assured that other 
intellectual pursuits were not neglected 
nor the sciences unknown. Now, how- 
ever, her schools are closed forever; not 
a vestige remaining. Of the houses of 
her philosophers, not a stone rests upon 
another ; and where civilization and learn- 
ing once reigned, ignorance and barbar- 
ism have reassumed their sway. 

This is the people whose posterity has 
been denied a rank among the human 
race, and has been degraded into a spe- 
cies of talking baboons ! 

"Land of the mighty Dead! 
There science once displayed 
And art, their charms; 
There awful Pharaohs swayed 



Great nations who obeyed; 
There distant monarchs laid 
Their vanquished arms. 
"They hold us in survey — 

They cheer us on our way — 

They loud proclaim, 

From pyramidal hall — 

Prom Carnac's sculptured wall — 

Prom Thebes they loudly call — 

* Retake your fam*" 

"Arise and now prevrttj 
O'er all your foes: 
In truth and righteousness — 
In all the arts of peace — 
Advance and still increase, 
Though hosts oppose ' * 

Under the inspiration of the moment, 
Charlie, the irrepressible, mounted to the 
top of the first pyramid, and from its peak 
proceeded to harangue his companions, 
lugging in the famous Napoleon's: 
"From the heights of yonder Pyramids 
forty centuries are contemplating you," 
etc. This was admirably done, and the 
glances and grimaces of the eloquent 
young American must have outvied in 
ugliness the once gracious-countenanced 
Egyptian Sphinx. 

We may say here that before the exca- 
vations of the explorers were ended, they 
found in two of the pyramids, concealed 
treasures, — golden plates and tables that 
must have been used by the priests in 
their worship. Before one enormous im- 
age was a golden table, also of enormous 
proportions. The seats and steps were 
also of gold, confirming the ancient Chal- 
dean records which telt of 800 talents of 
metal used in constructing this statue. 

There was also a statue of Candace, 
seated in a golden chariot. On her knees 
crouched two enormous silver serpents, 
each weighing thirty talents. Another 
queen (Professor Stone said it must be 
Dido from certain peculiar figures) car- 
ried in her right hand a serpent by the 
head, in her left hand a sceptre garnished 
with precious stones. 

All of this treasure was collected final- 
ly, after indemnifying the government. 



34^ 



THE COLORED AMERICAN MAGAZINE. 



and carefully exported to England, where 
it rests today in the care of the Society of 
Geographical Research. 

They never forgot that sunset over 
the ancient capital of Ethiopia at the close 
of the first day spent on the city's site, in 
the Desert. The awe-inspiring Pyramids 
throwing shadows that reminded one of 
the geometrical problems of his student 
days ; the backsheesh-loving Arabs, in the 
most picturesque habiliments and atti- 
tudes ; the patient camels, the tawny 
sands, and the burnished coppery sun- 
light! They had brought tents with 
them, leaving the most of the outfit on the 
opposite bank under the care of Jim 
Titus, whom Keuel had desired the 
professor to detail for that duty. 
Somehow since his adventure in 
the ruins with the leopard, and the 
mysterious letter-reading, he had felt 
a deep-seated mistrust of the docile ser- 
vant. He concluded not to keep him any 
nearer his person than circumstances de- 
manded. In this resolve Charlie Vance 
concurred; the two friends resolved to 
keep an eye on Titus, and Ababdis was 
sent for the mail. 

Reuel Briggs had changed much. Har- 
assed by anxieties which arose from his 
wife's silence, at the end of two months 
he was fast becoming a misanthrope. 
Charlie felt anxious as he looked at him 
walking restlessly up and down in the 
pale moonlight, with fiery eyes fixed on 
space. Charlie suppressed his own feel- 
ings over the silence of his father and sis- 
ter to comfort Reuel. 

"You ought not, my dear Briggs," he 
would say. "Come, for heaven's sake 
shake off that sadness which may make 
an end of you before you are aware/' 
Then he would add, jestingly, "Decidedly, 
you regret the leopard's claws!" 

On this night the excitement of new 
scenes had distracted the thoughts of both 
men from their homes, and they lay 
smoking in their hammocks before the 



parted curtains of the tent lazily watching 
Ababdis advancing with a bundle in his 
hand. It was the long expected mail ! 

CHAPTER XIV. 

It was some three weeks after this be- 
fore Briggs was able to assume his du- 
ties. The sudden shock of the news of 
his wife's death over-weighted a brain 
already strained to the utmost. More 
than once they despaired of his life — 
Professor Stone and Vance, who had put 
aside his own grief to care for his friend. 
Slowly the strong man had returned to 
life once more. He did not rave or pro- 
test ; Fate had no power to move him 
more; the point of anguish was passed, 
and in its place succeeded a dumb stupid- 
ity more terrible by far, though far more 
blessed. 

His love was dead. He himself was 
dead for any sensibility of suffering that 
he possessed. So for many days longer 
he lay in his hammock seemingly with- 
out a thought of responsibility. 

They had carried him back to the camp 
across the river, and there he spent the 
long days of convalescence. What did 
he think of all day as he moved like a 
shadow among the men or swung listless- 
ly in the hammock? Many of the men 
asked themselves that question as they 
gazed at Briggs. One thought repeated 
itself over and over in his brain, "Many 
waters cannot quench love, neither can 
the floods drown it." "Many waters 5 ' — 
"many waters" — the words whispered 
and sung appealingly, invitingly, in his 
cars all day and all night. "Many wat- 
ers, many waters." 

One day he heard them tell of the re- 
moval of the door in the pyramid two and 
one-half miles on the hill. They had 
found the Snhinx' head as described in 
the manuscript, but had been unable to 
move it with any instrument in their pos- 
session. Much to his regret, Professor 



OF ONE BLOOD. 



347 



Stone felt obliged to give the matter up 
and content himself with the valuable 
relics he had found. The gold mines, if 
such there were, were successfully hidden 
from searchers, and would remain a mys- 
tery. 

The white orb of the moon was high in 
the heavens ; the echoeless sand gave back 
no sound ; that night Reuel rose, took his 
revolver and ammunition, and leaving a 
note for Vance telling him he had gone to 
the third pyramid and not to worry, he 
rowed himself over to Meroe. He had 
no purpose, no sensation. Once he halt- 
ed and tried to think. His love was dead : 
— that was the one fact that filled his 
thoughts at first. Then another took its 
place. Why should he live? Of course 
not; better rejoin her where parting was 
no more. He would lose himself in the 
pyramid. The manuscript had spoken or 
dangers — he would seek them. 

As he went on the moon rose in full 
splendor behind him. Some beast of the 
night plunged through a thicket along 
the path. 

The road ascended steadily for a mile 
or more, crossing what must have once 
been carriage drives. Under the light of 
the setting moon the gradually increasing 
fertility of the ground shone silver-white. 
Arrived at the top of the hill, he paused 
to rest and wipe the perspiration from his 
face. After a few minutes' halt, he 
plunged on and soon stood before the en- 
trace of the gloomy chamber; as he 
stumbled along he heard a low, distinct 
hiss almost beneath his feet. Reuel 
jumped and stood still. He who had been 
desirous of death but an hour before 
obeyed the first law of nature. Who can 
wonder? It was but the re-awakening 
of life within him, and that care for what 
has been entrusted to us by Omnipotence, 
will remain until death has numbed our 
senses. 

The dawn wind blew all about him. He 
would do no more until the dawn. Pres- 



ently the loom of the night lifted and he 
could see the outlines of the building a 
few yards away. From his position he 
commanded the plain at his feet as level 
as a sea. The shadows grew more dis- 
tinct, then without warning, the red dawn 
shot up behind him. The sepulchre be- 
fore him flushed the color of blood, and 
the light revealed the horror of its empti- 
ness. 

Fragments of marble lay about him. It 
seemed to the lonely watcher that he 
could hear the sound of the centuries 
marching by in the moaning wind and 
purposeless dust. 

The silence and sadness lay on him like 
a pall and seemed to answer to the desola- 
tion of his own life. 

For a while he rambled aimlessly from 
wall to wall examining the gigantic rest- 
ing place of the dead with scrupulous 
care. Here were ranger great numbers 
of the dead in glass cases ; up and up they 
mounted to the vaulted ceiling. His ta- 
per flickered in the sombreness, giving 
but a feeble light. The air grew cold and 
damp as he went on. Once upon a time 
there had been steps cut in the granite 
and leading down to a well-like depres- 
sion near the center of the great chamber. 
Down he went holding the candle high 
above his head as he carefully watched 
for the Sphinx* head. He reached a 
ledge which ran about what was evidently 
once a tank. The ledge ran only on one 
side. He looked about for the Sphinx; 
unless it was here he must retrace his 
steps, for the ledge ran only a little way 
about one side of the chamber. 

He was cold and damp, and turned 
suddenly to retrace his steps, when just in 
front of him to the left the candle's light 
fell full on the devilish countenance of the 
Ethiopian Sphinx. 

He moved quickly toward it ; and then 
began an examination of the figure. As 
he stepped backward his foot crushed 
through a skull ; he retreated with a shud- 



34» 



THE COLORED AMERICAN MAGAZINE. 



der. He saw now that he stood in a space 
of unknown dimensions. He fancied he 
saw rows of pillars flickering drunkenly 
in the gloom. The American man is fa- 
miliar with many things because of the 
range of his experience, and Reuel Briggs 
was devoid of fear, but in that moment he 
tasted the agony of pure, physical terror. 

( To be i 



For the first time since he received his let- 
ters from home, he was himself again 
filled with pure, human nature. He 
turned to retrace his steps; something 
came out of the darkness like a hand, 
passed before his face emitting a subtle 
odor as it moved; he sank upon the 
ground and consciousness left him. 

itinued. ) 



FURNACE BLASTS, 

IL BLACK OR WHITE — WHICH SHOULD BE THE YOUNG AFRO' AMERICAN'S CHOICE 

IN MARRIAGE 

J. SHIRLEY SHADRACH. 



We have no desire to eulogize the Ne- 
gro in treating this subject. As a class, 
Negroes are what any other people would 
be so long subjected to the terrorism of 
tyranny which blurred the relation of the 
sexes and thereby weakened the physical, 
intellectual and moral forces of an entire 
race. Let us also take into calculation an- 
other fact,— this was done under the 
domination of a people, many of whom 
were themselves of the most indifferent 
morals, to speak lightly. 

The purpose of every race lover should 
be to familiarize the public mind with the 
fact that the iNegro is a human being, 
amenable to every law, human and divine, 
that can affect any other race upon the 
footstool. The greatest objection to Ne- 
gro enfranchisement is found in the men- 
ace of social equality which it is contend- 
ed will inevitably lead to amalgamation. 

The Anglo-Saxon argues that no fouler 
blight can fall upon his race than the 
curse of intermarriage with former 
slaves, forgetting that the "shaded Af- 
ghan" which represents the present con- 
glomeration, once pure African, was con- 
tributed by the blood of the Southern 
whites. 



In the fear of social equality, no allow- 
ance is made for the chance that the Ne- 
gro may not care for the joys ( ?) of such 
association ; it is taken for granted that he 
will jump at the opportunity of pushing 
himself into a circle where he is not want- 
ed. The truth is, the intelligent, self- 
respecting Afro-American finds every in- 
tellectual and social want more than filled 
among his associates of his own class. 
Among them he finds all the refinements 
of life which enhance the beauty of home 
and woman, with that freedom of associa- 
tion in which is a certain cordial exhilara- 
tion only found in social equality. There 
vulgarity, ignorance, coarseness, do not 
exist, but pleasant jets of affection, delic- 
ious fountains of association metamor- 
phose the earth, and in this happy social 
affinity he forgets that there is a world 
where prejudice bars the door of pleasure 
for Negroes. 

But the question of marriage is one of 
three about which no man can speak with 
certainty ; it defies all laws and bows only 
to the will of Infinity. 

We are born ; we marry ; we die ; and 
no power on earth can change the circum- 
stances under which these vital happen- 



OF ONE BLOOD. 



423 



OF ONE BLOOD* * 

OR, THE HIDDEN SELF. 

PAUUNE K. HOPKINS. 



SYNOPSIS OP CHAPTERS I. TO XII. 

Reuel Briggs, a young medical student, interested in 
mysticism, sees a face that haunts him. He attends a 
concert with his friend Aubrey Livingston, and there 
discovers in a negro concert-singer the owner of the 
mysterious face. He sees this woman again on Hallow 
Eve while playing at charms with a party of young 
people at Vance Hall, the home of Livingston's be- 
trothed. Early the next morning he is called to attend 
the victims of a railroad disaster at the hospital. He 
finds among them the girl whose face haunts him, in a 
cataleptic sleep which the doctors call death. He suc- 
ceeds in restoring her to consciousness, but with a 
complete loss of memory. She loses her identity as a 
negress. Reuel falls deeply in love with her. He 
finally restores her to health and determines to marry 
her, but finds his circumstances too straitened. Au- 
brey Livingston helps him out by offering to obtain 
for nim a place in an expedition about to explore the 
ancient city of Meroei in Africa. Reuel accepts, but 
marries Dianthe before going on a two years' venture. 
After his departure Dianthe finds that Livingston is in 
love with her, and he acquires a power over her that 
she cannot resist. She agrees to fly with him against 
her will ; but before the time set, they, with Molly 
Vance, go out canoeing and are overturned in the river, 
and all three are supposed to have been drowned, 

The expedition reaches Africa. In crossing the Great 
Desert Reuel Briggs visits old ruins and is rescued 
from a leopard's claws by Vance. They are suspicious 
of Jim Titus, who pretended not to hear Briggs* calls 
for help. They receive no letters from home after leav- 
ing England, and one night, by clairvoyant aid, Reuel 
reads a letter that Titus has received. That same 
night, by mediumistic power, Briggs describes the 
overturning of the boat containing Molly, Dianthe and 
Aubrey, on the Charles River months before. The 
caravan reaches Meroe, and letters reveal the death of 
Dianthe and Molly. Reuel is sick for some weeks, 
and when he returns to health finds the expedition 
about to give up its search for treasure and return 
home. Wanders out one night while the camp is 
asleep and goes to the last pyramid. While exploring 
it he becomes unconscious. 

From profound unconsciousness, 
deep, merciful, oblivious to pain and 
the flight of time, from the gulf of the 
mysterious shadows wherein earth and 
heaven are alike forgotten, Reuel awoke 
at the close of the fourth day after his 
entrance into the Great Pyramid. That 
Lethean calm induced by narcotic odors, 
saved his reason. Great pain, whether 
physical or mental, cannot last long, and 
human anguish must find relief or take 
it 

A soft murmur of voices was in his 
ears as he languidly unclosed his eyes 
and gazed into the faces of a number of 
men grouped about the couch on which 



he lay, who surveyed him with looks of 
respectful admiration and curiosity 
mingled with awe. One of the group 
appeared to be in authority, for the oth- 
ers listened to him with profound re- 
spect as they conversed in low tones, 
and were careful not to obtrude their 
opinions. 

Gradually his senses returned to him, 
and Reuel could distinguish his sur- 
roundings. He gazed about him in 
amazement Gone were all evidences of 
ruin and decay, and in their place was 
bewildering beauty that filled him with 
dazzling awe. He reclined on a couch 
composed of silken cushions, in a room 
of vast dimensions, formed of fluted col- 
umns of pure white marble upholding a 
domed ceiling where the light poured in 
through rose-colored glass in soft pris- 
matic shades which gave a touch of 
fairyland to the scene. 

The men beside him were strangers, 
and more unreal than the vast chamber. 
Dark-visaged, he noticed that they 
ranged in complexion from a creamy 
tint to purest ebony; the long hair which 
fell upon their shoulders, varied in tex- 
ture from soft, waving curls to the crisp- 
ness of the most pronounced African 
type. But the faces into which he gazed 
were perfect in the cut and outline of 
every feature; the forms hidden by soft 
white drapery, Grecian in effect, were 
athletic and beautifully moulded. San- 
dals covered their feet. 

The eyes of the leader followed 
ReuePs every movement 

"Where am I?" cried Briggs impetu- 
ously, after a hurried survey of the situ- 
ation. 



424 



THE COLORED AMERICAN MAGAZINE. 



Immediately the leader spoke to his 
companions in a rich voice, command- 
ing", but with all the benevolence of a 
father. 

"Leave us" he said. "I would be 
alone with the stranger." 

He spoke in ancient Arabic known 
only to the most profound students of 
philology. Instantly the room was 
cleared, each figure vanished behind the 
silken curtains hanging between the col- 
umns at one side of the room. 

"How came I here?" cried Reuel 
again. 

"Peace," replied the leader, extending 
his arms as if in benediction above the 
young man's head. "You have nothing 
to fear. You have been brought hither 
for a certain purpose which will shortly 
be made clear to you; you shall return 
to your friends if you desire so to do, 
after the council has investigated your 
case. But why, my son, did you wander 
at night about the dangerous passages 
of the pyramid? Are you, too, one of 
those who seek for hidden treasure?" 

In years the speaker was still young, 
not being over forty despite his patri- 
archal bearing. The white robe was in- 
finitely becoming, emphasizing breadth 
of shoulder and chest above the silver- 
clasped arm's-eye like nothing he had 
seen save in the sculptured figures of 
the ruined cities lately explored. But 
the most striking thing about the man 
was his kingly countenance, combining 
force, sweetness and dignity in every 
feature. The grace of a perfect life in- 
vested him like a royal robe. The musi- 
cal language flowed from his lips in 
sonorous' accents that charmed the 
scholar in his listener, who, to his own 
great surprise and delight, found that 
conversation between them could be 
carried on with ease. Reuel could not 
repress a smile as he thought of the as- 
tonishment of Professor Stone if he 
could hear them rolling out the ancient 



Arabic tongue as a common carrier of 
thought. It seemed sacrilegious. 

"But where am I?" he persisted, de- 
termined to locate his whereabouts. 

"You are in the hidden city Telassar. 
In my people you will behold the direct 
descendants of the inhabitants of Meroe. 
We are but a remnant, and here we wait 
behind the protection of our mountains 
and swamps, secure from the intrusion 
of a world that has forgotten, for the 
coming of our king who shall restore to 
the Ethiopian race its ancient glory. I 
am Ai, his faithful prime minister." 

Hopelessly perplexed by the w f ords of 
the speaker, Reuel tried to convince 
himself that he was laboring under a 
wild hallucination; but his senses all 
gave evidence of the reality of his situa- 
tion. Somewhere in Milton he had read 
lines that now came faintly across his 
memory: 

"Eden stretched her lines 
From Auran eastward to the royal 
tow'rs 

Of great Seleucia, built by Grecian 
kings, 

Or where the sons of Eden long before 
Dwelt in Telassar. 

Something of his perplexity Ai must 
have read in his eyes, for he smiled as 
he said, "Not Telassar of Eden, but so 
like to Eden's beauties did our ancestors 
find the city that thus did they call it." 

"Can it be that you are an Ethiopian 
of those early days, now lost in obscur- 
ity? Is it possible that a remnant of that 
once magnificent race yet dwells upon 
old mother Earth? You talk of having 
lived at Meroe; surely, you cannot mean 
it. Were it true, what you have just ut- 
tered, the modern world would stand 
aghast" 

Ai bowed his head gravely. "It is 
even so, incredible though it may seem 
to you, stranger. Destroyed and abased 
because of her idolatries, Ethiopia's ar- 



OF ONE BLOOD. 



425 



rogance and pride have been humbled in 
the dust. Utter destruction has come 
upon Meroe the glorious, as was pre- 
dicted. But there was a hope held out 
to the faithful worshippers of the true 
God that Ethiopia should stretch forth 
her hand unto Eternal Goodness, and 
that then her glory should again dazzle 
the world. I am of the priestly caste, 
and the office I hold descends from fath- 
er to son, and has so done for more than 
six thousand years before the birth of 
Christ. But enough of this now; when 
you are fully rested and recovered from 
the effect of the narcotics we were 
forced to give you, I will talk with you, 
and I will also show you the wonders of 
our hidden city. Come with me." 

Without more speech he lifted one of 
the curtains at the side of the room, re- 
vealing another apartment where run- 
ning water in marble basins invited one 
to the refreshing bath. Attendants 
stood waiting, tall, handsome, dark-vis- 
aged, kindly, and into their hands he 
resigned Reuel. 

Used as he was to the improvements 
and luxuries of life in the modern Ath- 
ens, he could but acknowledge them as 
poor beside the combination of Oriental 
and ancient luxury that he now enjoyed. 
Was ever man more gorgeously housed 
than this? Overhead was the tinted 
glass through which the daylight fell in 
softened glow. In the air was the per- 
fume and lustre of precious incense, the 
flash of azure and gold, the mingling of 
deep and delicate hues, the gorgeous- 
ness of waving plants in blossom and tall 
trees — palms, dates, orange, mingled 
with the gleaming statues that shone 
forth in brilliant contrast to the dark 
green foliage. The floor was paved with 
varied mosaic and dotted here and there 
with the skins of wild animals. 

After the bath came a repast of fruit, 
game and wine, served him on curious 
golden dishes that resembled the speci- 
mens taken from ruined Pompeii. By 



the time he had eaten night had fallen, 
and he laid himself down on the silken 
cushions of his couch, with a feeling of 
delicious languor and a desire for re- 
pose. His nerves were in a quiver of 
excitement and he doubted his ability 
to sleep, but in a few moments, even 
while he doubted, he fell into a deep 
sleep of utter exhaustion. 

CHAPTER XV. 

When he arose in the morning he 
found that his own clothing had been 
replaced by silken garments fashioned 
as were Ai's with the addition of golden 
clasps and belts. In place oi his re 
volver was a jewelled dagger literally 
encrusted with gems. 

After the bath and breakfast, Ai en- 
tered the room with his noiseless tread, 
and when the greetings had been said, 
invited him to go with him to visit the 
public buildings and works of Telassar. 
With a swift, phantomlike movement, 
Ai escorted his guest to the farther end 
of the great hall. Throwing aside a cur- 
tain of rich topaz silk which draped the 
large entrance doors he ushered him 
into another apartment opening out on 
a terrace with a garden at its foot — a 
garden where a marvellous profusion of 
flowers and foliage ran riot amid spark- 
ling fountains and gleaming statuary. 

Through a broad alley, lined with ma- 
jestic palms, they passed to the extreme 
end of the terrace, and turning faced 
the building from which they had just 
issued. A smile quivered for a moment 
on Ars face as he noted Reuel's ill-con- 
cealed amazement He stood for a mo- 
ment stock-still, overcome with astom- 
ishment at the size and splendor of the 
palace that had sheltered him over night. 
The building was dome-shaped and of 
white marble, surrounded by fluted col- 
umns, end fronted by courts where 
fountains dashed their spray up to the 
blue sky, and flowers blushed in myriad 



426 



THE COLORED AM EL IC AN MAGAZINE. 



colors and birds in gorgeous plumage 
flitted from bough to bough. 

It appeared to Reuel that they were 
on the highest poinc of what might be 
best described as a horse-shoe curve 
whose rounded end rested on the side of 
a gigantic mountain. At their feet 
stretched a city beautiful, built with an 
outer and inner wall. They were in the 
outer city. Two streams descended like 
cataracts to the plain below, at some 
distance from each other, forming a tri- 
angle which held another city. Far in 
thfe distance like a silver thread, he 
could dimly discern where the rivers 
joined, losing themselves in union. As he 
gazed he recalled the description of the 
treasure city that Professor Stone had 
read to the explorers. 

As far as the eye could reach stretched 
fertile fields; vineyards climbed the 
mountain side. Again Reuel quoted 
Milton in his thoughts, for here was the 
very embodiment of his words: 

"Flowers of all hue, and without thorn 
the rose, 

Another side, umbrageous grots and 
caves 

Of cool recess, o'er which the mantling 
vine 

Lays forth her purple grape, and gently 
creeps 

Luxuriant ; meanwhile murmuring 

waters fall 
Down the slope hills, dispersed, or in 

a lake, 

That to the fringed bank with myrtle 
crown'd 

Her crystal mirror holds, unite their 
streams. 

The birds their choir apply; airs, vernal 
airs, 

Breathing the smeil of field and grove, 
attune 

The trembling leaves, while universal 
Pan, 

Knit with the Graces and the Hours in 
dance, 

Led on th' eternal spring. 



Far below he could dimly discern 
moving crowds; great buildings reared 
their stately heads towards a sky so blue 
and bewildering beneath the sun's bright 
rays that the gazer was rendered speech- 
less with amazement. Shadowy images 
of past scenes and happenings flitted 
across his brain like transient reflection 
of a past perfectly familiar to him. 

"Do you find the prospect fair?*' asked 
Ai at length, breaking the settled silence. 

"Fairer than I can find words to ex- 
press; and yet I am surprised to find that 
it all seems familiar to me, as if some- 
where in the past I had known just such 
a city as this/' 

Ai smiled a smile of singular sweet- 
ness and content; Reuel could have 
sworn that there was a degree of satis- 
faction in his pleasure. 

"Come, we will go down into the city. 
You who know the wonders of modern 
life at its zenith, tell me what lesson you 
learn from the wonders of a civilization 
which had its zenith six thousand years 
before Christ's birth." 

"Six thousand years before Christ!" 
murmured Reuel in blank stupidity. 

"Aye; here in Telassar are preserved 
specimens of the highest attainments the 
world knew in ancient days. They tell 
me that in many things your modern 
world is yet in its infancy/' 

"How!" cried Reuel, "do yon then 
hold communion with the world outside 
your city?" 

"Certain members of our Council are 
permitted to visit outside the gates. Do 
you not remember Ababdis?" 

"Our camel-driver?" 

Ai bowed. "He is the member who 
brought us news of your arrival, and 
the intention of the expedition to find 
our city for the sake of its treasure." 

More and more mystified by the 
words and manner of his guide, Reuel 
made no reply. Presently they entered 
a waiting palanquin and were borne 
swiftly toward the city. The silken cur- 
tains were drawn one side, and he could 



OF ONE BLOOD. 



drink in the curious sights. They soon 
left the country behind them and en- 
tered a splendid square, where stately 
homes were outlined against the dense 
blue of the sky. A statue of an immense 
sphinx crouched in the center of the 
square, its giant head reaching far into 
the ethereal blue. Fountains played on 
either side, dashing their silvery spray 
beyond the extreme height of the head. 
Under umbrageous trees were resting- 
places, and on the sphinx was engraved 
the words: 'That which hath been, is 
now; and that which is to be, hath al- 
ready been; and God requireth that 
which is past." 

Suddenly a crowd of men surged into 
the square, and a deep-toned bell sound- 
ed from a distance. Swiftly sped the 
bearers, urged forward by the general 
rush. The booming of the bell contin- 
ued. They reached the end of the ave- 
nue and entered a side street, through 
a court composed of statues. They 
paused before a stately pile, towering in 
magnificence high in the heavens, a 
pile of marvellously delicate architecture 
worked in stone. The entrance was of 
incomparable magnificence. Reuel 
judged that the four colossal statues be- 
fore it represented Rameses the Great. 
They were each sculptured of a single 
block of Syene granite of mingled red 
and black. They were seated on cubical 
stones. The four Colosses sitting there 
before that glittering pile produced a 
most imposing effect 

The steps of the temple were strewn 
with flowers; the doors stood open, and 
music from stringed instruments vi- 
brated upon the air. The bearers stopped 
at a side entrance, and at a sign from Ai, 
Reuel followed him into the edifice. 

All was silence, save for the distant 
hum of voices, and the faint sound of 
music. They halted before a curtain 
which parted silently for their entrance. 
It was a small room, but filled with a 
light of soft colors; when Reuel could 



command his gaze, he beheld about 
twenty men prostrated before him. 
Presently they arose and each filed past 
him, reverently touching the hem of his 
white robe. Among them was Ababdis, 
so transformed by his gorgeous robes of 
office as to be almost unrecognizable. 

Ai now assumed an azure robe em- 
broidered in silver stars and crescents 
that formed a sunburst in shape of a 
Grecian cross. He then advanced 
towards Reuel bearing on a silken cush- 
ion a magnificent crown, where the prin- 
cipal aigrette was shaped as a cross set 
with gems priceless in value. Astounded 
at the sight, the young man stood mo- 
tionless while it was adjusted by golden 
chains about his head. The gems blazed 
with the red of the ruby, the green of 
the emerald, the blue of the sapphire, 
the yellow of the topaz, the cold white 
of priceless diamonds. But dulling all 
the glories of precious stones, peerless in 
their own class, lay the center orna- 
ment — the black diamond of Senechus's 
crown, spoken of in Professor Stone's 
record. A white robe of silken stuff was 
added to his costume, and again his 
companions filed past him in deepest 
reverence. Reuel was puzzled to un- 
derstand why so great homage was paid 
to him. While he turned the thought 
in his mind, a bugle sounded somewhere 
in the distance, sweet and high. In- 
stantly, he felt a gliding motion as if 
the solid earth were slipping from be- 
neath his feet, the curtains before him 
parted silently, and he found himself 
alone on a raised platform in the center 
of a vast auditoriurfi, crowded with hu- 
manity. Lights twinkled everywhere; 
there was the fragrance of flowers, there 
were columns of marble draped in am- 
ber, azure and green, and glittering 
lamps encrusted with gems and swung 
by golden chains from the sides of the 
building. A blazing arch formed of 
brilliant lamps raised like a gigantic bow 



42S 



THE COLORED AMERICAN MAGAZINE. 



in the heavens and having in its center 
the words 

"HAIL! ERGAMENES!" 
in letters of sparkling fire, met his star- 
tled gaze. Then came 1 ringing shout 
from the throats of the assembled multi- 
tude, "Ergamenes! Ergamenes P Again 
and again the throng lifted up the joy- 
ous cry. Presently as Reuel stood there 
undecided what to do — not knowing 
what was expected of him, as silently as 
lie had come, he felt the motion of the 
platform where he stood. The crowd 
faded from sight, the curtains fell; once 
more he stood within the little room, 
surrounded by his companions. 

"Ababdis, Ai,'' he demanded, sternly, 
"What is the meaning of this strange 
happening, more like a scene from the 
Arabian Nights? Who is Ergamenes?" 

"Thou art Ergamenes — the long- 
lookcd-for king of Ethiopia, for whose 
reception this city was built! But we 
will return to the palace, now that the 
people have satisfied somewhat their 
curiosity. At supper you shall know 
more." 

Once more the bearers carried them 
swiftly beyond the confines of the city, 
and soon the palace walls rose before 
them. Reuel had hardly collected his 
scattered wits before he found himself 
seated at table and on either side of the 
board the Council reclined on silken 
cushions. His own seat was raised and 
placed at the head of the table. There 
was no talking done while what seemed 
to be a solemn feast was in progress. 
Servants passed noiselessly to and fro 
attending 1.0 their wants, while from an 
alcove the music of stringed instruments 
and sweetest vocal numbers was borne 
to their ears. 

After supper, they still reclined on the 
couches. Then from the hidden recesses 
the musicians came forth, and kneeling 
before Reuel, one began a song in blank 
verse, telling the story of Ergamenes 
and his kingdom. 



"Hail! oh, hail, Ergamenes! 
The dimmest sea-cave below thee, 

The farthest sky-arch above, 
In their innermost stillness know thee, 
And heave with the birth of Love. 
"All hail! 

We are thine, all thine, forevermore; 
Not a leaf on the laughing shore, 
Not a wave on the heaving sea, 

Nor a single sigh 

In the boundless sky, 
But is vowed evermore to thee!" 

"Son of a fallen dynasty, outcast of a 
sunken people, upon your breast is a 
lotus lily, God's mark to prove your race 
and descent. You, Ergamenes, shall 
begin the restoration of Ethiopia. Bless- 
ed be the name of God for ever and ever, 
for wisdom and might are His, and He 
changeth the times and seasons; He re- 
moveth kings and countries, and setteth 
them up again; He giveth wisdom unto 
the wise, and knowledge to them that 
know understanding! He revealeth the 
deep and secret things; He knoweth 
what is in the darkness, and the light 
dwelleth with Him! 

"Great were the sins of our fathers, 
and the white stranger was to Ethiopia 
but a scourge in the hands of an of- 
fended God. The beautiful temples of 
Babylon, filled with vessels of silver and 
gold, swelled the treasures of the false 
god Bel. Babylon, where our monarchs 
dwelt in splendor, once the grandest city 
to be found in the world. Sixty miles 
round were its walls, of prodigious 
height, and so broad that seven chariots 
could be driven abreast on the summit! 
One hundred gates of solid brass gave 
entrance into the city, guarded by lofty 
towers. Beautiful buildings rose within, 
richly adorned and surrounded by gar- 
dens. One magnificent royal palace 
was girdled by three walls, the outer- 
most of wdiich was seven miles and a 
half in compass. In its grounds rose the 
far-famed hanging gardens, terraces 



OF ONE BLOOD. 



429 



built one above another to the height 
of three hundred and fifty feet, each ter- 
race covered with thick mould, and 
planted with flowers and shrubs, so that 
the skill of man created a verdant hill on 
a plain. Nearly in the centre rose the 
lofty temple of Belus, the tower of Ba- 
bel, whose builders had hoped to make 
its summit touch the very skies. Mil- 
lions of dollars in gold were gathered in 
the chambers of the temple. The 
wealth, power and glory of the world 
were centered in the mighty city of 
Babylon. 

"On the throne of this powerful city 
sat your forefathers, O Ergamenes!" 

Part of the story had been given in 
recitative, one rich voice carrying 
grandly the monotonous notes to the 
accompaniment of the cornet, flute, 
sackbut, dulcimer and harp. Reuel had 
listened to the finest trained voices at- 
tempting the recitative in boasted musi- 
cal circles, but never in so stately and 
impressive a manner as was now his 
privilege to hear. They continued the 
story. 

"And Meroe, the greatest city of them 
all, pure-blooded Ethiopian. Once the 
light of the world's civilization, now a 
magnificent Necropolis. 

"Standing at the edge of the Desert, 
fertile in soil, rich in the luxuries of for- 
eign shores; into her lap caravans 
poured their treasures gathered from 
the North, South, East and West. All 
Africa poured into this queenly city 
ivory, frankincense and gold. Her col- 
ossal monuments were old before Egypt 
was; her wise men monopolized the 
learning of the ages, and in the persons 
of the Chaldeans have figured conspicu- 
ously the wisdom of ages since Meroe 
has fallen. 

"Mother of ancient warfare, her 
horsemen and chariots were the won- 
der and terror of her age; from the 
bows of her warriors, the arrows sped 
like a flight of birds, carrying destruc- 



tion to her foes, — a lamb in peace, a lion 
in time of war." 

Once more the measure changed, and 
another voice took up the story in verse. 

"Who will assume the bays 

That the hero wore? 
Wreaths on the Tomb of Days 

Gone evermore! 
Who shall disturb the brave 
Or one leaf of their holy grave? 
The laurel is vow'd to them, 
Leave the bay on its sacred stem! 
But hope, the rose, the unfading rose, 
Alike for slave and freeman grows! 

"On the summit, worn and hoary, 
Of Lybia's solemn hills, 
The tramp of the brave is still! 
And still is the poisoned dart, 
In the pulse of the mighty hearts, 
Whose very blood was glory! 

Who will assume the bays 

That the hero wore? 
Wreaths on the Tomb of Days 

Gone evermore !" 

Upon Reuel a strange force seemed 
working. If what he heard were true, 
how great a destiny was his! He had 
carefully hidden his Ethiopian extrac- 
tion from the knowledge of the world. 
It was a tradition among those who had 
known him in childhood that he was 
descended from a race of African kings. 
He remembered his mother well. From 
her he had inherited his mysticism and 
his occult powers. The nature of the 
mystic within him was, then, but a 
dreamlike devotion to the spirit that 
had swayed his ancestors; it was the 
shadow of Ethiopia's power. The lotus 
upon his breast he knew to be a birth- 
mark. Many a night he had been 
aroused from childhood's slumbers, to 
find his mother bending above him, can- 
dle in hand, muttering broken sentences 
of prayer to Almighty God as she ex- 



430 



THE COLORED AMERICAN MAGAZINE. 



amined his bosom by the candle's rays. 
He had wondered much; now he 
guessed the rest. Once more the clang- 
ing strings of the instruments chained 
his attention. The recitative was re- 
sumed. 

"The Most High ruleth in the king- 
dom of men, and giveth it to whomso- 
ever He will. He delivereth and rescu- 
eth, and He worketh signs and wonders 
in heaven and in earth. Pre-eminent in 
peace, invincible in war — once the mas- 
ters of mankind, how have we fallen 
from our high estate! 

"Stiff-necked, haughty, no conscience 
but that of intellect, awed not by God's 
laws, worshipping Mammon, sensual, 
unbelieving, God has punished us as he 
promised in the beginning. Gone are 
our ancient glories, our humbled pride 
cries aloud to God in the travail of our 
souL Our sphinx, with passionless fea- 
tures, portrays the dumb suffering of 
our souls. 

Their look, with the reach of past ages, 
was wise, 

And the soul of eternity thought in their 
eyes. 

"By divine revelation David beheld 
the present time, when, after Christ's 
travail for the sins of humanity, the time 
of Ethiopia's atonement being past, 
purged of idolatry, accepting the One 
Only God through His Son Jesus, sud- 
denly should come a new birth to the 
descendants of Ham, and Ethiopia 
should return to her ancient glory! Er- 
gamenes, all hail! 

"You come from afar 

From the land of the stranger, 
The dreadful in war, 

The daring in danger; 
Before him our plain 

Like Eden is lying; 
Behind him remain 

But the wasted and dying. 



"The weak finds not ruth, 

Nor the patriot glory; 
No hope for the youth, 

And no rest for the hoary; 
O'er Ethiop's lost plains 

The victor's sword flashes, 
Her sons are in chains, 

And her temples in ashes! 

<f Who will assume the bays 

That the hero wore? 
Wreaths on the Tomb of Days 

Gone evermore!" 

Upon his companions the song of the 
past of Ethiopia had a strange effect. 
Soothing at times, at times exciting, 
with the last notes from the instruments 
the company sprang to their feet; with 
flashing dark eyes, faces reflecting in- 
ward passions, they drew their short, 
sabrelike arms and circled about 
Reuel's throne with the shout "Erga- 
menes ! Ergamenes !" 

CHAPTER XVI. 

Once more Reuel found himself alone 
with Ai. It was far into the night, but 
he felt sleepless and restless. At last 
Ai broke a long silence: 

"Tell me of the country from which 
you come, Ergamenes. Is it true that 
the Ethiopian there is counted less than 
other mortals?" 

"It is true, Ai," replied Reuel. "There, 
the dark hue of your skin, your waving 
hair with its trace of crispness, would 
degrade you below the estate of any man 
of fair hue and straight locks, belonging 
to any race outside the Ethiopian, for it 
is a deep disgrace to have within the 
veins even one drop of the blood you 
seem so proud of possessing." 

"That explains your isolation from 
our race, then?" 

Reuel bowed his head in assent, while 
over his face passed a flush of shame. 
He felt keenly now the fact that he had 
played the coward's part in hiding his 



OF ONE BLOOD. 



431 



origin. What though obstacles were 
many, some way would have been 
shown him to surmount the difficulties 
of caste prejudice. 

"And yet, from Ethiopia came all the 
arts and cunning inventions that make 
your modern glory. At our feet the 
mightiest nations have worshipped, pay- 
ing homage to our kings, and all na- 
tions have sought the honor of alliance 
with our royal families because of our 
strength, grandeur, riches and wisdom. 
Tell me of all the degradation that has 
befallen the unfortunate sons of Ham." 

Then in the deep, mysterious silence 
of the night, Reuel gave in minutest de- 
tail the story of the Negro, reciting with 
dramatic effect the history of the wrongs 
endured by the modern Ethiopian. 

To his queries as to the history of 
these mountain-dwelling Ethiopians, Ai 
gave the following reply: 

"We are a singular people, governed 
by a female monarch, all having the 
same name, Candace, and a Council of 
twenty-five Sages, who are educated for 
periodical visits to the outer world. 
Queen Candace is a virgin queen who 
waits the coming of Ergamenes to in- 
augurate a dynasty of kings. Our vir- 
gins live within the inner city, and from 
among them Candace chooses her suc- 
cessor at intervals of fifteen years. 

"To become a Sage, a man must be 
married and have at least two children; 
a knowledge of two out-world languages, 
and to pass a severe examination by the 
court as to education, fitness and ability. 
After an arduous preparation they are 
initiated into the secrets of this king- 
dom. They are chosen for life. The 
inner city is the virgins' court, and it is 
adorned with beautiful gardens, baths, 
schools and hospitals. When a woman 
marries she leaves this city for the outer 
one. 

"We have a great temple, the one you 
entered, dedicated to the Supreme or 
Trinity. It is a masterpiece of beauty 



and art. The population assembles 
there twice a year for especial service. 
It seats about 12,000 persons. The 
Sages have seen nothing equal to it in 
the outer world. 

Octagonal in shape, with four wings 
or galleries, on opposite sides; the inter- 
vening spaces are filled with great prism 
columns, twenty-five feet high, made of 
a substance like glass, malleable, elastic 
and pure. The effect is gorgeous. The 
decorations of the hall are prepared 
natural flowers; that is, floral garlands 
are subjected to the fumes of the crystal 
material covering them like a film and 
preserving their natural appearance. 
This is a process handed down from the 
earliest days of Ethiopian greatness. I 
am told that the modern world has not 
yet solved this simple process," he said, 
with a gentle smile of ridicule. 

"We preserve the bodies of our most 
beautiful women in this way. We sus- 
pend reflecting plates of the crystal ma- 
terial arranged in circles, pendant from 
the ceiling of the central hall, and thus 
the music of the instruments is repeated 
many times in sweetest harmony. 

"We have services at noon every sev- 
enth day, chiefly choral, in praise of the 
attributes of the Supreme. Our religion 
is a belief in One Supreme Being, the 
center of action in all nature. He dis- 
tributed a portion of Himself at an early 
age to the care of man who has attained 
the highest development of any of His 
terrestrial creatures. We call this ever- 
living faculty or soul Ego. 

"After its transition Ego has the pow- 
er of expressing itself to other bodies, 
with like gift and form, its innate feel- 
ing; and by law of affinity, is ever striv- 
ing to regain its original position near 
the great Unity; but the physical attrac- 
tions of this beautiful world have such 
a fascination on the organism of man 
that there is ever a contention against 
the greater object being attained; and 
unless the Ego can wean the body from 



43 2 



THE COLORED AMERICAN MAGAZINE. 



gross desires and raise it to the highest 
condition of human existence, it cannot 
be united to its Creator. The Ego pre- 
serves its individuality after the dissolu- 
tion of the body. We believe in re-in- 
carnation by naturai laws regulating ma- 
terial on earth. The Ego can never be 
destroyed. For instance, when the body 
of a good man or woman dies, and the 
Ego is not sufficiently fitted for the 
higher condition of another world, it is 
re-associated with another body to com- 
plete the necessary fitness for heaven." 

"What of the Son of man? Do you 
not know the necessity of belief in the 
Holy Trinity? Have not your Sages 

(To be c 



brought you the need of belief in God's 
Son?" Ai looked somewhat puzzled. 

"We have heard of such a God, but 
have not paid much attention to it. How 
believe you, Ergamenes?'' 

'in Jesus Christ, the Son of God," 
replied Retiel solemnly. 

"O Ergamenes, your belief shall be 
ours; we have no will but yours. Deign 
to teach your subjects." 

When at last Reuel closed his eyes in 
slumber, it was with a feeling of greater 
responsibility and 'humility than he had 
ever experienced. Who was he that so 
high a destiny as lay before him should 
be thrust upon his shoulders? 
eluded.) 



ETHIOPIANS OF THE TWENTIETH CENTURY. 

I. QUESTIONS AFFECTING THE NATIVES AND COLOREE 
PEOPLE RESIDENT IN BRITISH SOUTH AFRICA. 

A. KIRKLAND SOGA. 

To ine Right Hon. Joseph Chamberlain, P. C. /)/., P., His Majesty's Secretary of 
State for the Colonies, ete. 



We are glad of the opportunity af- 
forded us of approaching you, and 
through you the British Government, in 
the manner prescribed by the constitu- 
tional forms of the country for the ex- 
pression of public opinion and feeling. 

The loyalty of the native people of 
South Africa is satisfactorily testified to 
by the reports of the official heads of 
Native Departments in their recent 
Blue-Books. We fully confirm them 
now. Much as our people have suf- 
fered through the late war, their con- 
fidence in the justice of that war made 
them all the more willing to bear the 
hardships imposed upon them in com- 
mon with the Mother Country. We 
would not lose this opportunity of testi- 
fying their indebtedness to His Excel- 
lency Viscount Milner and his able ad- 
ministrators in the great work of repa- 



triating the native refugees, and for all 
that has been done in protecting, hous- 
ing, and feeding them in the Concen- 
tration Camps. The cause of the suf- 
ferers can be confidently left in the gen- 
erous hands of the Imperial Govern- 
ment in its anxiety to do the best for all 
classes. 

THE CHURCH. 

The question of loyalty raises the 
larger question of the indebtedness of 
the native races to the Government and 
people of Great Britain. How much is 
implied in the thought that out of the 
self-sacrificing faith of the Christian na- 
tions, foremost among whom are the 
people of the British Isles, the Gospel 
of Salvation has been brought to the 
people that sit in darkness and the 
shadow of death, cannot be adequately 



49- 



1IIE COLORED AMERICAN MAGAZINE. 



which he is held by his countrymen. It 
was with keen regret that I discovered 
that in Ilayti the memory of Toussaint 
is not held in the honor which it de- 
serves. Wry little is said of him there 
and that little is not much in his praise. 
His case is another illustration of the 
truth that a prophet is without honor in 
his own country and among his own 
kin-men. 

The absence of appreciation of Tous- 
saint in Ilayti seems to be owing to the 
facts that he was not sufficiently blood- 
thirsty and that he was opposed to the 
complete separation of his country from 
France. He was also blamed for com- 
pelling his countrymen to work and to 
keep the productiveness of the country 
up to the point attained in the time of 
slavery. No one pretends that Tous- 
saint was not a friend to his people and 
a valiant friend of their freedom, but he 



was, they in?ist, too much of a French- 
man. Strange that the very people who 
say this today are themselves wedded to 
the French. They send their children 
to France to be educated; are proud of 
their French language, manners and cus- 
toms, and many of them take shelter un- 
der the citizenship of France even when 
proposing to spend their days in Hayti. 

But the memory of Toussaint 
L'Ouverture is not confined and will 
not be confined to his own country. He 
was too great for such limitations. His 
character and works make him the prop- 
erty of mankind, and the best minds and 
hearts of the civilized world will cherish 
and vindicate his memory and execrate 
the base treachery and remorseless 
cruelty that left him to perish of cold 
and hunger in the icy damps of a gloomy 
prison. 



OF ONE BLOOD.* 

OR, THE HIDDEN SELF. 

PAULINE E. HOPKINS. 



SYNOPSIS OF CHAPTERS I. TO XVI. 

Reuel Briggs, a voung medical student, interested in 
mysticism, sees a face that haunts him. He attends a 
concert with his friend Aubrey Livingston, and there 
discovers in a negro concert-singer the owner of the 
mysterious face. He sees this woman again on Hallow 
Eve while playing at charni9 with a party of young 
people at Vance Hall, the home of Livingston's be- 
trothed. Early the next morning he is called to attend 
the victims of a railroad disaster at the hospital. He 
finds among thein the girl whose face haunts him. in a 
cataleptic sleep which the doctors call death. Ik suc- 
ceeds in restoring her to consciousness, hut with a 
complete loss of memorv. She loses her identity as a 
negress. Reuel falls deeply in love with her. He 
finally restores her to health and determines to marry 
her. but finds his circumstances too straitened. Au- 
brey Livingston helps him out by offering to obtain 
for "him a place in an expedition about to explore the 
ancient city of Meroe in Africa. Reuel accepts, but 
marries I>ianthe before going on a two years' venture. 
After his departure Dianthe finds that Livingston is in 
love with her. and he acquires a power over her that 
she cannot resist. She agrees to fly with him against 
her will ; but before the time set, they, with Molly- 
Vance, go out canoeing and art overturned in the river, 
and all three are supposed to have been drowned. 

The expedition reaches Africa. In crossing the Great 
Desert Reuel Brings visits old ruins and is rescued 
from a leopard's claws by Vance. They are suspicious 
of Jim Titus, w ho pretended net to hear brings' calls 
for help. They receive no letters from home after leav- 
ing England, and one nigl t. by clairvovant aid. Reuel 
reads a letter that Titus has" received. That same 
night, by mediumistic power, Briggs describes the 
overturning of the boat containing Molly. Dianthe and 
Aubrey, on the Charles River months before. The 



caravan reaches Meroe. and letters reveal the death of 
Dianthe and Molly. Reuel is sick, for some weeks, 
and when he returns to health finds the expedition 
about to give up its search for treasure and return 
home. Wanders out one night while the camp is 
asleep and goes to the last pyramid. While exploring 
it he becomes unconscious. When consciousness re- 
turns he finds him-ell in a hidden city among the 
descendants of the ancient Ethiopians who await the 
return of their king. They claim Reuel as the ex- 
pected monarch because of the royal birthmark on 
his breast, — a lotus lily. 

CHAPTER XVI. — ( Concluded. ) 

After these happenings, which we have 
just recorded, every day Reuel received 
callers in state. It seemed to him that 
the entire populace of that great hidden 
city turned out to do him homage. The 
Sages, clad in silver armor, attended 
him as a body-guard, while soldiers and 
officials high in the councils of the State, 
were ranged on both sides of the immense 
hall. The throne on which he sat was 
a massive one of silver, a bronze Sphinx 

"Copyright, lyo;, by Pauline E. Hopkins. 



OF ONE BLOOD 



493 



couched on either side. The steps of 
the throne were banked with blossoms, 
offerings from the procession of chil- 
dren that filed slowly by, clad in white, 
wearing garlands of roses, and laying 
branches of palm, oleander flowers, lilies 
and olive sprays before their king. 

Offerings of gold, silver and gems, 
silken cloths, priceless articles moulded 
into unique and exquisite designs, 
sword of tempered steel, beside which a 
Damascus blade was coarse and unfin- 
ished, filled his artist soul with delight 
and wonder. Later, Ai escorted him 
to the underground workshops where 
brawny smiths plied their trades; and 
there the secrets of centuries dead and 
gone were laid bare to his curious gaze. 

How was it possible, he asked himself 
again and again, that a nation so ad- 
vanced in literature, science and the 
arts, in the customs of peace and war, 
could fall as low as had the Ethiopian? 
Even while he held the thought, the 
answer came: As Daniel interpreted 
Nebuchadnezzar's dream, so has it been 
and is with Ethiopia. "They shall drive 
thee from men, and thy dwelling shall 
be with the beasts .of the field, and they 
shall make thee to eat grass as oxen, 
and they shall wet thee with the dew of 
heaven, and seven times shall pass over 
thee, till thou knowest that the Most 
High ruleth in the kingdom of men, and 
giveth it to whomsoever He will. Thy 
kingdom shall be sure unto thee; after 
that thou shalt have known that the 
heavens do rule." 

But the excitement and changes 
through which he had passed began to 
tell upon a constitution already weak- 
ened by mental troubles. Ai observed 
with much concein, the apathy which 
foretold a serious illness. Hoping to 
arouse him from painful thoughts which 
now engrossed his mind, Ai proposed 
that the visit to the inner city, postponed 
by the pressure of other duties, be made 
the next day. 



That morning a company, of which 
the Sages formed a part, started for the 
inner city. They were to spend the 
night in travel, resting by day. The 
progress of the party was very slow, 
and in a direction Reuel had not yet 
explored. A deep yellow glow suffused 
the sky. This soon gave way to the 
powerful but mellow light of the Afri- 
can moon, casting long shadows over 
the silvery green of the herbage and 
foliage. They encountered a perfect net- 
work of streams, pursuing their way 
through virgin forests, brilliant by day- 
light with beautiful flowers. The woods 
were inhabited by various kinds of birds 
of exquisite note and plumage. There 
were also a goodly number of baboons, 
who descended from the trees and 
ranged themselves on the ground to ob- 
tain a nearer view of the travellers. They 
grinned and chattered at the caravan, 
seeming to regard them as trespassers in 
their domains. 

The character of the country im- 
proved as they neared the interior. 
Reuel noticed that this was at variance 
with the European idea respecting Cen- 
tral Africa, which brands these regions 
as howling wildernesses or an uninhabit- 
able country. He found the landscape 
most beautiful, the imaginary desert 
"blossomed like the rose," and the 
"waste sandy valleys" and "thirsty wilds," 
which had been assigned to this location, 
became, on close inspection, a gorgeous 
scene, decorated with Nature's most 
cheering garniture, teeming with choice 
specimens of vegetable and animal life, 
and refreshed by innumerable streams, 
branches of the rivers, not a few of 
which were of sufficient magnitude for 
navigation and commerce. But Reuel 
remembered the loathsome desert that 
stood in grim determination guarding 
the entrance to this paradise against all 
intrusion, and with an American's prac- 
tical common sense, bewailed this waste 
of material. 



494 



THE COLORED AMERICAN MAGAZINE. 



Proceeding along a mountain gorge, 
our travellers found the path straitened 
between the impending mountain on one 
side and a rapid and sparkling stream on 
the other. On the opposite side of the 
ravine the precipices rose abruptly from 
the very edge of the water. The whole 
appearance of this mountain pass was 
singularly grand, romanticallv wild and 
picturesquely beautiful. They were 
often obliged to clamber over huge 
masses of granite, fallen from the cliffs 
above; and, on this account, progress 
was slow and toilsome. On turning an 
angle of the rock, about the centre of 
the gorge, the party were suddenly con- 
fronted by a huge, tawny lion, which 
stood directly in the path, with not a 
wall and scarce a space between. The 
path was so narrow in this place that it 
would have been impossible to pass the 
brute without touching him. Used to 
the king of the African jungle, the com- 
pany did not shrink, but faced the ani- 
mal boldly, although not without some 
natural physical fear. The lion, too, 
seemed to be taken by surprise. Thus 
the opponents stood at a distance of five 
yards, each staring at the other for sev- 
eral minutes. Had the travellers shown 
the least signs of fear, or had they at- 
tempted to escape, the fate of one, at 
least, would have been sealed. Now ap- 
peared an exhibition of the power of 
magnetism. Reuel stepped in advance 
of the foremost bearer, fixed his won- 
derful and powerful eyes upon the beast, 
literally transfixing him with a glance, 
poured the full force of his personal 
magnetism upon the animal, which al- 
most instantly responded by low growls 
and an uneasy twisting of the head; 
finally, the terrible glance remaining in- 
flexible and unwavering, the beast 
turned himself about and slowly with- 
drew with a stately and majestic tread, 
occasionally looking back and uttering a 
low growl, as if admonishing the trav- 
ellers to keep their distance. 



Murmurs of wonder and admiration 
broke from Reuel's companions, who 
were aware of the danger attending the 
meeting of a hungry lion at close quar- 
ters. His admirable intrepidity, and the 
remarkable powers which were his birth- 
right, had preserved him and his com- 
panions. 

"Truly, he is the King!" they mur- 
mured among themselves. And more 
than ever Ai watched him with increas- 
ing love and the fondness of a father. 

Without further adventure they 
reached the portals of the inner city. 
Their arrival was evidently anticipated, 
for they were received by a band of 
young females under the guardianship 
of a matron. By this escort they were 
shown to the palace and into the rooms 
set apart for their reception. Having 
rested for an hour, bathed and dined, 
they were ready for the ceremony of in- 
troduction. Another guard of women 
took them in charge, and the procession 
started down one passage, crossed a 
great, aisle-like hall, and came to a cor- 
responding passage on the other side. 
On through seemingly endless colon- 
nades they passed, till they came to a 
huge door formed of great winged crea- 
tures. Reuel had thought that nothing 
could surpass the palace in the outer 
city for beauty and luxury, but words 
failed him as his eyes drank in the 
glories of the lofty apartment into which 
they stepped, as an Amazon in silver 
mail threw wide the glittering doors, dis- 
closing the splendor of the royal Pres- 
ence-chamber. It was a lofty saloon 
lined with gilded columns, the sunlight 
falling from the open roof upon the 
mosaic floor beneath. The tapestries 
which lined the walls bore exquisite 
paintings of love and warfare. 

As the door opened, a voice called. 
The company halted before a curtained 
recess, guarded by a group of beautiful 
girls. Never had Reuel beheld such 
subtle grace of form and feature, such 



OF ONE BLOOD. 



495 



masses of coal-black hair, such melting 
eyes of midnight hue. Each girl might 
have posed for a statue of Venus. 

The heavy curtains were lifted now, 
and discovered the Queen reclining 
upon a pile of silken cushions— a statue 
of Venus worked in bronze. 

'The Queen is here!" exclaimed a 
voice. In an instant all present pros- 
trated themselves upon the floor. Reuel 
alone stood erect, his piercing eyes fixed 
upon the woman before him. 

Grave, tranquil and majestic, sur- 
rounded by her virgin guard, she ad- 
vanced gracefully, bending her haughty 
head; then, gradually her sinuous body 
bent and swayed down, down, until she, 
too, had prostrated herself, and half- 
knelt, half-lay, upon the marble floor at 
Reuel's feet. 

" O Ergamenes, hast thou indeed re- 
turned to thine inheritance ?" murmured 
a voice like unto silver chimes. Reuel 
started, for it seemed to him that 
Dianthe's own voice was breathing in his 
ears. . 1 - 

Knowing now what was expected ol 
him, he raised the Queen with one hand, 
addressed her courteously in Arabic, led 
her to her silken couch, seated himself, 
and would have placed her beside him, 
but she, with a gesture of dissent, sank 
upon the cushions at his feet that had 
served her for footstools. 

By this time the Sages had risen and 
now reclined on the silken couches with 
which the apartment was well supplied. 
Ai advanced and addressed the Queen; 
during this exchange of courtesies, 
Reuel gazed upon her curiously, 
• She reminded him strongly of his 
beautiful Dianthe; in fact, the resem- 
blance was so striking that it was pain- 
ful, and tears, which were no disgrace to 
his manhood, struggled to his eyes. She 
was the same height as Dianthe, had 
the same well-developed shoulders and 
the same admirable bust What supple- 
ness in all her movements! What grace, 



and, at the same time, what strength! 
Yes; she was a Venus, a superb statue 
of bronze, moulded by a great sculptor; 
but an animated statue, in which one 
saw the blood circulate, and from which 
life flowed. And what an expressive 
face, full of character! Long, jet-black 
hair and totallv free, covered her shoul- 
ders like a silken mantle; a broad, square 
forehead, a warm bronze complexion; 
thick black eyebrows, great black eves, 
now soft and languishing— eyes which 
could weep in sorrow or shoot forth 
lightning in their anger; a delicate nose 
with quivering nostrils, teeth of dazzling 
whiteness behind lips as red as a rose; 
in her smile of grace and sweetness 
lurked a sense of power. He was aston- 
ished and lost in admiration in spite of 
himself. Her loveliness was absolutely 
and ideally perfect. Her attitude of un- 
studied grace accorded well with the 
seriousness of her face; she seemed the 
embodiment of all chastity. 

The maidens of her household waited 
near her — some of them with baskets of 
flowers upheld in perfect arms. Some 
brought fruit in glittering dishes and 
wine in golden goblets of fairy-like fret- 
work, which were served from stands of 
ivory and gold. One maiden knelt at 
h£r lyre, prepared to strike its chords 
at pauses in the conversation. 

The attendants now retired modestly 
into the background, while Ai and the 
other Sages conversed with the Queen. 
She listened with downcast eyes, occa- 
sionally casting a curious, though defer- 
ential glance at the muscular figure be- 
side her. 

"And dost thou agree, and art thou 
willing to accept the destiny planned by 
the Almighty Trinity for thee and me 
from the beginning of all things, my 
lord?" she questioned at length in her 
flute-like voice. 

"Queen Candace, thy beauty and gra- 
ciousness dazzle me. I feel that I can 
love thee with all my heart; I will fulfill 



THE COLORED AMERICAN MAGAZINE. 



496 

my destiny gladly, and I will cleave to 
thee until the end." 

"Now," answered the Queen with 
sweet humility, "now, when thou, my 
lord, doth speak so royally, it doth not 
become me to lag in generosity She 
paused. 

Reuel, gazing into her beautiful face, 
was deeply moved by strong emotions. 
Again she spoke: 

"Behold! in token of submission I 
bow to my lord, King Ergamenes." 
She bent herself slowly to the ground, 
and pressed her knees for one instant 
upon the mosaic floor. "Behold," and 
she touched his forehead lightly with 
her lips, "in earnest of connubial bliss, I 
kiss thee, King Ergamenes. Behold," 
and she placed her hand upon his heart, 
"I swear to thee eternal fealty by the 
Spirit — the never-changing Trinity." 
This ceremony ended she seated herself 
once more beside him. Reuel felt him- 
self yielding readily to her infinite attrac- 
tiveness. In the azure light and regal 
splendor of the fragrant apartment, 
there was rest and satisfaction. All the 
dreams of wealth and ambition that had 
haunted the feverish existence by the 
winding Charles, that had haunted his 
days of obscure poverty in the halls of 
Harvard, were about to be realized. 
Only once had he known joy in his 
checkered life, and that was when he 
basked in the society of Dianthe, whom 
he now designated his spirit-bride. The 
delirium of that joy had ended in lamen- 
tation. Doubts and misgivings had as- 
sailed him in the silence of the night 
when Ai had left him and his influence 
was withdrawn. Then he had but a 
faint-hearted belief in the wonderful tale 
told to him, but here, under Queen 
Candace's magic influence, all doubts 
disappeared, and it seemed the most 
natural thing in the world to be sitting 
here among these descendants of the 
ancient Ethiopians, acknowledged as 
their King, planning a union with a 
lovely woman, that should give to the 



world a dynasty of dark-skinned rulers,, 
whose destiny should be to restore the 
prestige of an ancient people. 

Verily, if the wonders he had already 
seen and heard could be possible in the 
nineteenth century of progress and en- 
lightenment, nothing was impossible. 
Dianthe was gone. The world outside 
held nothing dear to one who had al- 
ways lived much within himself. The 
Queen was loving, beautiful — why not 
accept this pleasant destiny which held 
its alluring arms so seductively towards 
him? A sudden moisture filled his eyes; 
a curious vague softness and tenderness 
stole over him. Turning abruptly toward 
his hostess, he held out his own swim- 
ming goblet: 

"Drink we a loving cup together, oh 
Queen Candace!" he said in a voice that 
trembled with earnestness. "I pledge 
my faith in return for thine!" 

The Queen returned his ardent gaze 
with one of bright surprise and joyous 
happiness, and bending her head, drank 
a deep draught of the proffered wine. 

"Almost thou lovest me, Ergamenes. 
May the Eternal Trinity hold fast our 
bonds!" With a graceful salute she re- 
turned the goblet. Reuel drank off in 
haste what remained within it. 

"Behold! I have prepared against this 
happy hour," continued the Queen, and 
going to an inlaid cabinet at one side of 
the room, she took from it a curious ring 
of dull gold, bearing one priceless gem 
cut in the form of a lotus lily. "Hold 
forth thy hand," she said, and on his fin- 
ger placed the ring. 

"Thus do I claim thee for all eternity." 

The Sages had watched the actors in 
this life-drama with jealous eyes that 
noted every detail with open satisfaction. 
At Queen Candace's last words, Ai ex- 
tended his arms with the solemn words: 

"And now it is done and never can 
be undone or altered. Let us hence, 
that the union may be speedily accom- 
plished." 



OF ONE BLOOD. 



497 



CHAPTER XVII. 

In a month the marriage was to be 
celebrated with great pomp and rejoic- 
ing. Preparations began as soon as 
the interview between the Queen and 
the prospective King was over. 

After his return from this betrothal, 
the power of second sight which seemed 
to have left Reuel for a time, returned in 
full force. Restlessness was upon him; 
Dianthe's voice seemed ever calling to 
him through space. Finally, when his 
feelings became insupportable, he 
broached the subject to Ai. 

The latter regarded his questioner 
gravely. "Of a truth thou art a legiti- 
mate son of Ethiopia. Thou growest 
the fruits of wisdom. Descendant of 
the wise Chaldeans, still powerful to a 
degree undreamed of by the pigmies of 
this puny age, you look incredulous, but 
what I tell you is the solemn truth." 

"The Chaldeans disappeared from this 
world centuries ago," declared Reuel. 

"Not all — in me you behold their pres- 
ent head; within this city and the outer 
world, we still number thousands." 

Reuel uttered an exclamation of in- 
credulous amazement. "Not possible!" 

Silently Ai went to his cabinet and 
took down a small, square volume which 
he placed in Reuel's hand. "It is a 
record of the wisdom and science of 
your ancestors." 

Reuel turned it over carefully, — the 
ivory pages were covered with charac- 
ters sharply defined and finely engraved. 

"What language is this? It is not He- 
brew, Greek nor Sanskrit, nor any form 
of hieroglyphic writing." 

"It is the language once commonly 
spoken by your ancestors long before 
Babylon was builded. It is known to us 
now as the language of prophecy." 

Reuel glanced at the speaker's regal 
form with admiration and reverence. 

"Teach me what thou knowest, Ai," 
he said humbly, "for, indeed, thou art a 
wonderful man." 



"Gladly," replied Ai, placing his hand 
in loving tenderness upon the bowed 
head of the younger man. "Our des- 
tiny was foreordained from the begin- 
ning to work together for the upbuild- 
ing of humanity and the restoration of 
the race of our fathers. This little book 
shall teach your soul all that you long 
to know, and now grasp but vaguely. 
You believe in the Soul?" 

"Most assuredly!" 

"As a Personality that continues to 
live after the bodv perishes?" 
"Certainly." 

"And that Personality begins to ex- 
ert its power over our lives as soon as 
we begin its cultivation. Death is not 
necessary to its manifestation upon our 
lives. There are always angels near! 
To us who are so blessed and singled 
out by the Trinity there is a sense of 
the supernatural always near us — others 
whom we cannot see, but whose influ- 
ence is strong upon us in all the affairs 
of life. Man only proves his ignorance 
if he denies this fact. Some in the coun- 
try from which you come contend that 
the foundations of Christianity are ab- 
surd and preposterous, but all the 
prophecies of the Trinity shall in time 
be fulfilled. They are working out to- 
day by the forces of air, light, wind, — 
the common things of daily life that 
pass unnoticed. Ethiopia, too, is stretch- 
ing forth her hand unto God, and He 
will fulfill her destiny. The tide of im- 
migration shall set in the early days of 
the twentieth century, toward Afric's 
shores, so long bound in the chains of 
barbarism and idolatry." 

Reuel listened entranced, scarce 
breathing. 

"I was warned of your coming long 
before the knowledge was yours. The 
day you left your home for New York. 
I sat within my secret chamber, and all 
was revealed to me." 

"Av, Ai, M Reuel answered, feeblv. 
"But "how?" 



49 8 



THE COLORED AMERICAN MAGAZINE. 



"You believe that we can hold com- 
munion with the living though seas di- 
vide and distance is infinite, and our 
friends who have passed to the future 
life of light are allowed to comfort us 
here?" 

"I believed 

"Tis so," continued Ai. "Half by 
chance and half by learning, I long ago 
solved one of the great secrets of Na- 
ture. Life is wonderful, but eternity is 
more wonderful." He paused, regarding 
affectionately ReuePs troubled face. 

"I will answer thy question presently. 
But can I do aught for thee? Dost mem- 
ories of that world from which thou 
hast recently come disturb thee, Erga- 
menes? I have some feeble powers; if 
thou wilt, command them." Ai fell into 
the use of "thee" and "thou" always 
when greatly moved, and Reuel had be- 
come very dear to him. 

"I would know some happenings in 
the world I have left; could my desire 
be granted, I might, perchance, lose this 
restlessness which now oppresses me." 

Ai regarded him intently. "How far 
hast thou progressed in knowledge of 
Infinity?" he asked at length. 

"You shall be the judge," replied 
Reuel. And then ensued a technical 
conversation on the abstract science of 
occultism and the future state. 

"I see thou are well versed," said Ai 
finally, evidently well pleased with the 
young man's versatility. "Come with 
me. Truly we have not mistaken thee, 
Ergamenes. Wonderfully hast thou 
been preserved and fitted for the work 
before thee." 

Reuel had the freedom of the palace, 
but he knew that there were rooms from 
which he was excluded. One room es- 
pecially seemed to be the sanctum sanc- 
torium of the Sages. It was to this 
room that Ai now conducted him. 

Reuel was nearly overpowered with 
the anticipation of being initiated into 
the mysteries of this apartment. He 



found nothing terrifying, however, in 
the plain, underground room into 
which* he was ushered. A rough table 
and wooden stools constituted the furni- 
ture. The only objects of mystery were 
a carved table at one end of the apart- 
ment, with a silken cloth thrown over 
its top, and a vessel like a baptismal font, 
cut in stone, full of water. Air and light 
came from an outside source, for there 
were no windows in the room. After 
closing the door securely, Ai advanced 
and removed the cloth from the table. 
"Sit," he commanded. "You ask me 
how I knew of your coming to my land. 
Lo, I have followed your career from 
babyhood. Behold, Ergamenes! What 
would you see upon the mirror's face? 
Friend or foe?" 

Reuel advanced and looked upon the 
surface of a disk of which the top of the 
table was composed. The material of 
which the polished surface was com- 
posed was unknown to Reuel; it was 
not glass, though quite transparent; it 
was not metal, though bright as pol- 
ished steel. 

Reuel made no wish, but thought of 
the spot where the accident had oc- 
curred upon the River Charles weeks be- 
fore. He was startled to observe a fa- 
miliar scene where he had often rowed 
for pleasure on pleasant summer even- 
ings. Every minute particular of the 
scenery was distinctly visible. Pres- 
ently the water seemed to darken, and 
he saw distinctly the canoe containing 
Aubrey, Molly and Dianthe gliding over 
the water. He started back aghast, cry- 
ing out, "It is magical!" 

"No, no, Ergamenes, this is a secret 
of Nature. In this disk I can show thee 
what thou wilt of the past. In the water 
of the font we see the future. Think of 
a face, a scene — I will reflect it for thee 
on this disk. This is an old secret, 
known to Ethiopia, Egypt and Arabia 
centuries ago. I can reflect the past and 
the faces of those passed away, but the 



OF ONE BLOOD. 



499 



living and the future are cast by the 
water." 

Reuel was awed into silence. He 
could say nothing, and listened to Ai's 
learned remarks with a reverence that 
approached almost to worship before 
this proof of his supernatural powers. 
What would tec professors of Harvard 
have said to this, he asked himself. In 
the heart of Africa was a knowledge of 
science that all the wealth and learning 
of modern times could not emulate. For 
some time the images came and went 
upon the mirror, in obedience to his 
desires. He saw the scenes of his boy- 
hood, the friends of his youth, and ex- 
perienced anew the delights of life's 
morning. Then he idly desired to see 
the face of his loved Dianthe, as she 
last appeared on earth. The surface of 
the disk reflected nothing! 

"You have not reached perfection 
then, in this reflector?" 

"Why think you so?" asked Ai 
gravely. 

"I have asked to see the face of a 
friend who is dead. The mirror did not 
reflect it." 

'The disk cannot err," said AL "Let 
us try the water in the font." 

"But that reflects the living, you say; 
she is dead." 

"The disk cannot err," persisted Ai. 
He turned to the font, gazed in its sur- 
face, and then beckoned Reuel to ap- 
proach. From the glassy surface Di- 
anthe's face gazed back at him, worn and 
lined with grief. 

" Tis she!" he cried, "her very self." 

'Then your friend still lives," said Ai, 
calmlv. 

"Impossible!" 

"Why do you doubt my word, Erga- 
menes?" 

Then with great suppressed excite- 
ment and much agitation, Reuel re- 
peated the story of Dianthe's death as 
brought to him by the last mail he had 
received from America. 



"You say that 'Molly/ as you call her, 
was also drowned?" 
"Yes." 

"Let us try the disk." 

They returned to the mirror and in- 
stantly the face of Molly Vance gazed 
at them from the river's bed, surrounded 
by seaweed and grasses. 

"Can a man believe in his own 
sanity!" exclaimed Reuel in an agony of 
perplexity. 

Ai made no reply, but returned to the 
font. "I think it best to call up the face 
of your enemy. I am sure you have 
one." Immediately the water reflected 
the debonair face of Aubrey Livingston, 
which was almost instantly blotted 
out by the face of Jim Titus. 

"Two!" murmured Ai. "I thought 
so." 

"If she then lives, as your science 
seems to insist, show me her present 
situation," cried Reuel, beside himself 
with fears. 

"I must have a special preparation for 
the present," said Ai, calmly. He set 
about preparing a liquid mixture. When 
this was accomplished he washed the 
face of the disk with a small sponge 
dipped in the mixture. A film of sedi- 
ment instantly formed upon it. 

"When this has dried, I will scrape it 
off and polish the mirror, then we shall 
be ready for the demonstration. One 
picture only will come — this will remain 
for a number of days, after that the 
disk will return to its normal condition. 
But, see! the sediment is caked. Now 
to remove it and finish our test." At 
last it was done, and the disk repol- 
ished.. Then standing before it, Ai 
cried, in an earnest voice: 

"Let the present appear upon the 
disk, if it be for the benefit of Thy hu- 
man subjects!" 

Ai appeared perfectly calm, but his 
hands shook. Reuel remained a short 
remove from him, awaiting his sum- 
mons. 



5oo 



THE COLORED AMERICAN MAGAZINE. 



"Come, Ergamenes." 

For a few moments Reuel gazed upon 
the plate, his eyes brilliant with expec- 
tation, his cheeks aglow with excite- 
ment. Then he involuntarily shud- 
dered, a half suppressed groan escaped 
him, and he grew ashy pale. In a trice 
he became entirely unnerved, and stag- 
gered back and forth like a drunken 
man. Greatly alarmed, and seeing he 
was about to fall, Ai sprang to his side 
and caught him. Too late. He fell to 
the floor in a swoon. The picture re- 
flected by the disk was that of the an- 
cestral home of the Livingstons. It 
showed the parlor of a fine old mansion ; 
two figures stood at an open window, 
their faces turned to the interior. About 
the woman's waist the man's arm was 
twined in a loving embrace. The faces 
were those of Aubrey and Dianthe. 

Late that night Reuel tossed upon his 
silken couch in distress of mind. If the 
disk were true, then Dianthe and Au- 
brey both lived and were together. He 
was torn by doubts, haunted by dreadful 
fears of he knew not what. If the story 
of the disk were true, never was man 
so deceived and duped as he had been. 
Then in the midst of his anger and des- 
pair came an irresistible impulse to rise 
from his bed. He did so, and distinctly 
felt the pressure of a soft hand upon his 
brow, and a yielding body at his side. 
The next instant he could have sworn 
that he heard the well-known tones of 
Dianthe in his ears, saying: 

"Reuel, it is I." 

Unable to answer, but entirely con- 
scious of a presence near him, he had 
presence of mind enough to reiterate a 
mental question. His voiceless question 
was fully understood, for again the fa- 
miliar voice spoke: 

"I am not dead, my husband; but I 
am lost to you. Not of my own seek- 
ing has this treachery been to thee, O 
beloved. The friend into whose care 
you gave me has acquired the power 



over me that you alone possessed, that 
power sacred to our first meeting and 
our happy love. Why did you leave me 
in the power of a fiend in human shape, 
to search for gold? There are worse 
things in life than poverty." 

Calming the frenzy of his thoughts 
by a strong effort, Reuel continued his 
mental questions until the whole pitiful 
story was his. He knew not how long 
he continued in this communion. Over 
and over he turned the story he had 
learned in the past few hours. Ungovern- 
able rage against his false friend pos- 
sessed him. "Blind, fool, dupe, dotard !" 
he called himself, not to have seen the 
treachery beneath the mask of friend- 
ship. And then to leave her helpless in 
the hands of this monster, who had not 
even spared his own betrothed to com- 
pass his love for another. 

But at least revenge was left him. He 
would return to America and confront 
Aubrey Livingston with his guilt. But 
how to get away from the hidden city. 
He knew r that virtually he was a pris- 
oner. 

Still turning over ways and means, he 
fell into an uneasy slumber, from which 
he was aroused by a dreadful shriek. 

CHAPTER XVIII. 
It was now two months since ReuePs 
strange disappearance from the camp 
of the explorers. Day after day they 
had searched even- inch of the ground 
within and about the pyramids, with no 
success. Charlie Vance was incon- 
solable, and declared his intention of 
making his home at Meroe until Reuel 
was found. He scouted the idea of his 
death by falling a prey to wild beasts, 
and hung about the vicinity of the 
Great Pyramid with stubborn persist- 
ence. He was no longer the spoiled 
darling of wealth and fashion, but a se- 
rious-minded man of a taciturn dispo- 
sition. 

He spent money like water in his en- 



OF ONE BLOOD. 



dcavor to find the secret passage, be- 
lieving that it existed, and that in it 
Reucl was lost. 

One morning he and Jim Titus laid 
bare a beautifully worked marble wall, 
built of fine masonry, with even blocks, 
each a meter and a half long, and below 
the exquisitely worked moulding two 
further layers of well-worked calcareous 
stone. The whole formed a foundation 
for a structure which had fallen into 
ruins about two and a half meters high. 
But this wall continued for thirteen 
meters only, and then returned at right 
angles at each end. On the inner side 
this marble structure was backed by 
large blocks of calcareous stone, and in 
the inner angles, they had with much 
labor to break up and remove two lay- 
ers of blocks superimposed at right 
angles, one upon another. The entire 
party was much puzzled to learn what 
this structure could have been. 

Sculptures and paintings lined the 
walls. As usual, there was a queen, at- 
tired in a long robe. The queen had 
in one hand the lash of Osiris and in 
the other a lotus flower. 

At the extremity of each portico was 
the representation of a monolithic tem- 
ple, above which were the traces of a 
funeral boat filled with figures. 

After two days' work, the skilled dig- 
gers assured the explorers that they 
could do nothing with the debris but to 
leave it, as it was impossible to open 
the structure. Rut in the night, Charlie 
was kept awake by the thought that this 
curious structure might hold the ex- 
pedition's secret; and remembering that 
perseverance was never beaten, set to 
work there the next morning, digging 
into the interior and breaking up the 
huge blocks which impeded his progress. 
The next day another impediment was 
reached, and it was decided to give it up. 
Again Charlie was awake all night, puz- 
zling over the difficulties encountered, 
and again he made up his mind not to 
give it up. Charlie was learning many 

(To be c 



needed lessons in bitterness of spirit 
out in these African wilds. Sorrow had 
come to him here in the loss of his sis- 
ter, and the disappearance of his friend. 
As Reucl had done in the night weeks 
before, so he did now, rising and dress- 
ing and securing his weapons, but tak- 
ing the precaution to awaken Jim, and 
ask him to accompany him for a last 
visit to the Pyramid. 

Jim Titus seemed strangely subdued 
and quiet since Reuel's disappearance. 
Charlie decided that their suspicions 
were wrong, and that Jim was a good 
fellow, after all. 

As they trudged along over the sandy 
paths in the light of the great African 
moon, Charlie was glad of Jim's lively 
conversation. Anecdotes of Southern 
life flowed glibly from his tongue, illus- 
trated by songs descriptive of life there. 
It really seemed to Vance that a portion 
of the United States had been trans- 
ported to Africa. 

They entered the great Pyramid, as 
Reuel had done before them, lit their 
torches, and began slowly and carefully 
to go over the work of excavation al- 
ready done. 

They passed down a side passage 
opening out of the outer passage, down 
a number of steps and along an under- 
ground shaft made by the workmen. 
Suddenly the passage ended. They 
halted, held up the lamps and saw such 
a scene as they were not likely to see 
again. They stood on the edge of an 
enormous pit, hedged in by a wall ol 
rock. There was an opening in the 
wall, made by a hinged block of stone. 
This solid door had opened noiselessly, 
(lark figures had stolen forth, and had 
surrounded the two men. As they dis- 
covered their strange companions, wea- 
pons of burnished steel flashed and 
seemed to fill the vault. Not a sound 
was heard but the deep breathing of 
men in grim determination and on seri- 
ous business bent. Instantly the two 
travellers were bound and gagged. 
tinueJ.) 



THE COLORED AMERICAN MAGAZINE. 



OF ONE BLOOD.* 

OR, THE HIDDEN SELF. 

PAULINE E. HOPKINS. 



SYNOPSIS OF CHAPTERS I. TO XVII. 

Reuel Briggs, a voung medical student, interested in 
mysticism, sees a face that haunts him. He attends a 
concert with his friend Aubrey Livingston, and there 
discovers in a negro concert-singer the owner of the 
mysterious face. He sees this woman again on Hallow 
Eve while playing at charms with a party of young 
people at Vance Hall, the home of Livingston's be- 
trothed. Early the next morning he is called to attend 
the victims of a railroad disaster at the hospital. He 
finds among them the girl whose face haunts him, in a 
cataleptic sleep which the doctors call death. He suc- 
ceeds in restoring her to consciousness, but with a 
complete loss of memorv. She loses her identity as a 
negress. Reuel falls deeply in love with her. He 
finally restores her to health and determines to marry 
her, but finds his circumstances too straitened Au- 
brey Livingston helps him out by offering to obtain 
for him a place in an expedition about to explore the 
ancient city of Meroe in Africa. Keuel accepts, but 
marries Dianthe before going on a two years' venture. 
After his departure Dianthe finds that Livingston is in 
love with her, and he acquires a nower over her that 
she cannot resist. She agrees to fly with him against 
her will ; but before the time set. they, with Molly 
Vance, go out canoeing and are overturned in the river, 
and all three are supposed to have been drowned. 

The expedition reaches Africa. In crossing the Great 
Desert Reuel Briggs visits old ruins and is rescued 
from a leopard's claws by Vance. They are suspicious 
of Jim Titus, who pretended not to hear Briggs' calls 
for help. They receive no letters from home after leav- 
ing England, and one night, by clairvovaut aid, Reuel 
reads a letter that Titus has received. That same 
night, by mediumistic power, Briggs describes the 
overturning of the boat containing Molly, Dianthe and 
Aubrey, on the Charles River months before. The 
caravan reaches Meroe, and letters reveal the death of 
Dianthe and Molly. Reuel is sick for some weeks, 
and when he returns to health finds the expedition 
about to give up its search for treasure and return 
home. Wanders out one night while the camp is 
asleep and goes to the last pyramid. While exploring 
it he becomes unconscious. When consciousness re- 
turns he finds himself in a hidden city atuong^ the 
descendants of the ancient Ethiopians who await the 
return of their king. They claim Reuel as the ex- 
pected monarch because of the royal birthmark on 
his breast,— a lotus lily. After this under the name of 
Ergamenes. Reuel is betrothed to Queen Candace. He 
converses with Dianthe spiritually and learns of Liv- 
ingston's treachery. While trying to plan to escape 
from the hidden city, he hears a cry of distress. 



CHAPTER XVIII.— (Concluded.) 
Instantly, after the seizure, the eyes 
of the prisoners were blindfolded; then 
they were half led, half dragged along 
by their captors. As he felt the grip of 
steel which impelled a forward move- 
ment, Charlie bitterly cursed his own 
folly in undertaking so mad a venture. 
"Poor Reuel," he lamented, "was this 
the explanation of his disappearance?'' 
Reuel had been the life of the party; next 
to Professor Stone, he was looked up to 
as leader and guide, and with his loss, 

?Copyright, 1903, by Pauline E- Hopkins. 



all interest seemed to have dropped from 
the members of the expedition. 

For half an hour they were hurried 
along what must have been deep under- 
ground passages. Charlie could feel the 
path drop beneath his feet on solid rock 
which seemed to curve over like the 
edges of a waterfall. He stumbled, and 
would have fallen if strong arms had 
not upheld him. He could feel the rock 
worn into deep gutters smoother than 
ice. For the first time he heard the 
sound of his captors' voices. One in 
command gave an order in an unknown 
tongue. Charlie wished then that he 
had spent more time in study and less 
in sport. 

"Oh," he groaned in spirit, "what a 
predicament for a free-born American 
citizen, and one who has had on the 
gloves with many a famous ring cham- 
pion !" He wondered how Jim was far- 
ing, for since the first frightened yell 
from his lips, all had been silence. 

There came another brief command in 
the unknown tongue, and the party 
halted. Then Charlie felt himself lifted 
into what he finally determined was a 
litter. He settled himself comfortably, 
and the bearers started. Charlie was of 
a philosophical nature; if he had been 
born poor and forced to work for a liv- 
ing, he might have become a learned 
philosopher. So he lay and reflected, 
and wondered where this experience 
would end, until, lulled by the yielding 
motion and the gentle swaying, he fell 
asleep. 

He must have slept many hours, for 
when he awoke he felt a strong sensa- 
tion of hunger. They were still jour- 
neying at a leisurely pace. Charlie could 
feel the sweet, fresh air in his face, could 
hear the song of birds, and smell the 



OF ONE BLOOD. 



scented air, heavy with the fragrance of 
flowers and fruits. Mentally thanking 
God that he still lived, he anxiously 
awaited the end of this strange journey. 
Presently he felt that they entered a 
building, for the current of air ceased, 
and the soft footsteps of the bearers gave 
forth a metallic sound. There came 
another command in the unknown 
tongue, and the bearers stopped; he was 
told to descend, in unmistakable Eng- 
lish, by a familiar voice. He obeyed the 
voice, and instantly he was relieved of 
his bandage; before his sight became ac- 
customed to the semi-darkness of the 
room, he heard the retreating steps of a 
number of men. As his sight returned 
in full, he saw before him Ai and Abdal- 
lah and Jim. 

Abdallah regarded him with a gaze 
that was stolid and unrecognizing. The 
room in which he stood was large and 
circular. Floors and walls were of the 
whitest marble, and from the roof light 
and air were supplied. There were two 
couches in the room, and a divan ran 
about one of its sides. There was no 
door or entrance visible — nothing but 
the unvarying white walls and flooring. 

"Stranger," said Ai, in his mellow 
voice, speaking English in fluent tones, 
"Why hast thou dared to uncover the 
mysteries of centuries? Art thou weary 
of life that thou hast dared to trifle with 
Nature's secrets? Scarce an alien foot 
has traversed this land since six thousand 
years have passed. Art weary of liv- 
ing?" As he asked the last question, 
Charlie felt a chill of apprehension. This 
man, with his strange garb, his dark 
complexion, his deep eyes and mystic 
smile, was to be feared and reverenced. 
Summoning up all his sang froid and 
determination not to give in to his fears, 
he replied, — 

"We came to find old things, that we 
may impart our knowledge to the people 
of our land, who are eager to know the 



beginning of all things. I come of a 
race bold and venturesome, who know 
not fear if we can get a few more dollars 
and fresh information." 

"I have heard of your people," replied 
Ai, with a mysterious sparkle in his 
eyes. "They are the people who count it 
a disgrace to bear my color; is it not so?" 

"Great Scott!" thought Charlie, turn- 
ing mental somersaults to find an answer 
that would placate the dignitary before 
him. "Is it possible that the ubiquitous 
race question has got ahead of the ex- 
pedition! By mighty, ifs time some- 
thing was done to stop this business. Talk 
of Banquo's ghost! Banquo ain't in it 
if this is the race question I'm up 
against." Aloud he said, "My vener- 
able and esteemed friend, you could get 
there all right with your complexion in 
my country. We would simply label 
you 'Arab, Turk, Malay or Filipino/ and 
in that costume you'd slide along all 
right ; not the slightest trouble when you 
showed your ticket at the door. Savee?" 
He finished with a profound bow. 

Ai eyed him sadly for a moment, and 
then said, — 

"O, flippant-tongued offspring of an 
ungenerous people, how is it with my 
brother?" and he took Jim's unresisting 
hand and led him up to Charlie. "Crisp 
of hair," and he passed his hand softly 
over Jim's curly pate. "Black of skin! 
How do you treat such as this one in 
your country?" 

Charlie felt embarrassed in spite of 
his assurance. "Well, of course, it has 
been the custom to count Africans as 
our servants, and they have fared as ser- 
vants." 

"And yet, ye are all of one blood; de- 
scended from one common father. Is 
there ever a flock or herd without its 
black member? What more beautiful 
than the satin gloss of the raven's wing, 
the soft glitter of eyes of blackest tint or 
the rich black fur of your own native ani- 



582 



THE COLORED AMERICAN MAGAZINE. 



mals? Fair-haired worshippers of Mam- 
mon, do you not know that you have 
been weighed in the balance and found 
wanting? that your course is done? that 
Ethoapia's bondage is about over, her 
travail passed?" 

Charlie smiled in inward mirth at 
what he called the "fossilized piece of an- 
tiquity/' ''Touched in the forehead; 
crank," was his mental comment. "I'd 
better put on the brakes, and not aggra- 
vate this lunatic. He's probably some 
kind of a king, and might make it hot 
for me." Aloud he said, ''Pardon, Mr. 
King, but what has this to do with mak- 
ing me a prisoner? Why have I been 
brought here?" 

"You will know soon enough," replied 
Ai, as he clapped his hands. Abdallah 
moved to the side of the room, and in- 
stantly a marble block slid from its po- 
sition, through which Ai and he de- 
parted, leaving the prisoners alone. 

For a while the two men sat and 
looked at each other in helpless silence. 
Then Jim broke the silence with lamen- 
tations. 

"Oh, Lord! Mr. Vance, there's a hoo- 
doo on this business, and I'm the hoo- 
doo!" 

"Nonsense!" exclaimed Vance. "Be 
a man, Jim, and help me find a way out 
of this infernal business." 

But Jim sat on the divan, lamenting 
and refusing to be comforted. Presently 
food was brought to them, and then 
after many and useless conjectures, they 
lay down and tried to sleep. 

The night passed very comfortably on 
the whole, although the profound silence 
was suggestive of being buried alive. 
Another day and night passed without 
incident. Food was supplied them at 
regular intervals. Charlie's thoughts 
were varied. He — fastidious and re- 
fined — who had known no hardship and 
no sorrow, — why had he left his coun- 
try to wander among untutored savages? 



None were there to comfort him of all 
his friends. These walls would open but 
to admit the savage executioner. He 
ground his teeth. He thought of Cora 
Scott; doubtless she thought him dead. 
Dead! No; nor would he die. He'd 
find a way out of this or perish; he'd go 
home and marry Cora. Now 7 this was 
a most surprising conclusion, for Charlie 
had been heard to say many times that 
"he'd be drawn and quartered before 
he'd tie up to a girl of the period," which 
Cora undoubtedly was. As if aroused 
from a dream, he jumped up and going 
over to Jim, shook him. The Negro 
turned uneasily in his sleep and groaned. 
Again he shook him. 

"Get up, Jim. Come, I'm going to try 
to get out of this." 

"I'm afraid, Mr. Vance; it's no use." 

"Come on, Jim; be a man." 

"I'm ready for anything, only show 
me the way," replied Jim in desperation. 
Their pistols had been taken from them, 
but their knives remained. They stored 
what food remained about their persons 
and began a thorough examination of 
the room. 

'They certainly find an exit here 
somewhere, Jim, and we must find it 
too." 

"Easier said than done, I fear, sir." 

An hour — two hours, passed in fruit- 
less search; the marble walls showed not 
a sign of exit or entrance. They rested 
then, sitting on the sides of the divans 
and gazing at each other in utter help- 
lessness. The full moonlight showered 
the apartment with a soft radiance from 
the domed roof. Suddenly, Jim sprang 
forward and inserted his knife in a crev- 
ice in the floor. Instantly Charlie was 
beside him, working like mad on the 
other side. The slab began to waver to 
and fro, as though shaken by a strong 
force — the crack widened — they saw a 
round, flat metal button — Jim seized it 
with one hand and pried with the knife 



OF ONE BLOOD. 



583 



in the other — a strong breeze of sub- 
terranean air struck through the nar- 
row opening — and with a dull reverbera- 
tion half the flooring slid back, revealing 
what seemed to be a vast hole. 

The men recoiled, and lay panting 
from their labors on the edges of the 
subway. Charlie blessed his lucky stars 
that hidden in his clothes was a bundle 
of tapers used by the explorers for just 
such emergencies. By great good for- 
tune, his captors had not discovered 
them. 

"What's to be done now, Jim?" 

"Git down there and explore, but 
hanged if I want the job, Mr. Vance." 

"We'll go together, Jim. Let's see," 
he mused, "What did Prof. Stone's 
parchment say? 'Beware the tank to 
the right where dwells the sacred croco- 
dile, still living, although centuries have 
rolled by, and men have been gathered 
to the shades who once tended on his 
wants. And beware the fifth gallery to 
the right where abide the sacred ser- 
pents with jewelled crowns, for of a 
truth are they terrible," quoted Charlie, 
dreamily. 

"You don't suppose this is the place 
you were hunting for, do you?" queried 
Jim, with eyes big with excitement. 

"Jim, my boy, that's a question no 
man can answer at this distance from 
the object of our search. But if it is, as 
I suspect, the way to the treasure will 
lead us to liberty, for the other end must 
be within the pyramid. I'm for search- 
ing this passage. Come on if you are 
with me." 

He lighted his taper and swung it into 
the abyss, disclosing steps of granite 
leading off in the darkness. As his head 
disappeared from view, Jim, with a shud- 
der, followed. The steps led to a pas- 
sage or passages, for the whole of the 
underground room was formed of 
vaulted passages, sliding off in every di- 
rection. The stairs ended in another 



passage; the men went down it; it was 
situated, as nearly as they could judge, 
directly beneath the room where they 
had been confined. Silently the two fig- 
ures crept on, literally feeling their way. 
Shortly they came to another passage 
running at right angles; slowly they 
crept along the tunnel, for it was noth- 
ing more, narrowing until it suddenly 
ended in a sort of cave, running at right 
angles; they crossed this, halting at the 
further side to rest and think. Charlie 
looked anxiously about him for signs, 
but saw nothing alarming in the smooth 
sandy floor, and irregular contorted 
sides. The floor was strewn with bowl- 
ders like the bed of a torrent. As they 
went on, the cavern widened into an 
amphitheatre with huge supporting col- 
umns. To the right and left of the cave 
there were immense bare spaces stretch- 
ing away into immense galleries. Here 
they paused to rest, eating sparingly of 
the food they had brought. "Let us 
rest here," said Charlie, "I am dead 
beat." 

"Is it not safer to go on? We cannot 
be very far from the room where we 
were confined." 

"I'll sit here a few moments, anyhow," 
replied Charlie. Jim wandered aimlessly 
about the great vault, turning over 
stones and peering into crevices. 

"What do you expect to find, Jim, 
the buried treasure?" laughed Charlie, as 
he noted the earnestness of the other's 
search. 

Jim was bending over something — 
wrenching off a great iron cover. Sud- 
denly he cried out, "Mr. Vance, here it 
is!" 

Charlie reached his side with a bound. 
There sat Jim, and in front of him lay, 
imbedded in the sand of the cavern's 
floor, a huge box, long and wide and 
deep, whose rusted hinges could not 
withstand the stalwart Negro's frantic 
efforts. 



j8 4 



THE COLORED AMERICAN MAGAZINE. 



With a shuddering sigh the lid was 
thrust back, falling to one side with a 
great groan of almost mortal anguish as 
it gave up the trust committed to its care 
ages before. They both gazed, and as 
they gazed were well-nigh blinded. For 
this is what they saw: — 

At first, a blaze of darting rays that 
sparkled and shot out myriad scintil- 
lations of color — red, violet, orange, 
green, and deepest crimson. Then by 
degrees, they saw that these hues came 
from a jumbled heap of gems — some 
large, some small, but together in value 
beyond all dreams of wealth. 

Diamonds, rubies, sapphires, ame- 
thysts, opals, emeralds, turquoises — lay 
roughly heaped together, some pol- 
ished, some uncut, some as necklaces 
and chains, others gleaming in rings 
and bracelets — wealth beyond the 
dreams of princes. 

Near to the first box lay another, and 
in it lay gold in bars and gold in flakes, 
hidden by the priests of Osiris, that had 
adorned the crowns of queens Candace 
and Semiramis — a spectacle glorious be- 
yond compare. 

"The Professor's parchment told the 
truth," cried Charlie, after a few mo- 
ments, when he had regained his breath. 
"But what shall we do with it, now we 
have it?" asked Jim in disconsolate 
tones. "We can't carry it with us." 

"True for you, Jim," replied Vance, 
sadly. "This wealth is a mockery now 
we have it. Jim, we're left, badly left. 
Here we've been romping around for 
almost six months after this very treas- 
ure, and now we've got it we can't 
hold it. This whole expedition has been 
like monkeying with a saw mill, Jim, my 
boy, and I for one, give in beaten. Left, 
I should say so; 'badly left, when I 
counted Africa a played-out hole in the 
ground. And, Jim, when we get home, 
if ever we do, the drinks are on me. 
Now, old man, stow some of these glit- 
tering baubles in your clothing, as I 



am going to do, and then we'll renew our 
travels." He spoke in jest, but the tears 
were in his eyes, and as he clasped Jim's 
toil-hardened black hand, he told him- 
self that Ai's words were true. Where 
was the color line now? Jim was a 
brother; the nearness of their desola- 
tion in this uncanny land, left nothing 
but a feeling of brotherhood. He felt 
then the truth of the words, "Of one 
blood have I made all races of men." 

As they stooped to replace the cover, 
Jim's foot knocked against an iron ring 
set in the sandy flooring. "I believe it's 
another box, Mr. Vance," he called out, 
and dropping his work, he pulled with 
all his might. 

"Careful, Jim," called Charlie's warn- 
ing voice. Too late! The ring disap- 
peared at the second tug, revealing a 
black pit from which came the odor of 
musk. From out the darkness came 
the sweeping sound of a great body 
moving in wavelets over a vast space. 
Fascinated into perfect stillness, Vance 
became aware of pale emerald eyes 
watching him, and the sound of deep 
breathing other than their own. There 
was a wild rattle and rush in the dark- 
ness, as Jim, moving forward, flung 
down his taper and turned to flee. 

"The serpents! The serpents! Fly for 
your life, Jim!" shouted Charlie, as he 
dashed away from the opening. Too 
late! There came a terrible cry, repeated 
again and again. Charlie Vance sunk 
upon the ground, overcome with horror. 

CHAPTER XIX. 
It must have been about one o'clock 
in the morning when Reuel started out 
of a fitful slumber by the sound of that 
terrible scream. He sprang to his feet 
and listened. He heard not a sound; all 
was silence within the palace. But his 
experience was so vivid that reason 
could not control his feelings; he threw 
wide the dividing curtains, and fled out 
upon the balcony. All was silence. The 



OF OXE BLOOD. 



moonlight flooded the landscape with 
the strength of daylight. As he stood 
trying to calm himself, a shadow fell 
across his path, and raising his eyes, he 
beheld the form of Mira; she beckoned 
him on, and he, turning, followed the 
shadowy figure, full of confidence that 
she would show him the way to that 
fearful scream. 

On they glided like two shadows, until 
the phantom paused before what seemed 
a solid wall, and with warning gaze and 
uplifted finger, bade him enter. It was 
a portion of the palace unfamiliar to 
him; the walls presented no hope of 
entrance. What could it mean? Mira 
faded from his gaze, and as he stood 
there puzzling over this happening, sud- 
denly the solid wall began to glide away, 
leaving a yawning space, in which ap- 
peared Ai's startled and disturbed face. 

"Back!" he cried, as he beheld his 
King. "Back, Ergamenes! how come 
you here?" 

"What was the cry I heard, Ai? I can- 
not rest. I have been led hither," he 
continued, significantly. Then, notic- 
ing the other's disturbed vision, he con- 
tinued, "Tell me. I command you." 

With a murmured protest, Ai stepped 
aside, saying, "Perhaps it is best." 

Reuel advanced into the room. The 
hole in the floor was securely closed, and 
on the divans lay Charlie Vance, white 
and unconscious, and Jim Titus, crushed 
almost to a jelly but still alive. Abdal- 
lah and a group of natives were working 
over Vance, trying to restore conscious- 
ness. Reuel gave one startled, terrified 
glance at the two figures, and staggered 
backward to the wall. 

Upon hearing that cry, Jim Titus 
stirred uneasily, and muttered, "It's 
him!" 

"He wishes to speak with you," said 
Ai, gravely. 

"How came they here, and thus?" de- 
manded Reuel in threatening anger. 

"They were searching for you, and 



we found them, too, in the pyramid. We 
confined them here, debating what was 
best to do, fearing you would become 
dissatisfied. They tried to escape and 
found the treasure and the snakes. The 
black man will die." 

"Are you there, Mr. Reuel?" came in 
a muffled voice from the dying man. 

Reuel stood beside him and took his 
hand, — "Yes, Jim, it is I; how came 
you thus?" 

"The way of the transgressor is hard," 
groaned the man. "I would not have 
been here had I not consented to take 
your life. I am sure you must have sus- 
pected me; I was but a bungler, and 
often my heart failed me." 

"Unhappy man! how could you plot 
to hurt one who has never harmed you?" 
exclaimed Reuel. 

"Aubrey Livingston was my foster 
brother, and I could deny him nothing." 

"Aubrey Livingston! Was he the in- 
stigator?" 

"Yes," sighed the dying man. "Re- 
turn home as soon as possible and res- 
cue your wife — your wife, and yet not 
your wife — for a man may not marry 
his sister." 

"What!" almost shrieked Reuel. 
"What!" 

"I have said it. Dianthe Lusk is your 
own sister, the half-sister of Aubrey Liv- 
ingston, who is your half-brother." 

Reuel stood for a moment, apparently 
struggling for words to answer the dy- 
ing man's assertion, then fell on his 
knees in a passion of sobs agonizing to 
witness. "You know then, Jim, that I 
am Mira's son?" he said at length. 

"I do. Aubrey planned to have Miss 
Dianthe from the first night he saw her; 
he got you this chance with the expedi- 
tion; he kept you from getting anything 
else to force you to a separation from 
the girl. He bribed me to accidentally 
put you out of the way. He killed Miss 
Molly to have a free road to Dianthe. 
Go home, Reuel Briggs, and at least 



S 86 



THE COLORED AMERICAN MAGAZINE. 



rescue the girl from misery. Watch, 
watch, or he will outwit you yet." Reuel 
started in a frenzy of rage to seize the 
man, but Ai's hand was on his arm. 

"Peace, Ergamenes; he belongs to 
the ages now.' 7 

One more convulsive gasp, and Jim 
Titus had gone to atone for the deeds 
done in the flesh. 

With pallid lips and trembling frame, 
Reuel turned from the dead to the liv- 



ing. As he sat beside his friend, his 
mind was far away in America looking 
with brooding eyes into the past and 
gazing hopelessly into the future. Truly 
hath the poet said, — 

"The evil that men do lives after them." 

And Reuel cursed with a mighty curse 
the bond that bound him to the white 
race of his native land. 

(To be continued.) 



COLUMBIA'S DISGRACE. 

Written especially for The Colored American Magazine. 
TOWNSEND AL,LBN. 

Ay, black was the man, and black was the deed, 
But blacker by far was the lawless creed 
Of those lawless men with their faces white 
Who avenged the deed in the dead of night! 

For black were the hearts of that howling mob, 
And worthy of Hades their fiendish job! 
A shudder of horror around the globe ran, 
At this beastly revertal of civilized man! 

The earth holds no record of more barbarous scene, 
No wild, savage orgie in history's dark screen 
Surpasses in demon-like hatred and spite, 
The deed of those white men that shameful night. 

And this, on Columbia's "land of the free!" 
Beneath the bright flag whose stars all decree 
A perfect equality, justice; above all 
Protection by law, until those stars fall! 

And this, when we reprimand Russia, in sooth! 
And prate of our liberty, freedom and truth! 
The nations of earth point the finger of scorn 
At Columbia's banner, blood stained and torn! 

Shame! shame on the brutes who let loose on the land 
This Spirit of Lawlessness! 'Twas Southern hand 
First took up the fagot, the torch and the stake, 
And started these fires which 'twill take blood to slake. 

Defiant of law, both of man and of heaven, 
They lynched and they roasted alive! Now this leaven 
Contagious is working; but God is not blind; 
They'll reap the wild whirlwind, who sow the wind! 



OF ONE BLOOD. 



643 



OF ONE 

OR, THE H 

PAULINB 

SYNOPSIS OP CHAPTERS I. TO XIX. 

Reuel Briggs, a young medical student, interested in 
mysticism, sees a face that haunts him. He attends a 
concert with his friend Aubrey Livingston, and there 
discovers in a negro concert-singer the owner of the 
mysterious face. He sees this woman again on Hallow 
Eve while playing at charms with a party of young 
people at Vance Hall, the home of Livingston's be- 
trothed. Early the next morning he is called to attend 
the victims of a railroad disaster at the hospital. He 
finds among them the girl whose face haunts him, in a 
cataleptic sleep which the doctors call death. He suc- 
ceeds in restoring her to consciousness, but with a 
complete loss of memory. She loses her identity as a 
negress. Reuel falls deeply in love with her. He 
finally restores her to health and determines to marry 
her, but finds his circumstances too straitened. Au- 
brey Livingston helps him out by offering to obtain 
for him a place in an expedition about to explore the 
ancient city of Meroe in Africa. Reuel accepts, but 
marries Dianthe before going on a two years' venture. 
After his departure Dianthe finds that Livingston is in 
love with her, and he acquires a power over her that 
she cannot resist. She agrees to fly with him against 
her will ; but before the time set, they, with Molly 
Vance, go out canoeing and are overturned in the river, 
and all three are supposed to have been drowned. 

The expedition reaches Africa. In crossing the Great 
Desert Reuel Briggs visits old ruins and is rescued 
from a leopard's claws by Vance. They are suspicious 
of Jim Titus, who pretended not to hear Briggs' calls 
for help. They receive no letters from home after leav- 
ing England, and one night, by clairvoyant aid, Reuel 
reads a letter that Titus has received. That same 
night, by mediumistic power, Briggs describes the 
overturning of the boat containing Molly, Dianthe and 
Aubrey, on the Charles River months before. The 
caravan reaches Meroe. and letters reveal the death of 
Dianthe and Molly. Reuel is sick for some weeks, 
and when he returns to health finds the expedition 
about to give up its search for treasure and return 
home. Wanders out one night while the camp is 
asleep and goes to the last pyramid. While exploring 
it he becomes unconscious. When consciousness re- 
turns he finds himself in a hidden city among the 
descendants of the ancient Ethiopians who await the 
return of their king. They claim Reuel as the ex- 
pected monarch because of the royal birthmark on 
bis breast,— a lotus lily. After this, under the name of 
Ergamenes. Reuel is betrothed to Queen Candace. He 
converses with Dianthe spiritually and learns of Liv- 
ingston's treachery. While planning to escape from 
the hidden city, he hears a cry of distress. Charlie 
Vance aad Jim Titus start to find Reuel, believing him 
lost in the pyramids. They are captured by Ai and 
confined in the palace. In endeavoring to escape, they 
find the hidden passage and treasure told of by Pro- 
fessor Stone. The treasure is guarded by serpents ; 
they kill Titus. Reuel, aroused by the cry he heard, 
explores the passages of the palace and comes on 
Charlie Vance and the dying Jim, who tells him of 
Livingston's plot and warns him to rescue Dianthe. 



CHAPTER XIX.— (Concluded.) 

One month after the events narrated 
in the previous chapter, a strange party 
stood on the deck of the out-going 
steamer at Alexandria, Egypt — Reuel 
and Charlie Vance, accompanied by Ai 
and Abdallah in the guise of servants. 
Ai had with great difficulty obtained 

?Copyright, 1903, by Pauline E. Hopkins. 



BLOOD/ 

DDEN SELF* 

;. HOPKINS. 

permission of the Council to allow King 
Ergamenes to return to America, This 
was finally accomplished by Ai's being 
surety for ReuePs safe return, and so 
the journey was begun which was to 
end in the apprehension and punish- 
ment of Aubrey Livingston. 

Through the long journey homeward 
two men thought only of vengeance, but 
with very different degrees of feeling. 
Charlie Vance held to the old Bible pun- 
ishment for the pure crime of man- 
slaughter, but in ReuePs wrongs lay 
something beyond the reach of punish- 
ment by the law's arm; in it was the 
accumulation of years of foulest wrongs 
heaped upon the innocent and defence- 
less women of a race, added to this last 
great outrage. At night he said, as he 
paced the narrow confines of the deck, 
'Thank God, it is night;" and when the 
faint streaks of dawn glowed in the dis- 
tance, gradually creeping across the ex- 
panse of waters, "Thank God, it is 
morning." Another hour, and he would 
say, "Would God it were night!" By 
day or night some phantom in his ears 
holloes in ocean's roar or booms in 
thunder, howls in the winds or murmurs 
in the breeze, chants in the voice of the 
sea-fowl — "Too late, too late. Tis done, 
and worse than murder." 

Westward the vessel sped — westward 
while the sun showed only as a crimson 
bull in its Arabian setting, or gleamed 
through a veil of smoke off the Eng- 
lish coast, ending in the grey, angry, 
white-capped waves of the Atlantic in 
winter. 

CHAPTER XX. 
It was believed by the general public 
and Mr. Vance that Molly and Dianthe 
had perished beneath the waters of the 



644 



TUE COLORED AMERICAN MAGAZINE. 



Charles River, although only Molly's 
body was recovered. Aubrey was 
picked up on the bank of the river in 
an unconscious state, where he was sup- 
posed to have made his way after vainly 
striving to rescue the two girls. 

When he had somewhat recovered 
from the shock of the accident, it was 
rumored that he had gone to Canada 
with a hunting party, and so he disap- 
peared from public view. 

But Dianthe had not perished. As 
the three struggled in the water, Molly, 
with all the confidence of requited love, 
threw her arms about her lover. With 
a muttered oath, Aubrey tried to shake 
her off, but her clinging arms refused 
to release him. From the encircling 
arms he saw a sight that maddened 
him — Dianthe's head was disappearing 
beneath the waters where the lily-stems 
floated in their fatal beauty, holding in 
their tenacious grasp the girl he loved. 
An appalling sound had broken through 
the air as she went down — a heart- 
stirring cry of agony — the tone of a 
voice pleading with God for life! the 
precious boon of life! That cry drove 
away the man, and the brute instinct 
so rife within us all, ready always to 
leap to the front in times of excitement 
or danger, took full possession of the 
body. He forgot honor, humanity, 
God. 

With a savage kick he freed himself 
and swam swiftly toward the spot where 
Dianthe's golden head had last ap- 
peared. He was just in time. Grasp- 
ing the flowing locks with one hand 
and holding her head above the treach- 
erous water, he swam with her to fb*. 
bank. 

Pretty, innocent, tencfn-hcarted 
Molly sank never to rise again. With- 
out a word, but with a look of anguished 
horror, her despairing face was covered 
b. the glistening, greedy waters that 
lapped so hungrily about the water-lily 
beds. 



As Aubrey bore Dianthe up the bank 
his fascinated gaze went backward to 
the spot where he had seen Molly sink. 
To his surprise and horror, as he gazed 
the body rose to the surface and floated 
as did poor Elaine: 

"In her right hand the lily, 
— All her bright hair streaming down — 
— And she herself in white, 
All but her face, and that clear-featured 
face 

Was lovely, for she did not seem as 
dead, 

But fast asleep, and lay as tho' she 
smiled." 

Staggering like a drunken man, he 
made his way to a small cottage up the 
bank, where a woman, evidently expect- 
ing him, opened the door without wait- 
ing for his knock. 

"Quick! here she is. Not a word. I 
will return to-night." With these 
words Livingston sped back to the 
river bank, where he was found by the 
rescuing party, in a seemingly ex- 
hausted condition. 

For weeks after these happenings 
Dianthe lived in another world, uncon- 
scious of her own identity. It was early 
fall before her full faculties were once 
more with her. The influence which 
Livingston had acquired rendered her 
quiescent in his hands, and not too 
curious as to circumstances of time and 
place. One day he brought her a letter, 
stating that Reuel was dead. 

Sick at heart, bending beneath the 
blight that thus unexpectedly fell upon 
her, the girl gave herself up to grief, 
and weary of the buffets of Fate, 
yielded to Aubrey's persuasions and be- 
came his wife. On the night which wit- 
nessed Jim Titus's awful death, they 
had just returned to Livingston's ances- 
tral home in Maryland. 

It would be desecration to call the 
passion which Aubrey entertained for 



OF ONE BLOOD. 



645 



Dianthe, love. Yet passion it was — 
the greatest he had ever known — with 
its shadow, jealousy. Indifference on 
the part of his idol could not touch him ; 
she was his other self, and he hated all 
things that stood between him and his 
love. 

It was a blustering night in the first 
part of November. It was twilight 
Within the house profound stillness 
reigned. The heavens were shut out of 
sight by masses of sullen, inky clouds, 
and a piercing north wind was howling. 
Within the room where Dianthe lay, a 
glorious fire burnt in a wide, low grate. 
A table, a couch and some chairs were 
drawn near to it for warmth. Dianthe 
lay alone. Presently there came a knock 
at the door. "Enter/' said the pale 
woman on the couch, never once re- 
moving her gaze from the whirling 
flakes and sombre sky. 

Aubrey entered and stood for some 
moments gazing in silence at the beauti- 
ful picture presented to his view. She 
was gowned in spotless white, her 
bright hair flowed about her uncon- 
strained by comb or pin. Her features 
were like marble, the deep grey eyes 
gazed wistfully into the far distance. 
The man looked at her with hungry, 
devouring eyes. Something, he knew 
not what, had come between them. His 
coveted happiness, sin-bought and 
crime-stained, had turned to ashes — 
Dead-Sea fruit indeed. The cold gaze 
she turned on him half froze him, and 
changed his feelings into a correspond- 
ing channel with her own. 

"You are ill, Dianthe. What seems 
to be your trouble? I am told that you 
see spirits. May I ask if they wear the 
dress of African explorers?" 

It had come to this unhappy state be- 
tween them. 

"Aubrey," replied the girl in a calm, 
dispassionate tone, "Aubrey, at this 
very hour in this room, as I lay here, 
not sleeping, nor disposed to sleep, 



there where you stand, stood a lovely 
woman; I have seen her thus once be- 
fore. She neither looked at me nor 
spoke, but walked to the table, opened 
the Bible, stooped over it a while, seem- 
ing to write, then seemed to sink, just 
as she rose, and disappeared. Examine 
the book, and tell me, is that fancy ?" 

Crossing the room, Aubrey gazed 
steadfastly at the open book. It was 
the old family Bible, and the heafry 
clasps had grown stiff and rusty. It 
was familiar to him, and intimately as- 
sociated with his life-history. There on 
the open page were ink lines underscor- 
ing the twelfth chapter of Luke: "For 
there is nothing covered that shall not 
be revealed, neither hid that shall not 
be known." At the end of this passage 
was written the one word "Nina." 

Without a comment, but with anxious 
brows, Aubrey returned to his wife's 
couch, stooped and impressed several 
kisses on her impassive face. Then he 
left the room. 

Dianthe lay in long and silent medi- 
tation. Servants came and went noise- 
lessly. She would have no candles. 
The storm ceased; the moon came forth 
and flooding the landscape, shone 
through the windows upon the lonely 
watcher. Dianthe's restlessness was 
soothed, and she began tracing the 
shadows on the carpet and weaving 
them into fantastic images of imagina- 
tion. What breaks her reverie? The 
moonlight gleams on something white 
and square; it is a letter. She left the 
couch and picked it up. Just then a 
maid entered with a light, and she 
glanced at the envelope. It bore the 
African postmark! She paused. Then 
as the girl left the room, she slipped the 
letter from the envelope and read: 

"Master Aubrey, — I write to inform you 
that I have not been able to comply 
with your wishes. Twice I have 
trapped Dr. Briggs, but he has escaped 



646 



THE COLORED AMERICAN MAGAZINE. 



miraculously from my hands. I shall 
not fail the third time. The expedition 
will leave for Meroe next week, and 
then something will surely happen. I 
have suppressed all letters, according 
to your orders, and both men are feel- 
ing exceedingly blue. Kindly put that 
first payment on the five thousand dol- 
lars to my sister's credit in a Baltimore 
bank, and let her have the bank book. 
Next mail you may expect something 
definite. 

"Yours faithfully, 

"Jim Titus." 

Aubrey Livingston had gone to an 
adjoining city on business, and would 
be absent three or four days. 

That night Dianthe spent in his 
library behind locked doors, and all 
about her lay open letters — letters ad- 
dressed to her, and full of love and 
tenderness, detailing Reuel's travels and 
minutely describing every part of his 
work. 

Still daylight found her at her work. 
Then she quitted it, closed up the desk, 
tied up the letters, replaced them, left 
the room, and returned to her boudoir 
to think. Her brain was in a giddy 
whirl, and but one thought stood out 
clearly in her burning brain. Her 
thoughts took shape in the one word 
"Reuel," and by her side stood again the 
form of the pale, lovely mulattress, her 
long black curls enveloping her like a 
veil. One moment — the next the room 
was vacant save for herself. 

Reuel was living, and she a bigamist 
— another's wife! made so by fraud and 
deceit. The poor overwraught brain 
was working like a machine now — 
throbbing, throbbing, throbbing. To 
see him, hear his voice — this would be 
enough. Then came the thought — lost 
to her, or rather she to him — and how? 
By the plans of his would-be murderer. 
O, horrible, inhuman wretch! He had 
stolen her by false tales, and then had 



polluted her existence by the breath of 
murder. Murder! What was murder? 
She paused and gasped for breath; then 
come the trembling thought, "Would 
he were dead!" 

He would return and discover the 
opening of the letters. "O, that he 
were dead!" 

She wandered about the grounds in 
the cold sunshine, burning with fever, 
and wild with a brain distraught She 
wished the trees were living creatures 
and would fall and crush him. The winds 
in their fury, would they but kill him! 
O, would not something aid her? At 
last she sat down, out of breath with 
her wanderings and wearied by the tu- 
mult within her breast. So it went all 
day; the very heavens beckoned her to 
commit a deed of horror. She slept and 
dreamed of shapeless, nameless things 
that lurked and skulked in hidden 
chambers, waiting the signal to come 
forth. She woke and slept no more. 
She turned and turned the remainder of 
the night; her poor warped faculties re- 
called the stories she had read of Cenci, 
the Borgias, and even the Hebrew 
Judith. And then she thought of Reuel, 
and the things he had told her on many 
an idle day, of the properties of medi- 
cine, and how in curiosity she had fin- 
gered his retorts used in experiments. 
And he had told her she was apt, and 
he would teach her many things of his 
mysterious profession. And as she 
thought and speculated, suddenly some- 
thing whispered, as it were, a name — 
heard but once — in her ear. It was the 
name of a poison so subtle in its action 
as to defy detection save by one versed 
in its use. With a shudder she threw 
the thought from her, and rose from 
her couch. 

We know we're tempted. The world 
is full of precedents, the air with im- 
pulses, society with men and spirit 
tempters. But what invites sin? Is it 
not a something within ourselves? Are 



THE RACE PROBLEM. 



647 



we not placed here with a sinful nature 
which the plan of salvation commands 
us to overcome? If we offer the excuse 
that we were tempted, where is the merit 
of victory if we do not resist the 
tempter? God does not abandon us to 
evil prompters without a white-robed 
angel, stretching out a warning hand 
and pointing out the better way as 
strongly as the other. When we con- 
quer sin, we say we are virtuous, tri- 
umphant, and when we fall, we excuse 
our sins by saying, "It is fate." 

The days sped on. To the on-looker 
life jogged along as monotonously at 
Livingston Hall as in any other quiet 
home. The couple dined and rode, and 



received friends in the conventional 
way. Many festivities were planned in 
honor of the beautiful bride. But, alas! 
these days but goaded her to madness. 
The uncertainty of ReuePs fate, her own 
wrongs as a wife yet not a wife, her 
husband's agency in all this woe, the 
frailness of her health, weighed more 
and more upon a mind weakened by 
hypnotic experiments. Her better 
angel whispered still, and she listened 
until one day ther^ was a happening 
that turned the scale, and she pro- 
nounced her own dreadful doom — "For 
me there's no retreat." 

(To be continued.) 



THE RACE PROBLEM. 

WILLIAM R. E. GRIGSBY, 1,1,. B. 



The race question or problem is 
doubtless the most momentous problem 
of our civilization. The more it is dis- 
cussed, the more intricate it seems. 
Considered with regard either to its 
scope or character, it is almost unpre- 
cedented in importance, difficulty, and 
the possible peril involved in its solu- 
tion. It is not a new question. Slavery 
and the slave trade were only its earlier 
phases. Rebellion, reconstruction, and 
kukluxism were incidents attending its 
partial solution. For more than a hun- 
dred years it has been a running sore to 
the American people. The steps already 
taken toward its solution have cost the 
nation more than a million lives and 
many billions of dollars. It still con- 
fronts us unsolved. ,?. ml growing every 
year more p-jrii* l.s. In its essential ele- 
ment the Negro question has remained, 
from the very first, substantially un- 
changed. Slavery and its trade was 
based solely upon the claim that the 
white man was inherently superior to 
the Negro, and therefore had a right to 



take, hold, subjugate and utilize the 
labor of the Negro, without compensa- 
tion and without his consent. This 
was accounted a conclusive argument at 
that time. 

Might and right were then very nearly 
convertible terms. The strong were al- 
ways in the right, while the weak were 
peculiarly liable to error and. of course, 
required restraint. The sword and the 
stake were then approved. Theological 
arguments and difference of faith were 
almost as perilous to individual liberty as 
a contrast in the color of the skin. 

Slavery held the saqie ground. 
Backed by the constitution, it held this 
position until the whole fabric of illu- 
sion based on the patriarchal anathema, 
"Cursed be Canaan," and the Apostolic 
ir.jur.rti-vi. "Servant, be obedient to your 
master,'' was swept away by a whelming 
tide of freemen's blood. 

It is hardly necessary here to discuss 
the superiority of the white race or 
whether that fact confers a right to sub- 
ordinate and control an inferior race. 



726 



THE COLORED AMERICAN MAGAZINE. 



munity apart from the white element of 
Anglo-Saxon and Celtic strains, but at 
no time will it affiliate with the Italian 
or the Jew, because of its religion, which 
is Protestant, and ardently so. In self- 
protection, because his temperament is 
more yielding than even that of the ob- 
sequious Polack or the servile Dago, the 
Negro will meet the two only on the 
common ground of the three races, that 
of being the instruments of cheap labor. 
Driven by the fierce competition in the 
struggle for existence, the Negro will 
be long in reaching the high mark of 
civilization, but with the growth of in- 
telligence, his numerical strength will 
increase until it will outstrip that of the 
constantly shrinking Anglo-Saxon- 
Celtic group. When the Jew and the 
Italian begin the struggle for racial su- 
premacy, the economic evolution of the 
Negro will be complete. Whether the 
struggle be purely a political one or a 



sanguinary one, the Afro-American, as 
best subserves his interests, will become 
the independent ally of one or the other 
of the warring races, and lend to victory. 
The once ostracized Negro, in his new 
estate, will be the balance of power in 
the foreignized Republic, and the na- 
tive Americans of Anglo-Saxon and 
Celtic strains will be totally submerged. 
The former masters will be subordinated, 
and the former slaves will become mas- 
ters. 

Note: — The foregoing article is the 
second of a series on America's peril 
from unrestricted immigration. The in- 
vasion of the United States by undesir- 
able immigrants from the south of Eu- 
rope will, from the author's viewpoint, 
end in the submergence of the Anglo- 
Saxon race, and the rise to prominence 
and power of the Afro-American race. 
—Ed. 



OF ONE BLOOD/ 



OR, THE HIDDEN SELF* 

PAULINE E. HOPKINS. 



ISYNOPSIS OP CHAPTERS I. TO XX. 

Reuel Briggs, a young medical student, interested in 
mysticism, sees a face that haunts him. He attends a 
concert with his friend Aubrey Livingston, and there 
discovers in a negro concert-singer the owner of the 
mysterious face. He sees this woman again on Hallow 
Eve while playing at charms with a party of young 
people at Vance Hall, the home of Livingston's be- 
trothed. Early the next morning he is called to attend 
the victims of a railroad disaster at the hospital. He 
finds among them the girl whose face haunts him, in a 
cataleptic sleep which the doctors call death. He suc- 
ceeds in restoring her to consciousness, but with a 
complete loss of memory. She loses her identity as a 
negress. Reuel falls deeply in love with her. He 
finally restores her to health and determines to marry 
her, but finds his circumstances too straitened. Au- 
brey Livingston helps him out by offering to obtain 
for him a place in an expedition about to explore the 
ancient city of Meroe in Africa. Reuel accepts, but 
marries Dianthe before going on a two years' venture. 
After his departure Dianthe finds that Livingston is in 
love with her, and he acquires a power over her that 
she cannot resist. She agrees to fly with him against 
her will ; but before the time set, they, with Molly 
Vance, go out canoeing and are overturned in the river, 
and all three are supposed to have been drowned, 

The expedition reaches Africa. In crossing the Great 
Desert Reuel Briggs visits old ruins and is rescued 
from a leopard's claws by Vance. They are suspicious 
of Jim Titus, who pretended not to hear Briggs' calls 
for help. They receive no letters from home after leav- 
ing England, and one night, by clairvoyant aid, Reuel 
?Copyright, 1903, by Pauline B. Hopkins. 



reads a letter that Titus has received. That same 
night, by mediumistic power, Briggs describes the 
overturning of the boat containing Molly, Dianthe and 
Aubrey, on the Charles River months before. The 
caravan reaches Meroe. and letters reveal the death of 
Dianthe and Molly. Reuel is sick for some weeks, 
and when he returns to health finds the expedition 
about to give up its search for treasure and return 
home. Wanders out one night while the camp is 
asleep and goes to the last pyramid. While exploring 
it he becomes unconscious. When consciousness re- 
turns he finds himself in a hidden city among the 
descendants of the ancient Ethiopians who await the 
return of their king. They claim Reuel as the ex- 
pected monarch because of the royal birthmark on 
his breast,— a lotus lily. After this, under the name of 
Ergaiuenes, Reuel is betrothed to Queen Candace. He 
converses with Dianthe spiritually and learns of Liv- 
ingston's treachery. While planning to escape from 
the hidden city, he hears a cry of distress. Charlie 
Vance aad Jim Titus start to find Reuel, believing him 
lost in the pyramids. Tbey are captured by Ai and 
confined in tne palace. In endeavoring to escape, tfley 
find the hidden passage and treasure told of by Pro- 
fessor Stone. The treasure is guarded by serpents ; 
they kill Titus. Reuel, aroused by the cry he heard, 
explores the passages of the palace ana comes on 
Charlie Vance and the dying Jim, who tells him of 
Livingston's plot and warns him to rescue Dianthe. 

Meantime Aubrey Livingston has married Dianthe, 
after proving to her the death of Reuel. During the 
honeymoon he drops a letter from Jim Titus, which 
Dianthe finds, thereby learning that Aubrey has lied 
to her and that her husband still lives. 



OF ONE BLOOD. 



727 



CHAPTER XXL 
It was past midday about two weeks 
later that Dianthe wandered about the 
silent woods, flitting through the mazes 
of unfamiliar forest paths. Buried* in 
sad thoughts she was at length conscious 
that her surroundings were strange, and 
that she had lost her way. Every now 
and then the air was thick tod misty 
with powdery flakes of snow which fell, 
or swept down, rather, upon the brown 
leaf-beds and withered grass. The buf- 
feting winds which kissed her glowing 
hair into waving tendrils brought no 
color to her white cheeks and no light 
to her eyes. For days she had been like 
this, thinking only of getting away from 
the busy house with its trained servants 
and its loathsome luxury which stifled 
her. How to escape the chains which 
bound her to this man was now her only 
thought. If Reuel lived, each day that 
found her still beneath the roof of this 
man whose wife she was in the eyes of 
the world, was a crime. Away, away, look- 
ing forward to she knew not what, only 
to get away from the sight of his hated 
face. 

Presently she paused and looked 
about her. Where was she? The spot 
was wild and unfamiliar. There was no 
sight or sound of human being to ques- 
tion as to the right direction to take, not 
that it mattered much, she told herself 
in bitterness of spirit. She walked on 
more slowly now, scanning the woods 
for signs of a human habitation. An 
opening in the trees gave a glimpse of 
cultivated ground in a small clearing, 
and a few steps farther revealed a typi- 
cal Southern Negro cabin, from which a 
woman stepped out and faced her as if 
expecting her coming. She was very 
aged, but still erect and noble in form. 
The patched figure was neat to scrupu- 
lousness, the eye still keen and search- 
ing. 

As the woman advanced slowly 
toward her, Dianthe was conscious of a 



thrill of fear, which quickly passed as 
she dimly remembered having heard 
the servants jesting over old Aunt Han- 
nah, the most noted "voodoo" doctor or 
witch in the country. 

"Come in, honey, and res'," were her 
first words after her keen eyes had trav- 
eled over the woman before her. Di- 
anthe obeyed without a murmur; in 
truth, she seemed again to have lost her 
own will in another's. 

The one-roomed cabin was faultlessly 
neat, and the tired girl was grateful for 
the warmth of the glowing brands upon 
the wide hearth. Very soon a cup of 
stimulating coffee warmed her tired 
frame and brought more animation to 
her tired face. 

"What may your name be, Auntie?" 
she asked at length, uneasy at the fur- 
tive glances cast by the eyes of the silent 
figure seated in the distant shadow of 
the chimney-corner. The eyes never 
wavered, but no answer was vouchsafed 
her by the woman in the corner. Some- 
where she had read a description of an 
African princess which fitted the woman 
before her. 

"I knew a princess; she was old, 
Crisp-haired, flat-featured, with a look 

Such as no dainty pen of gold 
Would write of in a fairy book. 

Her face was like a Sphinx's face, to me, 
Touched with vast patience, desert 
grace, 

And lonesome, brooding mystery." 

Suddenly a low sound, growing grad- 
ually louder, fell upon Dianthe's ear; it 
was the voice of the old woman croon- 
ing a mournful minor cadence, but for 
an instant it sent a chill about the girl's 
heart. It was a funeral chant commonly 
sung by the Negroes over the dead. It 
chimed in with her gloomy, despairing 
mood and startled her. She arose 
hastily to her feet to leave the place. 



7 28 



THE COLORED AMERICAN MAGAZINE. 



"How can I reach the road to Living- 
ston Place?" she asked with a shudder 
of apprehension as she glanced at her 
entertainer. 

"Don't be 'feared, child; Aunt Han- 
nah won't hurt a ha'r of that purty head. 
Hain't it these arms done missed evVy 
Livingston? I knowed your mother, 
child; for all you're married to Mar.se 
Aubrey, you isn't a white 'ooman." 

"I do not deny what you say, Auntie; 
I have no desire so to do," replied Di- 
anthe gently. 

With a cry of anguish the floodgates 
of feeling were unloosed, and the old 
Negress flung her arms about the deli- 
cate form. "Gawd-a-mercy! My Mira's 
gal! My Mira's gal!" Then followed a 
harrowing scene. 

Dianthe listened to the old story of 
sowing the wind and reaping the whirl- 
wind. A horrible, paralyzing dread 
was upon her. Was she never to cease 
from suffering and be at rest? Rocking 
herself to and fro, and moaning as 
though in physical pain, the old woman 
told her story. 

"I was born on de Livingston place, 
an* bein' a purty likely gal, was taken to 
de big house when I was a tot. I was 
trained by oP Miss'. As soon as I was 
growed up, my mistress changed in her 
treatment of me, for she soon knowed 
of my relations with massa, an' she was 
hurt to de heart, po' 'ooman. Mira was 
de onlies' child of ten that my massa lef' 
me for my comfort; all de res' were sold 
away to raise de mor'gage off de pro- 
p'rty. 

"OP marse had only one chil', a son; 
he was eddicated for a doctor, and of all 
the limb o' de devil, he was de worst. 
After oP marse an' oP miss' was dead he 
took a shine to Mira, and for years he 
stuck to her in great shape. Her fust 
child was Reuel " 

"What!" shrieked Dianthe. "Tell me 
— quick, for God's sake! Is he alive, 
and by what name is he known?" She 



was deathly white, and spread out her 
hands as if seeking support. 

"Yes, he's living, or was a year ago. 
He's called Dr. Reuel Briggs, an' many 
a dollar he has sent his oP granny, may 
the good Marster bless him!" 

"Tell me all — tell me the rest," came 
from the lips of the trembling girl. 

"Her second child was a girl, — a beau- 
tiful, delicate child, an' de Doctor fairly 
worshipped her. Dat leetle gal was your- 
self, an' Pm your granny." 

"Then Reuel Briggs is my brother!" 

"Certain; but let me tell you de res', 
honey. Dese things jes' got to happen 
in slavery, but I isn't gwine to wink at 
de debbil's wurk wif both eyes open. An' 
I doesn't want you to keep on livin' with 
Marse Aubrey Livingston. It's too 
wicked ; it's flyin' in de face ob Almighty 
God. I'se wanted to tell you eber sense 
I knowed who he'd married. After a 
while de Doctor got to thinkin' 'bout 
keepin' up de family name, an' de fus' 
thing we knows he up an' marries a 
white lady down to Charleston, an* 
brings her home. Well! when she found 
out all de family secrets she made de 
house too hot to hoP Mira, and it was 
ordered that she mus' be sold away. I 
got on my knees to Marse an' I prayed 
to him not to do it, but to give Mira a 
house on de place where she could be 
alone an' bring up de childrun, an' he 
would a done it but for his wife." 

The old woman paused to moan and 
rock and weep over the sad memories of 
the past. Dianthe sat like a stone 
woman. 

"Den I believe de debbil took posses- 
sion of me body and soul. A week be- 
fore my po' gal was to be sol', Misses' 
child was born, and died in about an 
hour; at about de same time Mira gave 
birth to a son, too. In de 'citemen' de 
idea come to me to change de babies, 
fer no one would know it, I being alone 
when de chiP died, an' de house wiP fer 
fear misses would die. So I changed de 



OF ONE BLOOD. 



babies, an' tol' Marse Livingston dat 
Mira's boy was de dead one. So, honey, 
Aubrey is your own blood brother an' 
you got to quit dat house mejuntly." 
"My brother!" 

Dianthe stood over the old woman 
and shook her by the arm, with a look of 
utter horror that froze her blood. 44 My 
brothers! both those men!" 

The old woman mumbled and 
groaned, then started up. 

Aunt Hannah breathed hard once or 
twice. Minute after minute passed. 
From time to time she glanced at Di- 
anthe, her hard, toil-worn hands strained 
at the arms of her chair as if to break 
them. Her mind seemed wavering as 
she crooned: 

"My Mira's children; by de lotus-lily 
on each leetle breast I claim them for 
de great Osiris, mighty god. Honey, 
hain't you a flower on your breast?" 

Dianthe bowed her head in assent, for 
speech had deserted her. Then old 
Aunt Hannah undid her snowy kerchief 
and her dress, and displayed to the terri- 
fied girl the perfect semblance of a lily 
cut, as it were, in shining ebony. 

"Did each of Mira's children have this 
mark?" 

"Yes, honey; all of one blood!" 

Dianthe staggered as though buffeted 
in the face. Blindly, as if in some hide- 
ous trance, reeling and stumbling, she 
fell. Cold and white as marble, she lay 
in the old woman's arms, who 
thought her dead. "Better so," she 
cried, and then laughed aloud, then 
kissed the poor, drawn face. But she 
was not dead. 

Time passed ; the girl could not speak. 
The sacrilege of what had been done 
was too horrible. Such havoc is 
wrought by evil deeds. The first down- 
ward step of an individual or a nation, 
who can tell where it will end, through 
what dark and doleful shades of hell the 
soul must pass in travail? 



"The laws of changeless justice bind 

Oppressor and oppressed; 
And close as sin and suffering joined, 

We march to Fate abreast." 

The slogan of the hour is "Keep the 
Negro down!" but who is clear enough 
in vision to decide who hath black blood 
and who hath it not? Can any one tell? 
No, not one; for in His own mysterious 
way He has united the white race and 
the black race in this new continent By 
the transgression of the law He proves 
His own infallibility: "Of one blood have 
I made all nations of men to dwell upon 
the whole face of the earth," is as true 
to-day as when given to the inspired 
writers to be recorded. Xo man can 
draw the dividing line between the two 
races, for they are both of one blood! 

Bending a little, as though very weak, 
and leaning heavily upon her old grand- 
mothers arm, Dianthe at length set out 
for the Hall. Her face was lined and 
old with suffering. All hope was gone; 
despair was heavy on her young shoul- 
ders whose life was blasted in its bloom 
by the passions of others. 

As she looked upward at the grey, 
leaden sky, tears slowly trickled down 
her cheeks. "God have mercy!" she 
whispered. 

CHAPTER XXII. 

For two days Mrs. Livingston 
brooded in her chamber. Fifty times a 
day Aubrey asked for her. The maid 
told him she was ill, but not alarmingly 
so; no physician was called. She was 
simply indisposed, could not be seen. 

Gazing in Dianthe's face, the maid 
whispered, "She sleeps. I will not dis- 
turb her." 

Alone, she springs from her couch 
with all the energy of life and health. 
She paced the room. For two long 
hours she never ceased her dreary walk. 
Memories crowded around her, wreath- 



73° 



THE COLORED AMERICAN MAGAZINE. 



ing themselves in shapes which floated 
mistily through her brain. Her humble 
school days at Fisk; her little heart leap- 
ing at the well-won prize; the merry play 
with her joyous mates; in later years, 
the first triumphant throb when wonder- 
ing critics praised the melting voice, and 
world-admiring crowds applauded. And, 
O, the glorious days of travel in Rome 
and Florence ! the classic scenes of study ; 
intimate companionship with Beethoven, 
Mozart and Hayden; the floods of in- 
spiration poured in strains of self-made 
melody upon her soul. Then had fol- 
lowed the reaction, the fall into unscru- 
pulous hands, and the ruin that had 
come upon her innocent head. 

The third day Mrs. Livingston arose, 
dressed, and declaring herself quite well, 
went to walk. She returned late in the 
afternoon, dined with her husband, con- 
versed and even laughed. After din- 
ner they walked a while upon the broad 
piazzas, beneath the silent stars and gra- 
cious moon, inhaling the cold, bracing 
air. Then Aubrey begged her for a song. 
Once again she sang "Go down, Moses," 
and all the house was hushed to drink in 
the melody of that exquisite voice. 

To mortal eyes, this young pair and 
their surroundings marked them as 
darlings of the gods enjoying the world's 
heaped-up felicity. Could these same 
eyes have looked deeper into their 
hearts, not the loathsome cell of the 
wretch condemned to death could have 
shown a sight more hideous. Twas late. 
Pausing at her chamber door, Aubrey 
raised her hand to his lips with courtly 
grace, and bade her good-night. 

It was the first hours of the morning. 
From the deepest and most dreamless 
slumber that had ever sealed his eyes, 
Aubrey awoke just as the clock was 
striking two. Twas quite dark, and at 
first he felt that the striking clock had 
awakened him; yet sleep on the instant 
was as effectually banished from his eyes 



as if it were broad daylight. He could 
not distinguish the actual contact of any 
substance, and yet he could not rid him- 
self of the feeling that a strong arm was 
holding him forcibly down, and a heavy 
hand was on his lips. He saw nothing, 
though the moon's rays shone full into 
the room. He felt nothing sensuously, 
but everything sensationally; and thus it 
was that with eyes half-closed, and seem- 
ingly fixed as by an iron vice, he beheld 
the door of his dressing-room — the pri- 
vate means of communication with Di- 
anthe's rooms — very cautiously opened, 
and Dianthe herself, in a loose robe, 
crept into the room, and stealthily as a 
spirit glide to the side of his bed. 

Arrested by the same trance-like yet 
conscious power that bound his form 
but left perception free, Aubrey neither 
spoke nor moved. And yet he felt, and 
partially beheld her stoop over him, lis- 
ten to his breathing, pass her hand be- 
fore his eyes to try if they would open; 
then he, with sidelong glance, beheld 
her, rapidly as thought, take up the 
night glass standing on his table, and 
for the glass containing clear cold water, 
which it was his custom to swallow every 
morning upon first awakening, substi- 
tute one which, he had seen from the 
first, she carried in her hand. This done, 
the stealthy figure moved away, gently 
drew back the door, and would have 
passed; but no — the spell was broken. 
A hand was on her shoulder — a hand of 
iron. Back it dragged her — into the 
room just left, shut the door and locked 
it, held her in its sinewy strength till 
other doors were locked, then bore her 
to the bed, placed her upon it, and then 
released her. And there she sat, white 
and silent as the grave, whilst before her 
stood Aubrey, pale as herself, but no 
longer silent 

Taking the glass which she had sub- 
stituted, he held it to her lips, and pro- 
nounced the one word — "Drink !" But 
one word; but O, what a world of des- 



yEGRO SUFFRAGE JUSTIFIED. 



73i 



tiny, despair, and agony hung on that 
word; again and again repeated. Her 
wild and haggard eyes, her white, 
speechless lips, all, alas! bore testimony 
to her guilt — to a mind unbalanced, but 
only added determination to Aubrey's 
deep, unflinching purpose. 

"Drink! deeper yet! Pledge me to 
the last drop; drink deep; drink all!" 

"Aubrey, Aubrey! mercy, as you look 
for it! let me explain " The shrink- 
ing woman was on her knees, the half- 
drained glass in her hand. 

"To Reuel!" gasped Dianthe, and set 



"Drink !" shouted Aubrey. "Drain the 
glass to Reuel !" 

the glass down empty. Once more 
Aubrey led his bride of three months 
back to the door of her room. Once 
more before her chamber door he 
paused; and once again, but now in 
mockery, he stooped and kissed her 
hand. 

"Farewell, my love," he said. "When 
we meet, 'twill be v 

"In judgment, Aubrey; and may God 
have mercy on our guilty souls!" 



(TO BE CONCLUDED NEXT MONTH.) 



H. NEGRO SUFFRAGE JUSTIFIED. 

BON. RICHARD P. HALLOWELL- 



In a letter published in the "Herald" 
March 11, I attempted to show that the 
incorporation of impartial, or, as it is 
better known, Negro suffrage, in the 
organic law of the United States, was 
not only an act of justice, but of politi- 
cal necessity. 

What would have occurred had mili- 
tary rule been established and main- 
tained in the South until social condi- 
tions improved and both freedmen and 
white men were better fitted for self- 
government, is now a matter of pure 
speculation. The plan was repugnant 
to public sentiment, North and South, 
and was necessarily abandoned. 
,The disloyal attitude of the ex-rebels 
toward the Federal government, and 
their passionate determination to deny 
all civil and political rights to the Ne- 
gro, revealed by the debates and the acts 
of the provisional conventions and legis- 
latures, made it impossible for Congress 
to restore exclusive political power to 
white men. If inference based upon 
initial experiment and existing social 
and political conditions is ever war- 
ranted, it is safe to assert that, had the 
reorganization of the rebel states been 



intrusted exclusively to white men, the 
resuscitation of the doctrine of state 
rights and the practical re-enslavement 
of the Negro would have resulted. In 
that event, the immense waste and de 
struction of property incident to the 
Civil War, the devastation of homes, the 
frightful loss of life, the horrors of An- 
dersonville and Libby prisons, would 
have gone for naught Let us say, 
rather, they would have stood for all 
time as the ghastly record of a national 
crime. There would have been an un- 
holy renewal of the old Union, only to 
be dissolved a second time, and not to 
be permanently renewed until the fun- 
damental law was made to govern and 
protect impartially every citizen without 
regard to race, color, or previous con- 
dition. 

The Negro was emancipated from 
slavery by the war. His enfranchise- 
ment was not a "mistake," as you and 
many others believe. It was the in- 
evitable sequence to his emancipation 
and its necessary confirmation. Neither 
has it been a "failure" unless in the 
sense that all suffrage is a failure, — a 
proposition from which, were it under 



SUSPENSE. 



My heart is torn within me, 
And my hair is turning gray, 

For I've asked her if she'll have me, 
And I don't know what she'll say. 

The moonlit air was balmy, 
And the boat was drifting slow, 

And she looked so sweet and dainty 
In her gown as white as snow, 

That before I really knew it, 
I had clasped her little hand, 

Asked her — told her how I loved her, 
Drew her closer — and — and — 

Well, my heart is torn within me 
And my hair is turning gray, 

For I've asked her if she'll have me, 
But I hope she'll say me nay. 



OF ONE BLOOD.* 

OR, THE HIDDEN SELF. 

PAULINE E. HOPKINS. 



SYNOPSIS OF CHAPTERS I. TO XXIII. 

Reuel Briggs, a young medical student, interested in mys- 
ticism, sees a face that haunts him. He attends a concert with 
his friend Aubrey Livingston, and there discovers in a negro 
concert-singer the owner of the mysterious face. He sees this 
woman again on Hallow Eve while playing at charms with a 
party of young people at Vance Hall, the home of Living- 
ston's betrothed. Early the next morning he is called to at- 
tend the victims of a railroad disaster at the hospital. He 
finds among them the girl whose face haunts him, in a cata- 
leptic sleep which the doctors call death. He succeeds in re- 
storing her to consciousness, but with a complete loss of 
memory. She loses her identity as a negress. Reuel falls 
deeply in love with her. He finally restores her to health and 
determines to marry her, but finds his circumstances too 
straitened. Aubrey Livingston helps him out by offering to 
obtain for him a place in an expedition about to explore the 
ancient city of Meroe in Africa. Reuel accepts, but marries 
Dianthe before going on a two years' venture. After his de- 

Krture Dianthe finds that Livingston is in love with her, and 
acquires a power over her that she cannot resist. She 
agrees to fly with him against her will ; but before the time set. 
they, with Molly Vance, go out canoeing and are overturned 
in the river, and all three are supposed to have been drowned. 

The expedition reaches Africa. In crossing the Great Desrrt 
Reuel Briggs visits old ruins and is rescued from a leopard's 
claws by Vance. They are suspicious of Jim Titus, who pre- 
tended not to hear Briggs' call for help. They receive no 
letters from home after leaving England, and one night, by 
clairvoyant aid, Reuel reads a letter that Titus has received. 
That same night, by mediumistic power, Briggs describes the 
overturning of the boat containing Molly, Dianthe and Aubrey, 
on the Charles River months before. The caravan reaches 
Meroe, and letters reveal the death of Dianthe and Molly. 



Reuel is sick for several weeks, and when he returns to health 
finds the expedition about to give up its search for treasure and 
return home. Wanders out one night while the camp is asleep 
and goes to the last pyramid. While exploring it he becomes 
unconscious. When consciousness returns he finds himself in 
a hidden city among the descendants of the ancient Ethiopians 
who await the return of their king. They claim Reuel as their 
expected monarch because of the royal birthmark on his 
breast, — a lotus lily. After this, under the name of Ergamenes, 
Reuel is betrothed to Queen Candace. He converses with 
Dianthe spiritually and learns of Livingston's treachery. 
While planning to escape from the hidden city, he hears a cry 
of distress. Charlie Vance and Jim Titus start to find Reuel, 
believing him lost in the pyramids. They are captured by Ai 
and confined in the palace. In endeavoring to escape, they find 
the hidden passage and treasure told of by Professor Stone. 
The treasure is guarded by serpents ; they kill Titus. Reuel, 
aroused by the cry he heard, explores the passages of the 
palace and comes on Charlie Vance and the dying Jim, who 
tells him of Livingston's plot and warns him to rescue Dianthe. 

Meanwhile Aubrey Livingston has married Dianthe, after 
proving to her the death of Reuel. During the honeymoon he 
drops a letter from Jim Titus, which Dianthe finds, thereby 
learning that Aubrey has lied to her and that her hus band 
still lives. i* ~" 

Wandering in the woods, Dianthe is lost, and is rescued by 
old Aunt Hannah, a negress. Aunt Hannah tells her the story 
of her daughter, who was Myra, the mother of Aubrey Liv- 
ingston, Reuel Briggs and herself. She thus learns that they 
are all of one blood, and that she has married both of her bro- 
thers. She loses her reason and attempts to poision Aubrey 
who, discovering her in the act compels her to drain the 
poisoned glass. 

•Copyright, 1903, by Paul'ne E. Hopkins. 



OF ONE BLOOD. 



3o 3 



CHAPTER XXIII. 

Twas a cold gray morning; the dawn 
of such a day as seems to wrap itself 
within the shroud of night, hiding the 
warm sun in its stony bosom, and to 
creep through time arrayed in mourning 
garments for the departed stars. Au- 
brey was up by the earliest glimpse of 
dawn. Uncertain what to do or where 
to go, he made a pretence of eating, sit- 
ting in solemn state in the lonely break- 
fast room, where the servants glided 
about in ghostly silence, which was too 
suggestive for the overwrought nerves 
of the master of all that magnificence. 
Fifty times he asked the maid for Mrs. 
Livingston. The woman told him she 
was ill, — not alarmingly so; no physi- 
cian's services were needed, neither his 
own nor another's. He did not ask to see 
her, yet with a strange and morbid curi- 
osity, he kept on questioning how she 
was, and why she kept her chamber, un- 
til the knowing laugh and sly joke about 
the anxiety of bridegrooms over the 
welfare of brides made the servants' quar- 
ters ring with hilarity. At length, tired 
of his aimless wandering, he said he'd 
go. His valet asked him where. He 
could not tell. 'Tack up some things." 

"For how long a time, sir?" 

"I cannot tell, James." 

"Shall I order the carriage?" 

"Anything, something! A horse; yes. 
Ill have the swiftest one in the stable. 
A valise — no more; no, you need not 
come. I must be alone." 

In Dianthe's room the attendants tread 
noiselessly, and finally leave her to enjoy 
her feigned slumber. She waits but the 
closing of the door, to spring from her 
couch with all the seeming energy of 
life and health. First she went to the 
window and flung wide the hangings, 
letting in a flood of light upon the pale, 
worn face reflected in the mirror. What 
a wondrous change was there! The 



long white drapery of her morning robe 
fell about her like a shroud, yet, white 
as it was, contrasted painfully with the 
livid ash-hue of her skin. Her arms 
were thin and blue, her hands transpar- 
ent; her sunny hair hung in long dishev- 
elled, waving masses, the picture of neg- 
lect; the sunken, wan brow, and livid 
lips, the heavy eyes with deep, black 
halos round them — all these made up a 
mined temple. 

"When he comes he will not know 
me," she murmured to herself; then sigh- 
ing deeply, turned and paced the room. 
What she thought of, none could say. 
She spoke not; never raised her eyes 
from off the ground,^ nor ceased her 
dreary walk for two long hours. She 
sometimes sobbed, but never shed a tear. 

Here we drop the veil. Let no hu- 
man eye behold the writhings of that 
suffering face, the torture of that soul 
unmoored, and cast upon the sea of wild- 
est passion, without the pilot, principle, 
or captain of all salvation, God, to trust 
in, — passion, adoration of a human idol, 
hereditary traits entirely unbalanced, 
generous, but fervid impulses, her only 
guides. She knew that her spiritual 
person must survive the grave, but what 
that world was where her spirit was fast 
tending, only the dread tales of fear and 
superstition shadowed truth; and now, 
when her footsteps were pressing to it, 
horror and dread dogged every foot- 
print. 

Hour after hour elapsed alone. O, 
'twas agony to be alone! She could not 
bear it. She would call her maid; but 
no, her cold, unimpassioned face would 
bring no comfort to her aching heart, 
aching for pity, for some cheering bo- 
som, where $he might sob her ebbing life 
away. The door opens, — and O joy! old 
Aunt Hannah's arms enfold her. For 
hours the two sat in solemn conference, 
while the servants wondered and specu- 
lated over the presence of the old witch. 



804 



t'OLCfttEf) AMERICAN MAGAZINE, 



At last nitfht fett_;^^ther,rg/W*^. 
mured thp r ^ Ifjki; rising -her -bead 
from off her damp^te^^^evy golden 
cloud is printed witn the fleecy words of 
glory. 1 will return.' " She pointed to 
the golden clouds banking the western 
sky. "O, will our spirits come, like set- 
ting suns, on each tomorrow of eter- 
nity?" 

For answer, the old woman raised her 
hand in warning gesture. There sound- 
ed distinct and clear — three loud, yet 
muffled knocks on the panel directly 
above the couch where Dianthe lay. 

"'Tis nothing, .mother; Pm used to 
it now," said the girl with indifference. 

"You say 'tis nuffin, honey; but yer 
limbs are quiverin' wif pain, and the 
drops ob agony is on yer po' white face. 
You can't 'ceive me, chile; yer granny 
knows de whole circumstance. I seed 
it all las' night in my dreams. Ven- 
geance is mine ; I will repay. One comes 
who is de instrumen' ob de Lord." And 
the old woman muttered and rocked and 
whispered. 

Whatever was the cause of Mrs. Liv- 
ingston's illness, its character was un- 
usual and alarming. The maid, who was 
really attached to the beautiful bride, 
pleaded to be allowed to send for medi- 
cal aid in vain. The causes for her suf- 
fering, as stated by Dianthe, were plaus- 
ible; but her resolve to have no aid, in- 
flexible. As evening advanced, her rest- 
lessness, and the hideous action of spas- 
modic pains across her livid face, became 
distressing. To all the urgent appeals 
of her servants, she simply replied she 
was waiting for some one. He was 
coming soon — very soon and then she 
Mould be quite well. 

And yet he came not. From couch to 
door, from door to window, with eager, 
listening ear and wistful eyes the poor 
watcher traversed her chamber in una- 
vailing expectancy. At length a sudden 
calm seemed to steal over her; the in- 



cessant restlessness of her wearied frame 
yielded to a tranquil, passive air. She 
lay upon cushions piled high upon the 
couch commanding a view of the broad 
hallways leading to her apartments. The 
beams of the newly risen moon bathed 
every object in the dim halls. Clear as 
the vesper bell, sounding across a far 
distant lake, strains of delicious music, 
rising and falling in alternate cadence of 
strong martial measure, came floating in 
waves of sound down the corridor. 

Dianthe and Aunt Hannah and the 
maid heard the glorious echoes; whilst 
in the town the villagers heard the 
music as of a mighty host Louder it 
grew, first in low and wailing notes, then 
swelling, pealing through arch and cor- 
ridor in mighty diapason, until the very 
notes of different instruments rang out 
as from a vast orchestra. There was the 
thunder of the organ, the .wild harp's 
peal, the aeolian's sigh, the trumpet's 
peal, and the mournful horn. A thou- 
sand soft melodious flutes, like trickling 
streams upheld a bird-like treble; whilst 
ever and anon the muffled drum with 
awful beat precise, the rolling kettle and 
the crashing cymbals, kept time to 
sounds like tramping of a vast but view- 
less army. Nearer they came. The 
dull, deep beat of falling feet — in the 
hall — up the stairs. Louder it came and 
louder. Louder and yet more loud the 
music swelled to thunder! The unseen 
mass must have been the disembodied 
souls of every age since Time began, so 
vast the rush and strong the footfalls. 
And then the chant of thousands of 
voices swelling in rich, majestic choral 
tones, joined in the thundering crash. 
It was the welcome of ancient Ethiopia 
to her dying daughter of the royal line. 

Upspringing from her couch, as 
through the air the mighty hallelujah 
sounded, Dianthe with frantic gestures 
and wild distended eyes, cried: "I see 
them now! the glorious band! Welcome. 



OF ONE BLOOD, 



805 



great masters of the world's first birth! 
All hail, my royal ancestors — Candace, 
Semiramis, Dido, Solomon, David and 
the great kings of early days, and the 
great masters of the world of song. O, 
what long array of souls divine, lit with 
immortal fire from heaven itself! O, 
let me kneel to thee! And to thee, too, 
Beethoven, Mozart, thou sons of song! 
Divine ones, art thou come to take me 
home? Me, thy poor worshipper on 
earth? O, let me be thy child in para- 
dise! 

The pageant passed, or seemed to pass, 
from her whose eyes alone of all the 
awe-struck listeners, with mortal gaze 
beheld them. When, at length, the last 
vibrating echoes of the music seemed to 
die away in utter vacant silence to the 
terrified attendants, Dianthe still seemed 
to listen. Either her ear still drank in 
the music, or another sound had caught 
her attention. 

"Hark, hark! 'Tis carriage wheels. Do 
you not hear them? Now they pass the 
railroad at the crossing. Hasten, O 
hasten! Still they have a long mile to 
traverse. O, hasten! They call me 
home." 

For many minutes she sat rigid and 
cold as marble. The trembling maid 
wept in silent terror and grief, for the 
gentle bride was a kind mistress. Old 
Aunt Hannah, with a fortitude born of 
despair, ministered in every possible way 
to the dying girl. To the great relief 
of all, at last, there came to their ears 
the very distant rumbling of wheels. 
Nearer it came — it sounded in the avenue 
— it paused at the great entrance, some 
one alighted — a stir — the sound of voices 
— then footsteps — the ascent of footsteps 
on the stairs. Nearer, nearer yet; hasti- 
ly they come, like messengers of speed. 
They're upon the threshold — enter. 
Then, and not till then, the rigid lady 
moved. With one wild scream of joy 
she rushed forward, and Reuel Briggs 
clasped her in his arms. 



For a few brief moments, the wretched 
girl lived an age in heaven. The pres- 
ence of that one beloved — this drop of 
joy sweetened all the bitter draught and 
made for her an eternity of compensa- 
tion. With fond wild tenderness she 
gazed upon him, gazed in his anxious 
eyes until her own looked in his very 
soul, and stamped there all the story of 
her guilt and remorse. Then winding 
her cold arms around his neck, she laid 
her weary head upon his shoulder and 
silently as the night passed through the 
portals of the land of souls. 



CHAPTER XXIV. 

'Twas midnight. The landscape was 
still as death. Hills, rocks, rivers, even 
the babbling brooks, seemed locked in 
sleep. The moonbeams dreamt upon 
the hillside; stars slept in the glittering 
sky; the silent vales were full of dream- 
ing flowers whose parti-colored cups 
closed in sleep. In all that solemn hush 
of silence one watcher broke the charmed 
spell. 'Twas Aubrey Livingston. Now 
he moves swiftly over the plain as if 
some sudden purpose drove him on ; then 
he turns back in the self-same track and 
with the same impulsive speed. What is 
he doing in the lonely night? All day, 
hour after hour, mile on mile, the scorch- 
ing midday sun had blazed upon his 
head, and still he wandered on. The 
tranquil sunset purpled round his way 
and still the wanderer hastened on. In 
his haggard eyes one question seems to 
linger — "I wonder if she lives!" 

Many, many dreary times he said this 
question over! He has a secret and 'tis 
a mighty one ; he fears if human eye but 
look upon him, it must be revealed. 
Hark! suddenly there falls upon his ear 
the sound of voices, surely some one 
called! Again! His straining ear 
caught a familiar sound. 

"Aubrey! Aubrey Livingston!" 



8o6 



THE COLORED AMERICAN MAGAZINE. 



"By heaven, it is her voice!" he told 
himself. And as if to assure him still 
more of who addressed him, close before 
his very eyes moved two figures. Hand 
in hand they passed from out a clump of 
sheltering trees, and slowly crossed his 
path. One face was turned toward him, 
the other from him. The moon revealed 
the same white robe in which he had 
last beheld her, the long, streaming hair, 
her slippered feet — all were there. Up- 
on his wondering eyes her own were 
fixed in mute appeal and deepest an- 
guish; then both figures passed away, 
he knew not where. 

"Twas she, and in full life. God of 
heaven, she lives I" 

Pausing not to think he was deceived, 
enough for him, she lived. He turned 
his steps toward his home, with flying 
feet he neared the hall. Just as he 
reached the great entrance gates, he saw 
the two figures slightly in advance of 
him. This time Dianthe*s face was 
turned away, but the silver moonbeams 
threw into bold relief the accusing face 
of Molly Vance! 

With a sudden chill foreboding, he 
entered the hall and passed up the stairs 
to his wife's apartments. He opened 
wide the door and stood within the 
chamber of the dead. 

There lay the peaceful form — spread 
with a drapery of soft, white gauze 
around her, and only the sad and livid, 
poisoned face was visible above it; and 
kneeling by the side of her, his first love 
and his last — was Reuel Briggs. 

Rising from the shadows as Aubrey 
entered, Charlie Vance, flanked on either 
side by Ai and Abdadis, moved to meet 
him, the stern brow and sterner words 
of an outraged brother and friend greet- 
ed him: 

"Welcome, murderer I" 



Dianthe was dead, poisoned ; that was 
claar. Molly Vance was unduly done to 
death by the foul treachery of the same 



hand. All this was now clear to the 
thinking public, for so secluded had Au- 
brey Livingston lived since his return 
to the United States, that many of his 
intimate associates still believed that he 
had perished in the accident on the 
Charles. It was quite evident to these 
friends that his infatuation for the beau- 
tiful Dianthe had led to the commission 
of a crime. But the old adage that, "the 
dead tell no tales," was not to be set 
aside for visionary ravings unsupported 
by lawful testimony. 

Livingston's wealth purchased shrewd 
and active lawyers to defend him against 
the charges brought by the Vances— 
father and son, — and Reuel Briggs. 

One interview which was never re- 
vealed to public comment, took place 
between Ai, Abdadis, Aunt Hannah, 
Reuel Briggs and Aubrey Livingston. 

Aubrey sat alone in his sumptuous 
study. An open book was on his knees, 
but his eyes were fixed on vacancy. He 
was changed and his auburn locks were 
prematurely grey. His eyes revealed 
an impenetrable mystery within into 
whose secret depths no mortal eye might 
look. Thus he sat when the group we 
have named above silently surrounded 
him. "Peace, O son of Osiris, to thy 
parting hour!" 

Thus Ai greeted him. There was no 
mistaking these words, and gazing into 
the stern faces of the silent group Au- 
brey knew that something of import was 
about to happen. 

Aubrey did not change countenance, 
although he glanced at Reuel as if seek- 
ing mercy. The latter did not change 
countenance; only his eyes, those strange 
deep eyes before whose fixed gaze none 
could stand unflinching, took on a more 
sombre glow. Again Ai spoke: 

"God has willed it! Great is the God 
of Ergamenes, we are but worms be- 
neath His feet. His will be done." Then 
began a strange, weird scene. Round 
and round the chair where Aubrey was 



OF ONE BLOOD. 



807 



seated walked the kingly Ai chanting 
in a low, monotone in his native tongue, 
finally advancing with measured steps 
to a position directly opposite and fac- 
ing Livingston, and stood there erect 
and immovable, with arms raised as if 
in invocation. His eyes glittered with 
strange, fascinating lights in the shaded 
room. To the man seated there it seemed 
that an eternity was passing. Why did 
not these two men he had injured take 
human vengeance in meting out punish- 
ment to him? And why, oh! why did 
those eyes, piercing his own like poin- 
ards, hold him so subtly in their spell? 

Gradually he yielded to the mysteri- 
ous beatitude that insensibly enwrapped 
his being. Detached from terrestrial 
bonds, his spirit soared in regions of 
pure ethereal blue. A delicious torpor 
held him in its embrace. His head sank 
upon his breast. His eyes closed in a 
trancelike slumber. 

Ai quitted his position, and approach- 
ing Aubrey, lifted one of the shut eye- 
lids. "He sleeps !" he exclaimed. 

Then standing by the side of the un- 
conscious man he poured into his ear — 
speaking loudly and distinctly, — a few 
terse sentences. Not a muscle moved in 
the faces of those standing about the 
sleeper. Then Ai passed his hands 
lightly over his face, made a few upward 
passes, and turning to his companions, 
beckoned them to follow him from the 
room. Silently as they had come the 
group left the house and grounds, gained 
a waiting carriage and were driven rap- 
idly away. In the shelter of the vehicle 
Charlie Vance spoke, "Is justice done?" 
he sternly queried. 

"Justice will be done," replied Ai's 
soothing tones. 

"Then I am satisfied." 

But Reuel spoke not one word. 



pening, the body of Aubrey Livingston 
was found floating in the Charles river 
at the very point where poor Molly 
Vance had floated in the tangled lily-bed. 
The mysterious command of Ai, "death 
by thine own hand," whispered in his 
ear while under hypnotic influence, had 
been followed to the last letter. 

Thus Aubrey had become his own 
executioner according to the ancient 
laws of the inhabitants of Telassar. Mem- 
bers of the royal family in direct line 
to the throne became their own execu- 
tioners when guilty of the crime of mur- 
der. 



Reuel Briggs returned to the Hidden 
City with his faithful subjects, and old 
Aunt Hannah. There he spends his 
days in teaching his people all that he 
has learned in years of contact with mod- 
ern culture. United to Candace, his 
days glide peacefully by in good works; 
but the shadows of great sins darken 
his life, and the memory of past joys is 
ever with him. He views, too, with 
serious apprehension, the advance of 
mighty nations penetrating the dark, 
mysterious forests of his native land. 

"Where will it stop?" he sadly ques- 
tions. " What will the end be?" 

But none save Omnipotence can solve 
the problem. 

To our human intelligence these truths 
depicted in this feeble work may seem 
terrible, — even horrible. But who shall 
judge the handiwork of God, the Great 
Craftsman ! Caste prejudice, race pride, 
boundless wealth, scintillating intellects 
refined by all the arts of the intellectual 
world, are but puppets in His hand, for 
His promises stand, and He will prove 
His words, "Of one blood have I made 
al! races of men." 



One day not very long after this hap- 



(THE END.) 



