The Climbers: A Story of Sunkissed Sweethearts 

Yorke Jones

1912


A New Student.

"But let my due feet never fail To walk the studious cloysters pale."
—Milton.

With distressing frequency the gentle, tall, thin, pale Greek-looking professor of Greek in Norwalk College for colored men was writing a goose-egg opposite my name in his grade book. I can see him now part that flowing salt-and-pepper beard from thin, sensitive lips and calmly say: "Mr. Wade will please recite." Yes; and I can see myself rise and simply flounder because I had no text book. When I, Joseph Wade, heard that the truant Xenophon long before ordered was at last in the express office, I made tracks to get it. Pretty deep tracks they were, too. I had to flounder through a two-foot January snow from Norwalk College to the depot, a half mile from the campus.

I had secured the Greek book, and was about to return to the college when the afternoon train arriving, left on the platform something that interested me far more than the Historian's time honored Expedition of the Ten Thousand Greeks, or yet his Recollections of the immortal sage who, on charge of corrupting Athenian youths, was condemned to drink the fatal hemlock.

The new student, Augustus Fairfax, was that something. My risibles were touched by the contrast between his appearance and high-sounding name. Augustus Fairfax! He was smooth-black, tall and thin—even to gauntness. As nervously restless was he as a blooded racer. He wore a soft black hat creased in the middle, perched jauntily on the side of a large, close-cropped, shapely head. Though he had on a cheap country-store suit, whose pant legs were stuffed in the tops of coarse ox-hide boots, acres too large for him, yet he was in the glory of a ruffled bosom shirt with gold studs in it!

My face was s aight, but I could not keep my heart from laughing at Fairfax, though it became apparent to me, as I panted to keep pace with his rapid strides, that he was simply green, not dull. I learned from him before we reached the campus that he was born of slave parents; brought North, a child, soon after the war ; reared on a farm in an adjoining county, whence, three winter months in each year, he had been sent to the excellent district school where the color line was not drawn, and where he had made good progress in his studies.

A crowd hides some natures. Fairfax's, however, was such that he could not but impinge himself on notice. His induction into the student body served to manifest what an original, wide-awake, fun-loving fellow he was.

One effect of his impigning himself on the notice of the student body was that he became the college butt of fun, and was thought to be very light hearted because he seemed so amusing; but there was not a more soberheaded man in Norwalk than this youth, at whose sayings and doings the college roared.

Because the present was new and the future bright, Fairfax was hopeful; though not so light hearted as he seemed comical.

Fairfax's race are America's butt of fun. They, too, are thought to be very light hearted because they seem amusing; but while the black man is hopeful (because his present is new and his future full of promise), yet it is a grave mistake to imagine that the child of Ham feels free of care, because, to his brother in white, he seems amusing.

Without A Name.

"A youth, to fortune and to fame unknown."
—Gray.

The winter of 1878, the one that Fairfax entered Norwalk, witnessed a great religious awakening among the students. In this revival one of the most active and efficient student-workers was my classmate and friend, David J. Holt, the only candidate for the ministry in our class, and, at this time, probably the most influential student in Norwalk.

There were reasons why he was so influential. Here are some of them: He was a fine mind; a hard, successful student; a man of deep piety; yet, withal, one of the most chummy fellows and greatest athletic enthusiasts in school. Of fine physique and presence, the usual height and weight, chestnut colored, with silky brown hair and open, honest, dark hazel eyes, no one studied, played ball and did Christian work with more energy than did the only candidate for the ministry in our class. Then, too, Holt had seen more of life than many of his school-mates. Years before he had been in Norwalk's course, but, for lack of funds, had fallen out; and, despairing of being able to resume his studies, had married. His wife, however, had died with their first child, Julia, now just in her teens. With his handsome second wife and Julia, an unusually bright and attractive girl, he was now living in a cottage that faced the beautiful campus. Holt and his wife were about the same color and had hair the same color and texture; Julia, however, was a shade darker than they; but was brown-haired and frank-eyed as her father.

The Holt home was a sort of Mecca for the students. Fairfax took quite a fancy to Holt and myself. Probably because we were disposed to see him have fair play against a set of fellows who liked to amuse themselves by teasing the young rustic. He was a pure-minded youth; and, withal, full of innocent fun, and therefore was quite welcome at Holt's home, and consequently found his way there quite frequently.

The young man's partiality for Holt and this welcome in the home of the influential student made the latter instrumental in leading Fairfax to the Cross.

I was too sick to be out of my room the night our quasi-ward found peace. My friend, however, detailed to me the circumstances. After prayer-meeting the zealous Christian worker had gone to the young inquirer's room and talked and prayed with him. "I had got home and was getting my next day's lesson," so Holt told me afterwards, "when someone came thundering at the front door. When I opened it, in burst Fairfax like a storm, catching me around the waist, crying rapturously with eyes like stars: " 'Oh, Mr. Holt! I'm so happy! I've found him !' "

Holt and his wife, so he told me, wept in sympathy with the young convert's joy. What seemed singular to the father is the fact that Julia, though not a professing Christian, was likewise moved to tears with Fairfax.

His conversion was an event; for natures such as his do nothing by halves. He became "a city set on a hill that cannot be hid"; but his triumphant, demonstrative zeal, while delightful to the earnest, was to another set of students simply amusing. Nor was it long, in consequence of the attitude of these, before clouds obscured the sun in the young convert's sky.

This came to pass about three weeks after Fairfax made a profession. He came into my room in great distress one night. I had just finished my lessons for next day, and was about to turn aside to shorthand, in which I was taking private instruction. A matter I had heard about brought him to my room.

It seems that the day before the young man, whose duty it was to distribute the mail to the students in their rooms, undertook to have some fun with Fairfax. The said mail-agent, arriving at the country youth's room door, said, waving a letter tauntingly before Fairfax's face, "Here is a letter for 'Abraham Lincoln'; I guess you are the rail-splitter." The impetuous young rustic had snatched the letter, slammed and locked the door in his tormentor's face before that worthy realized exactly what had happened.

At first he supposed Fairfax had snatched the missive in either pique or fun; but notwithstanding the mail-agent's most vehement remonstrances, the new convert refused to give up the letter. As a last resort, the affair was reported to the President, Dr. F. R. Dale.

The distressed young man came to me. "Why haven't you been over to see Dr. Dale?" I asked him.

"Because," was his sheepish reply. I imagined my voice betrayed the annoyance I felt over his conduct as I said: "It looks pretty ugly—your opening and keeping mail that's not yours."

I turned my back on him to go on with my work. He was sitting in awkward silence,—his hat between his knees,—looking like a criminal. In a voice that smote me to the heart for my harshness, he broke the long, painful silence. "Mr. Wade, that's why I am here; I came to get you to go over to Dr. Dale's with me."

I relented and agreed to go. Norwalk had got used to my scribbling shorthand in season and out. In fact, Dr. Dale encouraged me to do this; so he thought nothing of seeing me draw out my tablet and take shorthand notes of the interview between himself and Fairfax.

Dr. F. R. Date, ruddy, well proportioned, stood six feet in his socks. A once black but now mixed patriarchal beard swept to his waist overflowing the immaculate shirt bosom that a low-cut broadcloth vest revealed.

A figured study-robe flowed to his heels, while on his once raven, now mixed abundant locks, perched, crownlike, a study cap above an open ample brow and eyes keen but kind. The imposing physique, the sharp eyes that nothing escaped, the broad, square chin, the firm, generous mouth and the deep, rich voice—these all told those meeting Dr. Dale that they were in the presence of one of nature's kings. He sat in his capacious, high-back leather lounging chair, and peering kindly over his gold glasses at Fairfax, asked gently: "Well, sir, what can I do for you to-night?" This question to Fairfax indicated that the President surmised the new student's errand.

"I've come over, doctor, to—to see you about that letter."

"What about it, sir?" asked the doctor, bending on the youth a glance beneath which he winced.

"It's—it's mine, doctor," blurted he.

"Yours! How can that be? It is addressed to Abraham Lincoln. Is your name Lincoln, sir?"

"No, sir, doctor; I'm not named anything! I ain't got any name 1" replied he bitterly.

"Why, I thought your name is Fairfax?" asked the President with a broad smile at the rustic's heat.

"No, sir, doctor, I haven't got any name."

"How did you come to open a letter addressed to Abraham Lincoln, then?" asked the official with a stilt broader smile.

"Because," replied Fairfax sheepishly, "that used to be my name, and somebody that knowed me by that name sent me some money."

"Don't say 'knowed,' but knew me."

"Oh, doctor, I'm too worried to talk grammar!"

At this we all laughed.

"If the letter is yours, I don't see why you should be worried?" laughed Dr. Dale.

"I see!" exclaimed the young man excitedly, leaping to his feet, standing erect before the president. "I see! If it gets out about my name," he went on impetuously, "every dunce in Norwalk will be making a fool of me about it!"

"You use strong language, sir" said Dr. Dale, evidently pleased at Fairfax's power of expression.
"Well, doctor, I feel strong about it; for everywhere I've been made a fool of about my name; I mean," finished he in deep pain, "because I haven't got any name." Dr. Dale was touched. He asked in altered voice: "How did you come by the names Lincoln and Fairfax?
You told me when you came here that you were born in the South," he added to encourage the youth to talk about himself—evidently a thing painful to the new convert.
"Yes, sir; I was born a slave. This I know because I have some indistinct recollections. I don't know exactly where I was born nor when. I was with my mother in a tent in a Union camp one night when a skirmish took place. In the darkness and confusion, I got lost from her. I thought I'd find her when daylight came, but I've never laid eyes on her since."
Here he paused under stress of feeling. Dr. Dale wiped his eye and blew his nose.
"How did you get North?" he asked in altered tones.
"I was brought North by the Quakers who were looking after the orphans of slaves. They brought a whole lot of us children North to an asylum. I didn't know anything about my folks, and I didn't have any name, so they called me 'Abraham Lincoln.' They meant all right, but everywhere I've went," he continued, warming up at the thought of past annoyance, "I've been made a fool of about my name!"
Corrected, the president: "Don't say 'everywhere I've went,' but everywhere I've gone."
"Oh, doctor," broke out the young man with a broad grin, "I know that the past participle and not the past tense should be used after the verbs 'have' and 'be' We committed grammar in the school I went to before I came here; but nobody, not even the teacher, bothered about talking it."
"Well, sir," laughed the good doctor, "we in this institution learn grammar and talk it."
"Yes, sir, doctor," replied Fairfax, broken off from the thread of his narrative and feeling in awkward self-consciousness for his chair to take his seat.
"I did not mean to interrupt your story, sir," said the president.
"No, sir, doctor," replied the black boy, again becoming erect and graceful as his feelings again beguiled him into self-forgetfulness.
"As I was saying, I've been made a fool of, always, about that name, Abraham Lincoln. For what goose wouldn't know that I've no right to that name !"
"I should think you would be glad to bear the name of so good and great a man."
"Oh, the name is good enough, but I just got tired of being everlastingly teased about that name, so I got the folks that brought me up to get my name changed by law to Augustus Fairfax.
"That's more high-sounding than Lincoln!" laughed Dr. Dale.
"I don't care, sir; people don't tease me about it, anyhow."
As the letter really was Fairfax's, President Dale saw that there was nothing to do about it; so far, therefore, as that feature of the matter was concerned, the young man went back to the dormitory satisfied, and I went with him, having had a good inward laugh at the boy and an inward cry with him over the story of his childhood.
Quite Funny.
"The virtue of prosperity is temperance (self-control); the virtue of adversity is fortitude, which in morals is the more hero-ical virtue."—Essay, Adversity—Bacon.
Augustus Fairfax was not far wrong in dreading the consequence of the matter respecting his name becoming known. When the facts leaked out, a great shout of derision went up. He was dubbed the Anonymous from Eutopia, the Missing Link, the He-Topsy that never was born but "just growed." Norwalk had such a good time at the young convert's expense that his religion was put to a severe test, as he was the butt of all sorts of jokes and pranks.
Here is one of the class of jokes. A younger brother of one of the professors had died away at college, and in consequence of the body's being brought home to Norwalk for burial, we were having a holiday. A great crowd of students were on one of the porches of the dormitory in which Fairfax roomed. As he approached the porch, some wag in the crowd called out to the black rustic: "Come here, Fairfax! I want to tear you up to make crepe out of you for the burial."
A great shout of laughter was sent up by the delighted crowd. After that he was called "crepe."
Then, too, he was made the victim of many a half-grown boy prank. One of these, however, did not prove so funny for its perpetrators as it was hoped it would.
Three of the new student's most persistent tormentors, all city fellows, Robt. Saxton, Henry Don and Bill Halsey, went to the country lad's room one Saturday afternoon and announced that they were going to cobb or haze him in honor of his new name, The Anonymous. The young Christian was not long in reaching the decision that peace must be conquered. Instantly, therefore, he not only declared war, but immediately and most literally and vigorously "carried the war into Africa."
He had just come in from the foot-ball field, where he had left the bulk of the student body engaged in a match game of foot-ball, at that time still a gentlemanly game for the many, not yet having degenerated into a brutal fight between a few; consequently he had on not the city clothes and shoes purchased since his matriculation, but he wore the country-store clothes and heavy thick-soled bull hide boots in which he arrived at Norwalk. He was naturally as agile as a deer and labor on a farm had made him ns tough as his lubbering bovine footgear.
What of the encounter, do you ask? This: his fists and feet got in such good work that Robt. Saxton carried his arm in a sling for two weeks from a fall on the ice; Henry Don'had the pleurisy in his side from a cold; Bill Halsey had the rheumatism in his left leg so bad that he had to walk with a stick, while Fairfax—the funny, the even-tempered, after his boots had caused all these complaints, Fairfax, the sometime man of peace, Alexander like, sat down (on the side of his bed) and wept that there were no more worlds to conquer. With his cheeks streaming with bitter brine and his eyes as red as fire, he is reported to have cried in a fury that recked not of grammar: "Are there one, is there two more that wants to cobb me? Let'em come on! By Jacks! I kin lick any such fools in Norwalk!" But so far as the three were concerned, he was wasting the sweetness of his challenge on the desert air of their absence; for they had gone to take off their wounded and bury their dead.
This hazing incident never reached the ears of the authorities; yet it did get out among the boys, though you may be sure the three kept mum, and though Fairfax did not tell it—unless he unwittingly let out the secret that same evening at the nightly voluntary prayermeeting. The young convert was in deep distress and very penitent.
His prayer that night contained these significant words: "Thou knowest we do love Thee, and that we do want to do right. Forgive us for all our sins; for Thou knowest how hard it is to be teased for what you ain't responsible for."
There is a saying that "all the world loves the lover." Yes, and it loves the fighter, too. Else how comes it to pass that the soldier is the world's first hero? No; the hazing incident never reached faculty ears; but it did leak out among the boys; and when it did, it is only just like human nature (which loves the fighter) that Fairfax stock took a rise with Norwalk students. He was never teased thereafter, probably because it was hard for a fellow to continue to seem funny who had such good use of his fists and feet.
It would be a mistake, however, to suppose Fairfax thereafter owed immunity from teasing to muscular prowess wholly, however true it is that it is not human nature to withhold admiration from brawn.
What form of education a young man ought to bring from college is an old debate; but what kind of boy you send to school is infinitely more important than to what kind of institution you send the boy. Steel is worth sharpening; but what's the good of sharpening lead? What's the use of having a boy go through a college course, if he has not brains enough for the college course to go through him?
There were all sorts of ability in this Negro college, just as all sorts are to be found in white ones; but Fairfax was steel; he was capable of having the curriculum go through him. If a college is a world wherein there is aristocracy of brains rather than that of blood, the country youth without a name soon vindicated his right to be regarded as a high peer in Norwalk's aristocracy of brains.
It was said in the outset of this history that our class had only one candidate for the ministry in it the year Fairfax entered Norwalk—that is, Holt. Robert N. Wilson joined us as a candidate for the Holy office when we reached the Junior year. After our graduation, these two returned to Norwalk to take theology, therefore, while I went off to study medicine, as Norwalk had no medical department. When, three years later, Wilson, Holt and .myself finished our professional courses, Fairfax graduated from Norwalk at the head of his class, having become, by his industry, uprightness, talents and sunny heart, the most popular and influential student in Norwalk.
The butt had become a hero.
An Idyl of June—A Romance of Growth.
"What is so rare as a day in June?
No matter how barren the past may have been, 'Tis enough for us now that the leaves are green."
—Lowell.
Down in Dixie—At Work.
"What is a man, If his chief good and market of his time Be but to sleep and feed? a beast, no more.
Sure he that made us with such large discourse, Looking before and after, gave us not That capability and god-like reason To fust in us unused."
—Hamlet, Act IV., Scene IV.
Fairfax got a position as teacher in a State normal school in one of the Gulf States when he went from Norwalk; Wilson and Holt each took a church in the North, while I went South and hung out my physician's shingle in the city of Rockford, where there were more colored than white people.
I saw an opportunity for my church in the city of my adoption, and fixed on Holt to help get it up. But being a Northern man, he preferred work in the North. Besides this, he had a family dependent upon him, five with Julia, who had just graduated and gone South to teach; so he did not see his way clear to take hold of the mission.
I knew that Wilson was my next best man—pious and persistent, tactful and talented. Soon, by united effort, Wilson and myself had effected the organization of a church that we believed would become a power for good in that community.
I had no reason to complain of the practice that came to me in this city of twelve thousand Negro population.
There were a large class of intelligent, respectable, well-to-do colored people in Rockford; so that what with the friends I made professionally, what with those I made socially, and what with having my classmate as pastor, life went pretty well with me. Moreover, being a Northern man, the open hospitality of the people, their social and religious life, and the picturesque dialect of the untutored of them—these all kept me busy making shorthand notes of the things I saw and heard in my new world. From these notes, begun from my first hour in Rockford, I am able to continue this history.
Wilson and I kept bachelor's hall until our church was organized. That same week he went to live with two of our members, Mr. and Mrs. A. G. Harper, who had a comfortable, tasteful home; for he was a fine shoemaker and she a trained nurse. Mrs. Harper was necessarily, therefore, much away from home. The burden of housekeeping, however, and the care of little Alfred, Junior, a winsome chap in frocks, fell on the capable shoulders of Mrs. Harper's younger sister, Miss Alma May Montague, an interesting girl in the twenties.
A year after Wilson left me to continue keeping bachelor's hall I was able to do better by the race and better by Holt than if I had succeeded in getting him as my pastor.
A vacancy occured in the faculty of the Rockford Normal and Industrial College. This was a State co-edu-cational institution manned by a colored president and faculty.
The president, one of the older Norwalk men, and myself were good friends. Besides that, I was on good terms with the white Board of Trustees. One of the most influential of these having come South and built the Rockford street-car lines, knew Holt personally; for he had helped my classmate in school. These influences combined to elevate David J. Holt to the vacant professorship of rhetoric.
He moved South during the summer and began work in September. Julia, who had been teaching in the South, so impressed the president, that he had made her teacher in the model school of Rockford College. This work gave her children as pupils. Unfortunately, however, in March the president A. F. Garnet, died of pneumonia.
Who does not know that small communities breed cabals and jealousies? Therefore, rather than put a brand new man or one longer connected with the school in the vacant presidency, the trustees thought it wiser to elevate Holt to that dignity.
This they did; he was every way eminently fitted for the position. The new president used his influence to have Augustus Fairfax, who had been teaching English, appointed to the vacant professorship of rhetoric in Rockford.
Though Julia Holt had been appointed to a position in Rockford college, an important position, too, she was quite young and a mere sylph of a figure. She was under usual height, not what you would call a handsome girl; but her high soul so shone out in her fine eyes, hazel and frank, and she had so much of her father's noble mein, tactful manner and vivacious spirit, that those who came in contact with her conceded her fitness for her position and usually thought her a beautiful woman.
As for the quasi ward of Holt and myself, Augustus Fairfax, the sometime Anonymous—how much education, time and contact had done for his appearance and manners since I first met him on the platform at Norwalk depot! There was that in the bearing of the pleasant-faced, smooth-black young man, so easy in his manners, so pleasing in address that bespoke the man of self-respect, culture and mental power. Modest, frank, earnest and genial, he looked the gentleman and professor.
To no mean position had my friend Holt been promoted; for Rockford State Normal College, built at a cost of eighty, and receiving an annual appropriation of fifteen thousand dollars, consisted of six men and five women teachers, and of one hundred and fifty young men and two hundred young women students. The substantial, commodious, beautiful four-story brick T-shaped college building was situated on a beautiful plateau overlooking the city towards the west. Discipline is of unspeakable importance in a higher mixed school; therefore all the teachers, for the purpose of discipline, were required to live in the building, except the president. He had a house.
The school property, comprising thirty acres, had before the war been the estate of Dr. Warren Pogue, an aristocratic Southern gentleman. The president's residence was the fine, large, old pressed-brick two-story mansion of ten ample, high, elegantly finished rooms— downstairs a study, two parlors, a sitting and a dining room.
Holt said he never would have gone to the expense of furnishing becomingly a rich man's house, if he had not felt that his position demanded that he do so. He and Mrs. Holt had excellent taste; so the elegantly finished white man's house was furnished throughout in quiet, simple elegance.
I know enough about the world to know that the Holts' home was, in refinement, not behind what would be expected of a white family in a similar position.
Some Rockford Folks.
"Let not ambition mock their useful toil, The'r homely joys, and destiny obscure; Nor grandeur hear, with disdainful smile, The short and simple annals of the poor."
—Gray's Elegy.
Dr. Joseph Wade had no reason to complain of life. Had I not a large, growing, paying practice? Then think of having lifelong friends in Rockford—President David J. Holt, Professor Augustus Fairfax, Rev. Robt. N. Wilson and Mrs. Holt and Miss Julia.
Many a fellow going from school out into the world goes out into what, so far as his former associates are concerned, is a wilderness, where, in being the only educated man of color in the place, he is monarch of all he surveys; but it mightily sweetens being somebody and having something, to be able to be somebody and have something, surrounded by friends, who have grown up with one.
Now, in Rockford there were not a few college bred men and women besides my school friends.
Yes; the lines had fallen to me in pleasant places—in very pleasant places indeed.
I knew the city's highways and byways and the peopie, and took pleasure in making my school friends acquainted with the same. Some of the older—that is, the dialect talking folks, said this: "Wharevah you see one dem new folks whar done come heah, you almos' sho to see mo' of 'em!"
Rockford is one of the slow, conservative cities where everybody knows everybody. Hence the city had time to notice strangers. Your big bustling up-to-date city— oh, the pity of it!—has no time to do this.
This is why, I suppose, the following was said of the Norwalk coterie: "Neva did see sich folks to ramble 'bout gitten 'quainted wid everbody, an' all de time axin' questions." We heard some very romantic stories about both races, and got acquainted with some highly interesting characters by our rambling about.
One of these was Jeter Horn—"ole drunken Jeta," as he was called. He was remarkable, not because he was a drunkard—for indeed there were plenty of drunkards of both races around town—but what was remarkable about Jeter Horn was his fondness, when half-tight, for using grandlioquent or high-flown language. President Holt laughingly declared that if Jeter had been educated he would be a poetic orator. He was about fifty, ginger-cake colored, the usual height, slight built but robust. It was a common sight to see him half drunk, his head thrown back, his eyes rolling, his hat in his right hand, go stepping high, wide and frolicsome down the street— he eschewed the sidewalk when tight—the meantime holding his arms off from his body as a hen holds her wings when about to fly, and in a loud, mellow voice getting off a rigmarole of nonsense the ilk of the following: "I is a man you don't see every day. Skimmed milk masquerades fo' cream. Circumstances alters cases. Ef I'm not correct, correct I, Jeta. Many prophets of evil, whar done seed visions an' dreamed dreams, has done lif up deir onsanctified voices an' saed: 'Ole Jeta ain't long fuh dis worl'. But dem same prophets has gone to try de vas' langth of an onknoan eternity; but heah I is, a free creature of Gawd, walkin' 'bout dis ole Rockford, ketchin' de cool breeze, eatin' ma co'n bread an' herins, an' drinkin' ma whiskey."
Jeter was quiet enough when sober, and inoffensive when drunk; so the authorities did not lock him up; but laughed at his nonsense as everybody else did. He worked at white-washing, wood-sawing and gardening, and made his home with anyone that would tolerate him. This, respectable people never did for very long; so he was at first one place and then another, usually among the shiftless and disreputable.
Another interesting character was Ezekiel Brown— called Prophet Zeke and Uncle Zeke. He was Jeter's age, a trifle darker than he; not gray except his mustache, the only hair of consequence that he had; for he was as bald as a baby on top of his head.
He was an active, robust man of intelligence, as his keen face indicated; but unlike Jeter, he was highly respected by both races. He worked in the cemetery, being employed by the city. In addition to this, many wealthy families gave him the job of caring for their plots; so that he made, between the city and these, a very good living indeed. He had no family; so he made his home with his niece and her husband, a fine bricklayer. The cemetery, a beautiful place beautifully kept, adjoined the park, equally beautiful. Wilson, Fairfax, the Holts and myself, in our strolls in the cemetery and park, saw much of Zeke Brown, who had evidently taken the "furriners," as he called us, to his heart. It seems to me he knew the family history of everybody in town— white and black; and he liked nothing so well as to entertain the "furriners" with present-day gossip and past-day history of both races. Consequently, we heard in his picturesque dialect some interesting tales of Rockford people; for the old man was very much flattered by our noticing him to the extent of seeking him.
Though Rockford College was outside of the city limits, yet I believe the Holts, because I piloted them around, knew as much about the city as I did, who as a physician had to go in every nook and corner.
I did not have so many opportunities to take Julia out to drive, however, after Fairfax came to town; for though he walked she preferred strolling with him to driving with me. This would not be worth mentioning but for the fact that the young lady preferred walking with Fairfax to driving with any of her admirers, among whom may be mentioned the other single man in Rockford faculty, Professor Allen Garnet, the former president's nephew; Mr. Henry Blake, Rockford's most successful colored lawyer, and Mr. Warren Pogue, one of Rockford's most well-to-do young colored green grocers.
This preference led the Holts to see not, with displeasure, that Julia and Fairfax were under the spell of the little blind god. I told Holt how I saw it was going to be between these two if they ever got a chance. I saw it when he told me how Julia wept and laughed with Fairfax when he found peace.
I knew Holt well enough to know that he was very well satisfied at the turn of his daughter's heart affairs had taken; and I think I do Mrs. Myrtle A. Holt no injustice in saying that while she had the highest respect for Fairfax, and would not for worlds have admitted that she harbored color prejudice, yet, nevertheless, I am sure I do her no injustice in saying that she would have been better satisfied if Julia's choice had fallen on a man not so dark as Fairfax was. Indeed, I know that she preferred Mr. Warren Pogue above all of Julia's suitors.
And who was Warren Pogue? He was the son of Dr. Warren Pogue, a rich white man, Jeter Horn's exmaster, who was notorious in Rockford as a drunkard and libertine. He had both a white and colored family. After having been a notorious drunkard around Rockford for so many years that his name became a synonym for sottish libertine, he had recently died in the insane asylum of softening of the brain. His son lived with his mother. He was an upright gentleman and a fine, successful business man. But his antecedents being what they were, Holt charged his wife with preferring Pogue above all of Julia's suitors, simply because he looked like a white man. (Both Blake and Garnet were about Julia's color.) Mrs. Holt's defense of herself was her weeping on her husband's shoulder and crying: "Dave, you're always accusing me of being prejudiced to color! and you know very well I am no such thing!"
Holt told me he simply kissed her and laughed at her.
Give Sorrow Words.
"Give sorrow words; the grief that does not speak Whispers the o'erfraught heart, and bids it break."
—Macbeth, Act IV., Scene III.
Apropos of my remarking to Holt that I had long ago surmised how it was going to turn out with Julia and Fairfax, he said: "Wade, old fellow, it does seem to me you see soul things before anybody else sees them."
I noticed that Holt did not commit himself as to the opinion he had held about Fairfax and his daughter. Fathers are not usually very voluble respecting their feelings about their daughter's marriage; for I suppose that though a father knows his daughter's happiness is bound up in her marriage, yet he does not relish the thought of some other man being more to his daughter than he is, just as a mother rarely enjoys having a woman come between herself and her son.
I don't know that my spiritual or psychological insight is as keen as my friend thinks it is; but I am altogether certain that nothing, not even a human body, so interests me as does a human soul. I said this to Wilson once. He replied: "If that's so, you ought to be a minister." I might have been a trifle vain over supposed ability to deal with soul problems, but for an experience that completely emptied me of vanity—an experience I had with Miss Belle Clay, a patient I was called to see soon after I hung out my shingle in Rockford.
Miss Clay's folks were in good circumstances and highly respected. Her father, for years and years, had been night-watchman at Maitland's factory, one of the largest of the kind in the State. One of the most loving and sunny souls you ever saw was her mother, a short, cream-colored woman with what once was coal black but then mixed, silky hair.
In younger days she was accounted the handsomest woman in Rockford, which never was poor in women of color pleasant to look to. Except that she was taller, Belle was the exact image of her mother, a wholesome, warm-hearted little thing with good, practical sense, a teacher in the public school.
"Canst thou not minister to a mind diseased; Pluck from the memory a rooted sorrow?" asks Macbeth of the physician engaged for his wife insane with remorse because of the murder of King Duncan.
I felt that my engagement for Miss Clay was practically asking me the same question—asking me, "Canst not thou minister to a mind diseased?" For the young lady's trouble was wholly mental.
She had been engaged to Dan Neal—handsome Dan, a great beau at;d considered one of the finest catches in town. And be it known that there were about six marriageable girls to every marriageable fellow in what was considered the highest social circle of Rockford.
Dan had gone North—he was a barber, and had the next best paying white shop in town—and the next news was that he was married. He had married a Rockford girl that Belle had cut out. Poor Belle had the brain fever over his marriage. I saw that no remedy a druggist can compound could reach her case. I thought of these other words from Macbeth: ''Give sorrow words: the grief that does not speak Whispers the o'er fraught heart and bids it break." Accordingly, I sought to give grief a tongue. I strove to win her confidence in order to get her to pour out her heart's sorrow to me. I visited her, lent her books, took her out socially, took her to walk and to drive for no other purpose than to give her a chance to talk to me about Neal. My treatment worked like a charm. By the time the Holts came South (and, by the way, she and Julia struck up a wonderful friendship) Belle seemed to have grown ashamed to talk about Dan. I was glad enough, too; for I can tell you, I had begun not to relish hearing her talk of him.
Yes; the treatment worked like a charm so far as she was concerned; but as for me? Well, now, that's the part of my experience that emptied me of all vanity about ability to solve soul problems, for I had solved her problem by making one of my own.
What a goose I was! What else could be expected of a young susceptible man's pitying a girl with eyes and hair like midnight, and a complexion like a luscious pear? Wilson laughed at me and said: "Old fellow, it will not do for you to administer the same remedy to all young lady patients with Miss Clay's trouble." I said: "I don't want to try to."
A year and a half after Fairfax's appointment in Rockford College, he and Julia had set the day. It was to be in September. In March preceding that September I had a buggy smashed—a blessed smash!
I had to knock old Molly in the head. She stepped in a hole and broke her left foreleg. I hated it like all the world, for she was an affectionate and intelligent old thing, and you do get so attached to an animal that you've had for some time.
I prefer a faithful, loving dog or horse to a deceitful person every time! You see, you don't expect much of a dumb brute; so its shortcomings don't hurt you as a person's do. My new horse, Lary, a barrel-like, shortlegged, powerful bay gelding, was a fiery rascal! but I felt confident that I could manage him.
On the seventh of March, I was driving past the Graded School where Belle taught. It was recess time. Young Africa, seven hundred strong, were filling the air with the glad noise of liberty. Lary pricked up his ears. When I was opposite the girls' play-yard one of Belle's girls—a mischievous little minx—threw a paper bag with some banana peelings in it over the fence towards me, shouting with mischief in her voice: "There, Dr. Wade! Miss Belle sent 'em to you!"
Perhaps I was not as alert to Lary's movements as I might have been. I confess I was craning my neck to get a peep at Belle. The bag split, spilling the peelings. The high March wind blew the rattling bag right in Lary's face. Then and there the old fellow danced the kan kan, whirling around like a flash, hurling me out of the buggy, my head hitting the curbing.
The foolish horse—well, they say the only reason he ran so hard was because he couldn't fly! He had made kindling wood of the buggy before some street hands stopped him. Recess was over when I regained consciousness, and I found myself on a lounge in the Principal's office, alone with Belle.
The teachers, some of them, said—and there were ten in the building—that they did not know how in the world Belle got down stairs and out in the street. Of course I didn't know. And I assure you I didn't care. It was enough for me to open my eyes and, above me, see her sweet eyes swimming with tears.
That was in March. May fourth we were married, Wilson tying the knot. I didn't know how popular we were until our wedding took place. It was a home affair; but nevertheless Zeke Brown had this to say about it: "Dem folks had fine doins, an' some o' de bes' eatins a man evah shet his teeth down on."
Some time before, I had bought a lot and built a house, where I was keeping bachelor's quarters, taking my meals at Maria James', one of Rockford's crack cooks. Somebody has said it takes more than good land and tools to make a good farm—there is needed a good farmer to do that. Equally true is it that a fine house and furniture do not of themselves make a home; it takes a woman that knows how to do that. Belle knew how. I got a house and furniture, and she did the rest—that is, made a beautiful homelike home; not a small achievement by any means. Many a professional man in marrying his intellectual equal weds a woman that is as helpless as a baby about making a home. That's usually because of the foolish kind of seminary education that totally ignores the fact that God made woman to be a mother and home-maker. Belle, however, got her housewifely skill in the best possible of all schools of domestic training, namely, in a well-regulated home.
I told Belle I think I got the better of the bargain in our marriage.
Just Among Ourselves.
"We may live without poetry, music and art; We may live without conscience, and live without heart; We may live without friends; we may live without books; But civilized man cannot live without cooks."
—Lucile, Owen Meredith (Lord Lytton.) Love makes our world beautiful. Yes, and it gives us an interest in all things connected with the loved one.
Now there was Lary—I would have liked to keep him because of what he had done to help me win Belle; but after breaking my buggy, the old goose was always trying to run away! Humph! Horse nature and human nature, if either once takes bit in teeth and runs off and smashes up things, either a horse or a person finds it harder to keep from running off ever after that.
Yes; it spoils a horse to let him run off once. Belle begged me to sell him, which I did very reluctantly; for I felt kindly towards Lary for helping me to win Belle.
Then, too, there was that girl that frightened Lary. The day we had been married one month we were to have to dinner the Holts, Fairfax and Wilson—just among ourselves, we said.
I was driving rapidly home to meet our guests just as public school let out. I saw on the street the girl that had thrown towards me the paper bag that had frightened Lary. I stopped and said: "Come here, sissie, will you please?"
She dropped her head and ambled shame-facedly up to the buggy. I suppose she thought I was going to scold her. I took out of my vest pocket a brand new silver dollar and gave it to her.
She ducked her head in acknowledgment of the gift, too surprised to speak. While I drove off, I looked back and saw her companions gathered around her where she stood, riveted with astonishment, as she exclaimed in awed tones: "Look what Miss Belle's husband done gin me!"
That gift was an expression of my joy at being Miss Belle's husband.
When I got home, I found only Professor Fairfax and his fiancee, Miss Julia Holt. Neither her parents nor Rev. Robert Wilson could come.
Well, now, didn't we four have a most delightful time, though! Fairfax was just bubbling over with fun. Good food doesn't usually put people out of humor. He insisted on calling me Mr. Dear, and Belle, Mrs. Darling. You can imagine why.
When we were nearly through with dessert, we had two callers, Zeke Brown and Mom Kitty Parker. They met each other, at the gate. Uncle Zeke, in his "'galia, was gwine to a turnin' out of de de lodge. He jes drapt in to ax de Docta to call by an' see my niece, Nancy. She's sort o' poo'ly to-day."
Mom Kitty had "come to see her son, de Docta, who done ma'ied, an' my li'l baby Belle. Lawd, chillun, I didn't have no idee you all was havin' a big dinin', else I wouldn't a come."
Mom Kitty's husband drove a delivery wagon for a great dry goods firm. All five of their children were married and living away from Rockford. She was a monthly nurse, tall, walnut wood colored, powerful of frame, with the sweetest voice, widely known, and loved by both races for her sweet motherliness. Every physician in the town knew he could depend on Mom Kitty. She was off with one of her daughters when we were married.
I had got her up from a severe sickness, and Belle was one of her babies; hence, as soon as she got home, she had "come to see my children in deir new home."
We insisted that she and Zeke should have some of our dinner. Zeke at first demurred, saying: "I ain't used to eatin' wid de white folks. 'Cause you all is de poure quality."
When they got to the table, however, the old man got over his real or assumed embarrassment. His spirits arose as the good things to eat descended. He grew quite garrulous.
"I tell you, 'tain't nothin' sweetens vittals like hard wuk."
"Preach it, Prophet Ezekiel," mischievously ejaculated Fairfax, staring at Julia, who, though usually a light eater, had, by reason of her morning classwork and the walk, done ample justice to the dinner and was now having her third helping of cream.
"Ef I'm a prophet," grinned the old man towards Julia, "I ken tell you, Miss Julia, dat de nighes' way to a man's heart is by way of his mouf."
"Ain't hit de dyin'—de livin' truth!" ejaculated Mom Kltty. "Belle, honey," continued she, beaming on her, "ef you want to manage de docta, you feed him, chile."
"Yas," put in Zeke, "I don't ker ef de docta is a poure white black man, I bet he gits mad when be wants his grub same as I does. When I comes home an' dinna ain't ready, I don't want Nancy to go wastin' time a tell-in' why 'tain't ready! I wants dat grub! She ken tell why she didn't have it ready arter I done et. Den I ken 'predate de beauty o' de reasons; for' a hongry man ain't got a bit mo' reason den a rabbit. Haw! Haw! Haw! Haw!" laughed his big mouth.
"Pretty lords of creation, you men are!" replied Belle in feigned scorn. "I don't see what makes them so foolish about a little something to eat," added Julia, "women are not so unreasonable."
"I tell you de cause why," said Zeke. " 'Cause de women is de cooks, an' dey ain't got nobody to git mad wid. Hit's like de brides dat make 'tend dey don't ker whut dey has to eat. I've noticed dat when a bride says one thing to eat 'same as another, hit's a sho thing dat gal don't know how to cook! Haw! Haw! Haw!
"I ain't treadin' on yo' co'ns, is I, Miss Belle? 'cause dis dinna speaks fo' you." Belle looked pleased.
"You are not treading on mine, Uncle Zeke; for I know how to cook," said Julia; "besides that, I'm not a bride; but if I ever become one," she continued, a flush on either cheek, "I'll profit by your advice to Belle, Mom Kitty," she added, addressing the old lady, who looked pleased.
"Ef you evah become one!" Zeke reepated slowly, looking at the flushing Julia teasingly, with one eye shut; "ef you evah become one! Humph! Why, a little bird done tole me, ef you should die widout becomin' a bride, you'd have a frown on yo' purty face in de coffin, Miss Julia! Haw! Haw! Haw!"
We all joined him in the laugh.
Belle was about to help me to some more cream, and said banteringly to Fairfax: "Mr. Professor of Gab, join Dr. Mindcure in some more cream?'' Fairfax arose, and from behind his chair gave Belle a most profound bow and said as solemnly as a judge: "No, I thank you, Madame Darling. More of the chilled quintessence of the fluid product of the animal sacred to the Hindoos, I will not take; for so copiously have I indulged the clamorous calls of a craving appetite, that an oppressive sense of inward fullness admonishes me, admonishes me most eloquently to desist from further participation."
We all laughed at this but Julia. She said: "Gus, you remind me of Jeter Horn."
Zeke chuckled: "Good souls! Ef I spit dictionary like dat, hit would knock all de teeth outen my head, so I couldn't chaw my vittals!"
Fairfax delighted to put his fun in the form of the mock heroic. I've seen him amuse himself by talking in grandiloquent terms to a group of workmen who seemed to enjoy it as much as he did, just as I have seen the ignorant country people who used to go to Norwalk commencement sit spellbound under the Latin salutatory. I've often heard them say: "Dat fust speech wus de purt-tiest one of all." "My! ain't dat Latin sweet!" "Hit sholy is purty talk."
I am sure these people didn't understand a word of what was said; but the very flow of Latin appealed to their sense of music, just as big words, more musical than short ones, appeal to the Negro musical ear.
A Disturbed Siesta.
"Oh happy state! when souls each other draw, When love is liberty, and nature is law: All then is full, possessing and possessed, No craving void left aching in the breast: Ev'n thought meets thought, ere from the lips it part, And each warm wish springs mutual from the heart."
—Eloisa to Abelard—Pope.
After dinner, Julia and her lover returned to the college. Uncle Zeke went to "de turnin' out of de lodge," and I went to see his niece. Mom Kitty announced her determination to stay and go from our house to preaching at her church just two blocks away.
When I returned from seeing Zeke's niece, I found Mom and Belle deep in the mystery of flowers in the front yard.
I had been up the night before, and expected to be up the coming night. Consequently, I said: "Mom Kitty, I'm almost dead for sleep. Let Belle entertain you, won't you, and excuse me to see if I can't get a nap?"
"What you wastin' yo' brath axin' me dat fo', son? Cose I'll 'xcuse you. Go on, boy, an' res' yo'sef. I wonder you ain't broke down 'fo' now."
Our house of six rooms had a square front hall on both floors. The downstairs hall we used as a summer sitting room. In the one upstairs, Belle had her machine and a large, comfortable lounge. I threw myself down on this and was soon fast asleep. The reason I "ain't broke down 'fo' now" is, I can go to sleep for fifteen or twenty minutes and wake up as refreshed as if I had slept for hours.
I don't know how long I had been asleep when the voices of Mom Kitty and my wife awoke me. They were in the lower hall. I only know I was perfectly refreshed. I could hear every word they said; for from the way they talked I presume Belle thought I was in our room resting. I looked down over the banister and saw my wife and the old lady, side by side on the little sofa.
"Yas, honey, I was mighty 'fraid you was gwine to marry de docta, still a-lovin' Dan Neal, like Jinnie Cross married Ira Lewis still a-lovin' my nephew, Dallas Leonard. But I see yo' love yo' husban'."
"Love him! Mom Kitty, I just wonder and wonder how I ever could have been wrapped up in Dan Neal!"
I felt that I ought to be somewhere else; but I couldn't move without betraying the fact that I had already overheard them; so I saw nothing left for me to do but to keep quiet.
"Gals sometimes fool themselves an' marry somebody dey don't love 'cause dey can't get dem dey do love; but any gal dat does dat will suffer jes like Jinnie Cross did. Poo' thing! How she did suffer!"
"How was that, Mom Kitty? I never heard about her."
"Hit's a long story, my chile. Do you want to hear it?"
"Yes, maam; tell me about it, since you think her case resembles mine."
"No, honey; 'tain't like youn; but like youn mought have been. Let me tell you 'bout Jinnie."
I knew Mom Kitty's power of graphic narrative; and as I had been refreshed, I took out my note-book and took down in shorthand the story as she told Belle as nearly as I could in her own language. It is to be borne in mind, however, that no putting of Mom Kitty's story in cold type could do justice to her wonderful telling of it out of the wealth of her love and experience, and in her marvelous voice.
Jennie Cross' Story.
"Then gently scan your brother man, Still gentler sister woman; Tho' they may gang a kennin wrang To step aside is human."
—Burns.
"Jinnie Cross' mother's name was Marthy Ann. Jin-nie's father was one of de Normans, and you know dey has always been some of de bigges' white folks in town. Her daddy got kilt in de fust year of de war. Arter de war Marthy sent de little thing North to her half brother's wife whar Jinnie staid till she was eighteen. Den a white woman wanted to take Jinnie to Europe as lady's maid, but Marthy wouldn't let Jinnie go, 'fraid her chile would git off somewhere an' forgit all 'bout her mammy; so she had Jinnie to come home to Rockford.
"I neva sot eyes on a purtier gal dan Marthy Ann Cross was de time she tuk up wid young Tom Norman. You know Belle, befo' de wah, lots o' good lookin' free culled women lived wid white men, an' nuthin' wa'n't thought of it nuther. Dem women was de 'ristocrats in dem days, 'cause most of de white men was de riches' men in town. De wah has done changed all dat, you know."
"Yes," replied Belle, "and it's a blessed thing that it has!"
"Yas, chile, I think so, too; fo' in dem days a nice lookin' free gal like yo' looked forward to dat as de mos' natural thing in de worl'."
" Yes, Mom Kitty; and I believe there are just lots of white men who are mad because good looking colored girls nowadays want to be decent. But I am interrupting your story."
"As I was sayin', when Marthy took up wid Norman she was a little plump thing jes like you, Belle. She had dese meltin' brown eyes, an' dis creamy skin, an' dis kind o' wavy hair dat looks dark 'cept when de sun's on it; den it looks gold. When Jinnie come home at eighteen she was de very spit of her mammy when Marthy took up wid dat white man.
"To be young, an' so purty, Jinnie, was mighty mis'-r'ble. Poo' thing ! She had 'nough to make her mis'-r'ble. Fust thing was she had been engaged to my nephew, Dallas Leonard, who was a lawyer in de Southwest. He won a big case, an' de white lawyers he won it over got so mad dat dey picked a fuss wid him, an' in de fight shot him.
"Nothin' was done wid 'em. Jennie was mighty mis'-r'ble, poo' thing!
"Next thing to make her mis'r'ble was, dat when she she come home, she foun' her mammy married to Jim Gains, a mighty good lookin' yaller man, but mean an' coarse. Jinnie come cryin' to me, an' tellin' me dat Jim Gains had done gin it out dat he didn't want no white man's chile in his home. Him an' Marthy had it hot an' heavy 'bout Jinnie!
"Soon arter dat Marthy died. 'Cose Jinnie didn't want to stay at his house even befo' her mammy died; you know she wa'n't gwine to stay when her mammy was gone, though ole Jim was willin' fo' her to stay den—de ole rascal!"
"I know what you mean!" said Belle.
"Jinnie hadn't been in Rockford but little over a year when I heerd she was engaged to Ira Lewis, a steady, good man, runner fo' de fust National Bank, whar he'd been fo' years an' years. Dey thought nobody was like him; an' dey would have trusted him wid any amount o' money to take it to de tother side of de worl'.
"Now, I knowed how she felt towards Dallas; so one day she was at my house; I says to her, says I, 'How is it, Jinnie, you's gwine to marry Ira Lewis?' "Den she ups an' tells me all her troubles. She says, says she, 'Mom Kitty, you know since mamma died, I've sewin' round in big white folks' families. I make good money, an' de women treat me all right; an' de men, too—dat's it, Mom Kitty, de men is too nice. You know what my mother did; an', Mom Kitty, I'm just 'fraid; so I'm goin' to get married, an' have a home of my own.' " 'Well,' says I, 'you don't make 'tend to love Ira, den?' " 'Mom,' she said, an' two tears jumped up in her sweet eyes, *de man I love is in his grave!"' I felt my own throat grow tight at this and I looked over the banisters and saw that Belle was using her handkerchief.
"' Honey,' says I, 'you oughtn't to marry dat man jes to git a home, an' a protector; you oughtn't to marry Ira ef you don't love him.' "
"She said, says she, 'Mom Kitty, I love Ira as much as I'm evah gwine to love any man 'cept Dallas.' "I argued an' argued wid her, but I couldn't convince her; so she an' Ira got married. He wasn't a bad lookin' man; but honey, he was one mo' black man! Jinnie felt so bad 'bout not havin' no lawful father dat she tried to git away fum herse'f by marryin' a black man. De blacker he was de better she was pleased. She said to me: 'I wish I was as black as he is! Den dese white Satans wouldn't be followin' me wid dey eyes evah time I got on de street. Some of 'em can look at a good lookin' cullud gal in sech a way as to make you want to cuss.' "Well,Jennie's marriage turned out jes like I 'xpected. Ira was dat proud of her! He jes thought everything she done was jes right.' He encouraged her to go out wid young men same as ef she wa'n't married. Ira Lewis was a good man—an' de greatest man fuh lodge an' church you evah sawl "Every blessed night of de week dat man would be gone to some society er religious meetin'; fuh he was a big deycon in de church, a big Odd Fellow, a big Mason; in fact, a big evahthing he could jine. I nevah seed sich a jiner in all my bo'n days l He encouraged Jinnie to have a house full of young folks to keep her company 'cause she wa'n't no church member; so when Jra would be gone to church meetin's, prayer meetin's, lodge meet-in's an' things, Jinnie would be at home wid a house full o' gals an' boys, havin' a high ole time, or else gone wid some young man* to a party or to de theater.
"Ira nevah stopped to think dat he ought to give mo' of his time to his wife; 'cause, sides bein' a sinna, she wa'n't nothin' but a chile in age to him.
"Things went on dis way fo' a good while. By 'n by, one night at a festival I overheerd Jack Baxter an' some mo' boys talkin' 'bout Jinnie. I knowed fum what Jack said, dat he was in love wid her. He was a good lookin' young man, of good family, an' mighty well-to-do in de fish an' oyster business; but he was a sinna like Jinnie, an' a little wild.
"De next week I went to Jinnie's house one night to talk to her 'bout a dress I wanted her to make fo' me. I foun' her an' Jack siftin' up together alone—Ira gone, as usual. I knowed dey was dead in love wid each other time I laid eyes on 'em. I went to see her 'bout de dress de next day, an' foun' her alone. 'Cause she didn't have no mammy I tuk it on mysef to take her to task 'bout Jack. But she cried, an' kicked up an' went on scan'-lous. She 'dared befo' Gawd she wa'n't studyin' 'bout Jack! She didn't love nobody but her Ira, de bes' husban' dat evah drawed breath!
"Dat was in February. De fou'th Sunday in March our church had a big baptisin' in de pond in de park. It was so cold dey had to break de ice. De docta tole Ira he wa'n't strong 'nough to stan' gwine in de ice-water, an' fo' him not to go in wid de candidates; but he was a big deycon, an' he 'lowed dat ef he went down in de wata in faith, Gawd wa'n't gwine to let his faithful chile ketch cold; so he went in.
"De Wednesday night follerin', Jack Baxter took Jinnie to de theater. Dey met Jeta Horn drunk when dey was comin' back, an' he 'gun to jaw arter 'em an' say Jack was in love wid Jinnie, an' dat he was gwine to tell Ira. Ole Jeta lived next door to Ira; he wa'n't so low down as he is now.
"Sam Young, the hackman, boarded at my house. Thursday night, fo' a wonder, Ira Lewis didn't go to no meetin', but come home early, an' sot aroun' sort o' quiet. I happened to be dah when he come. So was Jack Baxter, to take Jinnie to a party at Palmer's. Ira was mighty sullen an' quiet. I seed dat Jack an' Jinnie was scart. Dey thought ole Jeta had been talkin' to Ira. Guilty conscience don't need no accuser. Jinnie was might oneasy. She axed Ira what was de matta wid him. He sed:'Nuthin'. When she axed must she break her engagement to go out wid Jack, he answered sort o' short: 'Cose not I' an' 'xcused hi'se'f an' went to bed.
"I seed things was gittin' billious, so I bid 'em goodnight an' started home.
"But I forgot my reticule dat had some money in it. I stepped back to get it. De outer hall doo' was unlocked; when I stepped inside an' was about to knock at de inner doo', my hand was jes' paralyzed in de act of knockin' by overhearin' Jack pleadin' wid Jinnie to take de nine o'clock train an' run off wid him, 'cause Ira had done foun' 'em out!
"He said he had one hundred dollars in his pocket, when she objected 'bout money.
"He had collected de money to deposit in de bank. Then she objected 'bout bein' stopped; an' he said all they had to do was to git Sam Young to drive by de depot, git out, an' tell him they would walk to de party at Palmer's.
"Den she consented. She was already dressed fo' de party, an' I got out o' dat house an' fairly flew home!"
"Why didn't you call Ira?" asked Belle.
" 'Cause I didn't believe Ira knowed dey was in love, an' I wanted to stop 'em fum runnin' away widout let-tin' him know anything 'bout it."
"Oh, I see," said Belle.
"So I wanted to see Sam Young befo' he started out to git 'em to take 'em to de party, an' git him to bring 'em all unbeknown to my house, so dat dey would miss de nine o'clock train, de only one out of Rockford till next day."
"Oh, yes, I see your plan," said Belle.
"Well, when I got home a-puffin' an' a-blowin' Sam had on his overcoat, jes gwine out. I says, 'Sam,' says I, 'whar you gwine?' 'I'm gwine to git Jack Baxter an' Mrs. Lewis to take 'em over to Palmer's; dey is havin' a big party to-night.' " 'Sam,' says I, 'I want you to bring 'em by here fust; I'm got some business wid 'em.' "I had my orders to have 'em at Henry Palmer's house by nine o'clock; an' its fifteen minutes arter eight now; so I'll not have time to bring 'em 'roun' here.
" 'Sam,' says I (gittin' desp'rate), 'I mus' see dem folks befo' dey go to de party! I'll give you a dollar ef you'll bring em by here!"
"He said: 'I wouldn't do it ef you gin me ten l' "Sam was one o' dese hard-headed niggas wid jes sense 'nough to be muleish; I knowed he wouldn't do it ef he said he wa'n't gwine to do it.
"I was strong in dem days, an' Sam was nothin' but a little thin runt of a man. He got my nigga up; an' so I backed myse'f up agin' de doo' an' sed to him: 'Ef you don't do what I want you to, you slia'n't go out dis house!' "Den he started to try to get out of de winder. I went to him, I did, an' cotch him by de shoulder to hold him, but I couldn't hold him handy dat way, so I flung him down on de floo' an* sot on him. He kicked! He squirmed, but it wa'n't no ttse, 'cause I was heavy an' strong in dem days. I belt him down until I knowed he'd make 'em miss de train; then I let him git up."
I came near betraying myself with laughter when I looked over the banister and saw the old lady in great glee showing Belle how she "sot on Sam." Belle was convulsed, too.
"When Sam had gone, I struck out, full tilt, fo' de depot. I foun' Jinnie an' Jack there. Dey had walked, but had missed de train!
"Den I lit into 'em 'bout deir foolishness. Dey owned up everything an' cried like babies; fo' dey sho' did love fit to kill!
"I got Jack to take Jinnie back home jes like as ef dey had been to de party. Next day Jack left town.
"I spent all day wid Jinnie; an' neva in all my bo'n days had I seen anybody so broke up as she was!—all tore to pieces twixt love fo' Jack an' remorse fo' tryin' to run away fum her husban'."
"Poor thing!" put in Belle.
"Ira didn't come home to no dinna. Dat made her worse! She cried an' prayed fo' forgiveness all day. Dat night when Ira come home (she an' him neva slept together), he went on to bed an' didn't say nothin' t' all to her. She prayed all dat night, an' befo' mornin' she got converted.
"Next mornin' she went to Ira's room gwine to confess everything to him, but she foun' him out of his head wid fever. He was gittin' de pneumonia fum gwine in de ice-water at de baptisin' was de reason he acted in de way dat like to scart Jack an' Jinnie out o' dey senses.
"Well, poo' Ira died of pneumonia, an' he neva did know Jinnie an' Jack was lovin'!"
"It was a blessed thing he didn't" said Belle.
"Yas, indeed, it was. Gawd was mighty good to Jinnie, anyhow, fo' Jack didn't come back till Ira had been dead a year. Den fo' a long while Jinnie wouldn't notice him 'cause she felt so bad 'bout tryin' to run away. Dis broke Jack up so dat he, too, got religion.
"Arter two years dey got married, an' dey are very happy up North now."
"Poor thing!" said Belle, after a thoughtful pause; "a guilty conscience and old Jeter Horn's drunken tongue made her take a very foolish step. How she did suffer!" "Yas, Belle, ef she had been a low-down gal, she wouldn't have suffered so; but she wanted to do right." "You certainly did a good part by them, Mom Kitty." "An' her an' Jack loves me to dis day; dey is alius sendin' me something nice."
"I'm thankful, so thankful," murmured Belle, "that I haven't a particle of interest in Dan Neal now. I love Dr. Wade as Jennie loves Jack."
"I b'lieve you do, honey, an' I'm mighty glad; fo* ef a gal marries widout love, an' den wakes up to fin' herse'f in love, but not wid her husban'—well, all I've got to say is dat sich a gal don't need nobody to tell her what hell's like; she knows!"
The two women were disturbed at this juncture by some one calling for me. When I went into my office, Belle clung to my arm with a tender light in her sweet eyes. She seemed surprised at the warmth of my goodbye caress.
Mom Kitty had gone when I returned from my visit. I took Belle in my arms and read some of my shorthand notes. Then she understood the warmth of my goodbye kiss. I said: "Eavesdroppers do not usually hear any good of themselves; I've been an exception."
It is not necessary to give her reply. Mom Kitty's story made us very grateful for our happy love.
Our Echoes Roll From Soul to Soul."
"Our echoes roll from soul to soul And grow forever and forever.
Blow, bugle blow, set the wild echoes flying."
—Tennyson.
"Dat Boy."
"He.......................................
Allured to brighter worlds and led the way."
—The Deserted Village—Goldsmith.
President F. R. Dale used to say: "Young gentlemen, no man can preach the Gospel with any more force than the power with which he lives it; for what the preacher is, counts for more than what he knows or says."
He was an illustration of his own saying. His face shone and he knew it not. He has, by reason of his character, been dominant in my life since I left school. In all these years, whenever I've been tempted to do that which is unworthy, I have seemed to feel that good man's hand on my shoulder holding me back, while I've seemed to hear his kind voice asking: "Why will you do that, sir?'' I bless God that I ever knew Dr. Dale!
My pastor, Rev. Robert N. Wilson, seemed to me to be another illustration of the truth of Dr. Dale's saying.
He was an eloquent speaker, deep thinker and a wide scholar; but it was Wilson, the man, that drew people. So simple, sympathetic and earnest was he that although ours was a denomination new among Rockford colored people, and our house of worship, one of the least attractive in town, nevertheless our church, in the face of most strenuous opposition, grew in numbers and power for good.
One of the most valuable additions to our church was Henry Blake, mentioned some pages back as one of Julia's admirers, a young lawyer that settled in Rockford about the time I did. He was a dapper, handsome fellow about Julia's color, that of a pecan—a man of fine talents and training.
He had been induced to hang out his shingle in the city of my adoption by Isaac Scattergood, a Quaker in whose family in the North, Blake had been brought up, Friend Scattergood was a finely proportioned, portly man, probably fifty, yet unmarried, who had gone South for his health, and who, just outside of town, conducted a large truck farm. Because Blake had joined our church, quite a friendship had sprung up between us and the kind hearted Friend—especially between him and myself; for he thought I had been of great use to him in securing for him an excellent truck farmer in John Hill, and a first-class housekeeper in Judah Hill, his wife, two people about the age of their employer.
Blake had gone into partnership with Gideon Grayson, a lawyer who had been in Rockford for years. The law firm of Grayson and Blake, however, did more business in three months than Grayson alone had done in as many years; for while Grayson was an intelligent, well-educated man and a good lawyer, he had been coquetting with politics—the bane of the Negro lawyer. Blake practiced law and let politics alone, while Grayson practiced politics and let law alone.
Grayson, a great, black, masterful six-footer, belonged to Rev. Walter Granville's church, one of the largest in town. The lawyer and the preacher were Such good friends and so much alike in appearance, they were spoken of as Grayson and Granville, the Law and the Gospel. Granville was practically a new man in Rockford : he was there three years before Wilson. Naturally, he and Wilson, both young men and new in town, were compared. Soon it began to be said: " 'Saul' Granville has slain his thousands, but 'David' Wilson his tens thousands. This opinion may explain why our church and its gifted pastor were often abused, even from the pulpit.
Wilson, be it said, was not Granville's superior in natural ability; my pastor was the other minister's superior in culture and piety alone; for Granville had only a smattering of training. How different a man he would have been under the influence that moulded Wilson. As it was, Granville was bombastic, not cultured; uppish, not dignified; sanctimonious, not pious; but worst of all, morally he was a rotten fish. Yet, he had one of the largest churches in town. How often does it happen that the Negro preacher with the largest following is not, by reason of lack of training and good character, morally uplifting his followers.
We lost a faithful member, a pillar, you may say, the Christmas before Belle and I were married; John Davis was his name. I attended him and therefore often met Wilson at his house. He was a consumptive. And how the old man did lean on Wilson! If the preacher did not arrive at the usual hour of his daily visit to the sick, it was pitiful to hear the old man say: "I wish dat boy would come!"
To me it was a beautiful sight to see how helpless Wilson felt in that sick-room, and yet to see that he was so perfect a comforter because he so felt. I used to think to myself, "It is sympathy that makes the minister, that is a good man, a king over hearts."
Christmas eve night the Sunday School teachers prepared the Christmas tree, for we were to have Christmas tree exercises Christmas night. After we got through dressing the tree, a party of us, including Wilson, Fairfax, Julia, Belle and myself, went to cheer the sick man, taking along gifts of necessaries.
Before we left, Wilson prayed. As we arose to go, the old man said in tremulous tones: "Chillun, ef I don't see you all no mo' I want you all to know I ain't got a doubt nor a fear. I bin follerin' Him nigh on forty yeahs an' I ain't got a doubt nor a fear. Don't be s'prised ef you come back arter Christmas an' I ain't heah; but Gawd done gin me a Chrismsa gif'!"
Sure enough he got his "Christmas gif'." He died Christmas morning.
In April of that year we lost another member, Sister Myra Jenkins, a widow all whose children were dead. She was a tall, angular, black woman of great piety and force of character. When Wilson once preached on "Heavenly Recognition," after the sermon, with tears of joy glistening in her eyes, she said: "I'm jes waitin' to go to my chillun. Oh, I'm so happy! Gawd sent Brer Wilson heah—nobody but Gawd sent dat boy heah to preach de Gospel!"
When she got down on her dying bed, Wilson declared that his daily visits to her were a benediction to him.
Quite a contrast in their effect were his visits to Jeter Horn who, just across the street from Sister Myra Jenkins, was on what was thought to be his dying bed. Wilson read and talked to him and prayed with him; but though Jeter had once been a church-member he seemed to be overwhelmed at the thought of death. He did not die, however; but as he expressed it, "I is still alive, walkin' 'bout dis ole Rockford, eatin' ma co'n bread an' herrin's an' drinkin' ma whiskey."
At Sister Myra's funeral, there was a mighty outpouring of people. Wilson surpassed himself that day. One of the deceased's lifelong friends said: "Dat little man whar done come heah an' got up a church—dat man's a wonda to me when lie gits in de pulpit. Hit looks to me somethin' comes over him when he gits on his high hoss in de pulpit; he ain't like de same man you laugh an' talk wid ev'ry day."
The old lady expressed just what I feel about Wilson. When he was at his best, a subtle change came over him, putting an immense distance between me and him—classmates though we were—and making my intimate friend so to tower above me as that I could not but reverence him.
One Sabbath mornin, as we Norwalkers' still under the spell of one of Wilson's most soul-moving sermons, were returning home from church, Holt evidently voiced the feelings of us all when he said to me: "Wade, I tell you what it is: at his best, Wilson certainly has the power of the Spirit on him as men of old had!"
In The City of the Dead.
"He is gone on the mountain, He is lost to the forest, Like a summer-dried fountain When our need was the sorest.
The font, reappearing, From the rain-drops shall borrow, But to us comes no cheering, To Duncan no morrow !"
—Scott—Lady of the Lake.
Rockford's decoration day was the next week after Mom Kitty told Belle about Jennie Cross' mistake in marrying a man she did not love because the man she did was dead. A large part of Rockford was in the cemetery; the white people to decorate the graves of their loved and lost; the colored folks to see and be seen, and to be going somewhere. And strange to say, for those who marched to the cemetery to decorate the graves of heroes who died fighting to uphold slavery—strange to say, a Negro band furnished the music!
All of us Norwalkers went to the cemetery as beautiful as a garden of gods. Fairfax and Julia were there dreaming poetry in their sweet love, and Belle and I were there walking on air in our new wedded bliss. Without one how beautiful the world looks, when, within one, there is a world of love!
The speechmaking did not come off until afternoon; that's why we Norwalkers were not out, except to hear that. But now even the lovely afternoon had waned until the sun hung a lurid ball just above the hazy horizon. Love had placed its flowers and dropped its reminiscent tears on the graves above the dust of warriors, it is true, brave and sincere, but warriors whose success would have riveted the galling chains of bondage on their brothers in black. The placid air had been filled with the rattle of musketry, the thunder of cannon, the throb of music and the thrill of fervid oratory uttered to justify the "lost cause." The salutes, the music, the speeches—we heard them all; and along with the crowd that choked the streets, we of the Norwalk coterie, in consequence of what we had heard, were leaving the cemetery understanding better than when we went into this city of the dead—understanding and sympathizing a trifle more with the feelings of the people represented by the gray—a brave, proud people upon whom, by the stern arbitrament of the sword, had been thrust a mighty revolution. And it is but simple justice to add that, however much there may be to be deplored in the South's treatment of the Negro, yet it nevertheless remains true that history does not show a case where the proud and imperious master class have treated the helpless freed-men better .than Ham has been treated by Japhet in Dixie.
Julia, Fairfax, President and Mrs. Holt had come out in a public carriage. For this they were now waiting comfortably seated near an old ivy-mantled church ruin, which ancient pile the city sought to preserve as a relic.
Wilson, Belle and myself were waiting with the Holts to keep them company. In his snuff-colored broadcloth Sunday suit, Zeke Brown came to us. He had before spoken to us. Whenever we came to the park which adjoined the cemetery, he made it a point to have something to say. He had-taken quite a fancy to us all; but he seemed especially drawn to Fairfax. At such times as we visited the park, Zeke liked nothing better than to entertain us with present-day gossip and past-day history of Rockford folks, white and black, high and low. He seemed to have an exhaustless fund of such stories, and he was a most capital story teller. He talked all the more freely to us, because he, no doubt, felt flattered that we set so high a value on his tales.
While we were waiting for the Holts' carriage, he told us a characteristic one, yet different from the others he had told us, in that it was about himself. This is the way he came to tell the story about himself.
After having greeted us, and chatted awhile about the day's doings, Zeke said to the young preacher: "Elda Wilson, I promised you a while ago dat I was comin' up to yo' chu'ch dis comin' Sunday. I seed Elda Granville sence dat, an' he 'minded me dat hit's communion at our chu'ch, so I can't come."
"All right, Brother Brown; when will you come?" said Wilson.
"I dunno zackly; but 'fo' long; 'cause I does dearly love to heah you preach!" Said Holt, with a twinkle: "If you like so well to heah him preach, why don't you join his church? He might give you the office of carrying around the bread and wine."
This last was said with a broad smile.
"Dat wouldn't be no honey to draw me to you all's chu'ch," replied he in Holt's own jocular vein, " 'cause I done had dat office an' lost it. I done been a deycon in our chu'ch."
"Been a deacon in your church?" asked Mrs. Holt in genuine surprise.
"Yas maam; an' lost it."
Mrs. Holt looked at the old man inquiringly.
"Yas, maam; done been a deycon an' lost it!" replied he to the query in her look, a droll challenge in his voice for her to ask him why he had lost it.
"You must have done something terrible," she answered in his own mock, serious vein.
"No maam, I didn't nuther; I don't think you'd say so ef you knowed."
Zeke and Fairfax were on the best of terms, the younger man always joking with the older by getting off some high-flown nonsense. So Fairfax broke out in grandiloquent terms, a twinkle in his eyes: "How long ! O how long, O Ezekiel, thou prophet, the son of thy mother—how long wilt thou make thy servants to hang by the eyebrows? Lift up thy voice, O thou seer most mighty, and vouchsafe an elucidation of the peculiar peccancy leading to an ecclesiastical catastrophe so egre-giously calamitous as thy demission from the lofty, sacred diaconate of thy church!"
Amused were we all at this outburst of nonsense delivered in sententious tones of inimitable drollery, as well as at Zeke, who, with his hands clapped to either side and his eyes rolled up as if in great agony, gasped: "Wait! Wait till I ketch my breath! De 'Fessa done chawed up de whole dictionary an' spit it at me so hard, he done knocked all de win' outen me!"
Julia, with a look on her pretty face of amusement, disgust and fondness, exclaimed: "I declare, Gus! if you and old Jeter were put in the same bag, I don't know which would get out first!"
"Jeta an' de 'Fessa in de same bag, Miss Jule? Ole Jeta is de man dat knocked me outen my deconry—de no count ole nigga! But lie's now gone into a bag he won't git out of soon, I bet!"
"What do you mean?" asked Mrs. Holt.
"Didn't you see in this morning's paper that he has been sent to the poor-house?" asked Holt.
"No, I didn't read the paper this morning," answered the wife.
"Neither did I," put in Julia, her sweet eyes apologiz-ingly in her lover's for what she had said of his reminding her disagreeably of the worthless Jeter.
Wilson took out of his pocket the daily Morning News and read to the company the following item: "The News, for years, with all Rockford, has laughed at Jeter Horn's tipsy, high-flown nonsense. More recently, however, we have seen a change in him which has made us feel that the funny old darkey ought not to be allowed at large when he is drunk. The drinking of years has at last borne its fruitage; the snakes are after the old coon, and our fears have been confirmed. Night before last he almost frightened to death some ladies that met him rampaging down North street like a chimpanzee; and, in consequence, the old sot was locked up. But he has the jim-jams so bad that the poor-house is thought to be the place for him; he will be detained there so that he can't get drunk and frighten ladies."
"I boun' he won't trouble nobody no more," said Zeke.
"And you say he knocked you out of the diaconate?" asked Holt.
"Dat's what he done!" he replied. Then ensued his funny, tender tale of how he lost his "deyconry."
How Zeke Brown Lost His Diaconate.
"True love is but a humble- low-born thing And hath its food served up in earthen ware."
—Lowell.
He had been separated from his wife by his master, who, moving to Louisiana, took Zeke with him.
This was before the war. After the surrender, he came back to Rockford and was made a "deycon in de Fust chu'ch."
"Dat same yeah Jeter came back, ma'ied to my wife Liza. Jeter belonged to Dr. Warren Pogue. Liza belonged to my ole Marsta's darter, Miss Ethel Kirk. When she got ma'ied to Dr. Pogue, she wouldn't give up Liza, an' ole man Kirk moved 'way. Dat's how come me to be separated from Liza, an' dat's how come she was ma'ied to ole Jeta, who was Dr. Pogue's body servant; an' he tuk Jeta wid him in de army.
" 'Fessa Fairfax, dah is something 'bout you dat 'minds me of Liza; dat's how come I to like you so. I heerd dat Jeta an' Liza had a gal dat got Ios'."
"I'm thankful that you like me, prophet, and that I am not a girl. If I were a woman, you see, I couldn't like the gentle creatures so!"
This he said, looking mischievously at Julia.
"I heard a lady say the other day, when some one complimented her, "I thank you for your encouragement, and I-----"
"Oh, Gus! stop talking!" interrupted Julia, looking at him.
"Go on, Brother Brown," said Wilson.
"Yas, Elda, de 'Fessa sholy is like my Liza. When she come back, hit nigh 'bout broke my hea't to see Jeta wid her, an' she so nice an' ladyfied !"
"Well, now, why didn't you two get together?" asked Holt.
" 'Cause, 'cause," hesitated he abashed, "she an' Jeta had got ma'ied arter de wah again wid papers out o' de cote house, an' me an' Liza didn't have nuthin' like dat when we ma'ied."
The old man stopped under stress of feeling, while among his listeners there was the blowing of noses and wiping of eyes.
"Wheneva Liza come to chu'ch," he resumed in subdued mood, "all indurin' de preachin' she'd set wid her jaw in her little han' an' cry—not loud, but soft, to her-se'f, an' every once in awhile look up at me whar I set near de pulpit in my deycon's cheer. She did look so pleadin'l"
Again a pause of deep feeling. Continued he, sure of our sympathy: "I could o' stood her cryin' in chu'ch an' her pleadin' looks; but I kept o' bearin' dat when Jeta was in licor, he mistreated her. Hit 'peared like to me fire was in my bones!
"I jes couldn't rest day nor night film thinkin' 'bout Jeta mistreatin' Liza, an' she sich a lady!"
"By 'n by, one communion Sunday, Liza cried so, I come mighty nigh drappin' de blessed yelements I was totin' 'roun'l"
There was a suppressed titter at this. Zeke himself grinned.
"When chu'ch was out, Br'er Deycon Powell axed her whut was de matta wid her to make her cry so. Arter a long time, he drawed outen her dat ole Jeta, 'cause she wouldn't give him her money she done wuked fo' so he could buy licor, had done beat her dat mornin' befo' she come to chu'ch.
"Chillun! when I heerd dat, my blood jes boiled! Br'er Powell he 'lowed de deycons had betta bring Liza's case befo' chu'ch meetin' dat comin' Monday night, to see couldn't she git a divo'ce away fum dat drunken hus-ban', an' git unda de protection o' de man she loved.
"My hea't swelled at de very thought ef dat only could be! but I knowed it couldn't be. I knowed dat nobody but ole Marse Kirk had joined me an' her; but dat Jeta had ma'ied her wid papers out o' de cote house, an' dat a whiete minister had went through de cer'mony.
"I didn't wait fo' no chu'ch meetin', cause I didn't put no 'pendence in no devo'ce doin's. I went home, I did, an' tuk off my Sunday clothes. I went upstairs an' fotch down an ole cowhide dat used 'long to ole Tom Kirk dat used to be my marsta."
"What were you doing with the cowhide?" asked Wilson.
"I jes kep' it hangin' up in a closet upstairs, so I could go up an' look at it every onct an' awhile, Elda, an' bless Gawd, 'cause no man ain't got no right to tie me up an' whup me in dese days!" answered he, with unction.
"Bless God for it!" added Holt with equal unction.
"Well, I took de cowhide, I did, an' went to Jeta's house. As luck would have it, Liza wa'n't dah; an' I foun' ole Jeta layin' out under de shade in de back yard, jes drunk 'nough to be fighty an' sassy.
"But folks! I bet he wa'n't sassy nor drunk neither time I got thue wid him! I jes natchely laid dat cowhide on him good!'' The old man seemed to be living the scene over again.
"I'd lay it on awhile, den stop an' talk to him 'bout his devilment wid Liza. I'd jes natchely burn him up again—he all de time talkin' his pretty talk, a-pleadin' same as any lawyer in de cote house! I tell you, I jes wored dat ole nigga out! I bet his ole marsta, Dr. Warren Pogue, neva gin him such a lickin'!"
We were all convulsed at his showing us how he "jes nachely laid dat cowhide on him good." Zeke seemed to enjoy it all over again.
"Well, my beatin' ole Jeta made a mighty stir—hit bein' jes arter I had done tote 'roun' de bread an' wine.
"At de chu'ch meetin' Monday night, 'stead o' havin' Liza's case up, bless my soul dey had me up! De bruth-ren an' sisterin axed me wa'n't I sorry dat, bein' a dey-con, I had done fit, an' dat, too, on communion Sunday?
"I told 'em it might o' ben wrong; but 'Bruthren an' sisterin,' says I, 'ef hit was wrong 'tain't wuth while fo' me to add to de wrong by tellin' a lie. 'Tain't wuth while fo'.me to say I is sorry; 'cause I ain't!' "Deep down in my hea't I feels dat wid dat cowhide I've did a wuk o' grace on Jeta.
"'Well,' dey saed, 'we'll put Br'er Brown unda de sanction (censure) o' de chu'ch to give him time to repent; so dey sot me back in de chu'ch.'"
"What do you mean by that?" asked Julia.
"I mean, I was still a deycon, but didn't set in my cheer, but had to set back in de chu'ch."
"Oh, I see!" replied Mrs. Holt.
"Well, how did it turn out about Eliza?" asked Belle with shining eyes.
"Liza, poo' thing!" he added in choking voice, "died three weeks arter dat. Arter de funeral I met Jeta an' tole him, ef hit hadn't been fo' his mistreatment, Liza would have been alive.
"He 'lowed she was his wife an' not mine, an' dat I didn't have no business chastisin' him 'bout her; an' a lot mo' jaw like dat. An' I jes got my nigga up an' gin him another lickin'! He had me arrested; an' though de cote didn't do nothin', de thing made a mighty big stir. Den de chu'ch tuk my deconry away fum me.
"But I didn't keer. I had de satisfaction o' heatin' dat no 'count nigga fo' mistreatin' de bcs' 'oman dat evah drawed de breath o' life!"
This was said with deep reverence. When the Holts' carriage came up, we all bade the old man good-night with new respect and sympathy for his beautiful faithfulness to his "Liza."
At The Gate Beautiful.
"He Took Him By the Right Hand and Lifted Him Up."—Acts 3:7.
Tuesday had been Memorial day. In the afternoon of Friday that same week Rockford College commencement came off.
Have you ever attended a commencement of a Southern colored institution for higher learning? If you have, you do not need to be told of the large, well-dressed, self-respecting crowd that gathered to witness Rockford's closing—the cream of the race in that region. The large, well-lighted audience hall on the second floor, capable of seating eight hundred, was packed. Twenty-five girl graduates, sweet in simple white, occupied a front bench on the left side of the assembly hall (left side to one on the platform). On the right side sat eleven young men graduates. The great crowd flowed behind and around the student body. On the boys' side of the hall, at a right angle to the graduates, the school choir and piano faced the ladies of the faculty.
The male members of the faculty were on the rostrum, as also several "distinguished" men, Wilson among them.
'Twas an enthusiastic, good-looking audience, as variant in color as the frost-touched autumn foliage, ranging from the black, with thick lips and grapy hair, to the white, with eyes of sky and locks of gold—quite a comment on the ante-bellum Southern gentleman's self-control ; yes, on that of Southern gentlemen; for it is the master class, not the so-called "poor, white trash," that have most mixed the people of African origin.
The Harpers, Alma May Montague, Mrs. Harper's sister, were over to commencement in a fine open public carriage.
Zeke Brown said: "Dem folks had on some clothes, sho' as you bo'n."
I hired a spanking new surrey for Belle and her mother, Mrs. Clay. I've said before that Belle was the image of her mother, who in her younger days was accounted one of the handsomest women in Rockford. Now, my ladies "had on some clothes," too; and I don't mind admitting that I was proud of them.
Mrs. Holt had provided seats with herself—it was where the president's family usually sat—for Belle and her mother, while it was expected that I would play "distinguished visitor" on the rostrum; but Belle was towed off by Julia to a seat near the girl graduates (the view of Fairfax, who had charge of the singing, was better there) ; Mrs. Clay sat with the girls* matron, Mrs. Ada Harmon, an old friend; while I, refusing to be "big man on the rostrum," plumped down beside Mrs. Holt; meanwhile'the two vacant seats in front of us were, at Mrs. Holt's invitation, taken by Mom Kitty and Isaac Scattergood's handsome, vivacious, ripe pear-colored little housekeeper, Mrs. Juddy Hill, a popular lady who was always given her whole name, Juddy Hill.
As Fairfax had charge of the music and both Wilson and Holt were on the rostrum, this failure of the prearranged seating shut Mrs. Holt and myself off from the rest of our coterie.
Somewhere else in this history I have said that Mrs. Holt was a handsome woman. She had what is better than mere good looks; that is, distinction. Tall and large, but not stout, with soft mixed gray hair that was glossy, of chestnut color and queenly bearing, she usually made those meeting her feel like calling her madam. This was her husband's commencement, and she would not have been a woman if she had not looked after her commencement attire. Had Julia, Belle and Mrs. Clay been sitting grouped around her as she intended, still, in good looks and good clothes, Mrs. Holt would have queened it over them all.
You can imagine that it did not hurt my feelings to sit in the president's seat beside, probably, the queenliest looking woman in all that audience.
The commencement music was inspiring. The essays and speeches about as good as those I've heard in the North at white commencements of schools of the same grade as Rockford was. About what were they to do? you ask? What will young colored graduates usually talk most about if you do not head them off? Oh, about the race, of course. Well, is not that quite the expected? Are they not being put through college to help solve the race problem?
The State's chief executive had been asked to make a speech and present the diplomas. He, the Attorney-General and the State Superintendnt of Public Instruction constituted the State Board of Education. Quite proper, was it therefore, for Holt to invite His Excellency to present the diplomas, and a wise way to keep on the right side of the power behind the local board of trusts.
The executive sent word, however, that he was so busy that he could spare time only to arrive in Rockford at three-thirty and return to the Capital on the northbound mail due in Rockford at five o'clock. This hour and a half would give him only time to step into a carriage, drive to Rockford, deliver his speech and the diplomas, and hurry back to the depot for the five o'clock mail.
Now, the Governor was a distinguished Confederate general, belonging to one of the oldest and most noted families of the State. His Excellency was one of that not small class of Southern aristocrats who feel that the white man's claim of being superior to the black man demands that the Anglo-Saxon make good his contention by treating colored people right.
The State executive was quite willing, therefore, to visit the school and thereby show his friendlinss to the institution and the race, provided his visit could be so arranged that His Excellency would not be obliged to accept social courtesies from a Negro president and faculty. Hence the arrangements just described.
The well-dressed, respectable, well-behaved, large, intelligent audience from one-thirty had been listening with enthusiastic appreciation to the exercises to be climaxed some time after three-thirty by the Governor's speech.
Mom Kitty had a nephew and Juddy Hill an exquisitely handsome daughter among the graduates; and so these two ladies were all enthusiasm; and who is not, when, at a commencement, our own dear boy or girl is one of the graduates?
Mrs. Holt and I had kept up a low-voiced, good-humored comment, possible only between friends so intimate as to address each other by the front name—comment on the fine tact displayed by Holt; the good taste of Fairfax, evidenced by his handling of the music, and his careful drilling of the performers, which painstaking training was exhibited in the manner of the rendition of their speeches and essays.
Finally, there remained but two more performances: an essay by a girl so white that it would take a board of physicians to prove that she was colored, and the valedictory by a young man not only the blackest member of the class, but a black man. Yes, just black; no adjectives needed !
President Holt was about to announce the fair maiden, when an usher informed him that the Governor's carriage would soon be up the hill one must ascend to get to Rockford campus. The audience was asked to wait until the president should return to the hall with the Governor.
With Holt's departure to meet the great man downstairs, a ripple of conversation broke over the expectant, good-humored crowd, with here and there low-voiced laughter; for on what occasion is it that the fun-loving Negro nature does not find matter for mirth? Aye, you have seen colored people enjoy even funerals!
But presently a hush falls on the throng. Necks are craned with bodies turned. The doors open. Beside Holt, and followed by the Hon. Nathan F. Cleggett and a Rockford gentleman, up the middle aisle starts the Governor—a large, short, red-faced, blue-eyed, sandy-haired man who had more years of his life behind him than before him. There is a burst of applause, generous and prolonged, which His Excellency acknowledges by bows to the right and left as he goes to the seat reserved for him during the exercises, a fine throne-like chair placed under this legend, printed in large letters on the wall: "Welcome to the Governor."
His Excellency heard the white girl's essay and the black boy's valedictory, then gave his speech and presented the diplomas to "you young men and young women."
The old gentleman could not bring himself to addressing them as "young ladies and gentlemen." He was a man of affairs rather than an orator; and so while he did not make a great speech, he made a kind one, replete with sound advice: "You people ought to be industrious, frugal, law-abiding, on good terms with your best friends (the white people of the South), polite, and faithful as the old black mammies were before the war," et cetera.
Howbeit, with his sound advice the Governor put forth some unsound political economy. He told us that because the bulk of school taxes are paid by white people, that State support of Negro education is a pure gratuity, for which "you people ought to be garteful to the white people."
"Now, governor, that will not do. If Negroes don't commit more crimes than anybody else, yet, and still because they are ignorant and poor, they are oftener before the courts, and consequently pay more fines than anybody else. If the fines Negroes pay were added to the taxes and saloon licenses they pay, it is doubtful if Negroes get many more schools than they actually pay for.
I admit, indeed, that Negroes ought to be grateful for State support of Negro education—if, for no other reason, because the State does its duty; but it is an economic heresy to say that Negro education is a gratuity and not a right because white people have more taxable property than black people. Everywhere (except in the South) political economists agree that no matter who turns in the taxes to the State treasury, that yet and still the laborer, the man who does the work, is the man who really pays the taxes; for there would be no money to turn in if there were no laborer at the forge, in the shop and on the farm. Now, since the man who does the work pays the taxes, if the Negro, ever since he has been in the South, has not done most of the work of the South, and that, too, for two long centuries before he was allowed any schooling at all,—if the Negro has not done most of the work of the South, I would like to know who has.
No, dear Governor, the State's education of the Negro is not a gratuity; it is the Negro's right. The child of the wage-earner has the same right to State education that the capitalist's child has.
After the chief executive had presented the diplomas, the two gentlemen who accompanied him were called on for "remarks." They remarked entirely too long; so long, that though the exercises were not over, His Excellency had to go for his train when the latter of the two remarkers took his seat. The good-humored audience were asked to wait until the programme should be completed. Holt started to accompany the Governor to his carriage. Again the audience burst into applause and the Governor, proceeding down the aisle at Holt's side, bowed to left and right in acknowledgment.
When the party had left the hall, again a ripple of sprightly conversation broke over the great gathering. Mom Kitty and Juddy Hill turned round and engaged Mrs. Holt and myself in talk.
The Governor's presence, the speeches, the graduation of Mom Kitty's nephew and Juddy Hill's daughter, had put the two ex-slave mothers in a happy reminiscent mood. Juddy Hill, with glistening eyes, said to Mrs. Holt and myself: "You all is Northern folks who never knew anything 'bout slavery,—you, two President Holt an' Professor Fairfax. This day can't be to you whut hit is to Sista Kitty an' myself."
"No, indeed," assented Mom Kitty. "Dr. Wade," continued Juddy, "I neva thought the las' time I saw the gen'ral that he'd eva give any chile of mine a diploma."
"When was that?" asked Mrs. Holt.
"In the fust year o' the war. My young missis' hus-ban', Colonel Poindexter, was on the gen'ral's staff. She'd follow him in the army wherever she could, an' always took me with her.
"The las' time I seen de gen'ral befo' to-day, was de day after de night he made a raid on de Yankees an' got wounded an' brought back with 'em Liza Horn, almos' distracted 'cause she'd lef' bellin' in de Union camp her only chile, a boy."
A look flashed between Mrs. Holt and myself.
"Why, I always heerd hit was a gal dat Jeta an' Liza los'?" put in Mom Kitty.
"No, it wasn't; it was a boy. And I neva seen anybody so heart broken as Liza was."
Continued she: "You see, Sista Kitty, Liza was fust married to Zeke Brown; but she belonged to Miss Ethel Kirk in Miss Ethel's own right. When she married Dr. Warren Pogue, the only way to keep from separatin' Liza an' Zeke was either for Miss Ethel's father to sell or give Zeke to the Pogues, or for Miss Ethel to give up Liza, her maid. None of 'em was willin' to do any of these things; an', as old Tom Kirk moved to Louisiana when Miss Ethel got married, Zeke an' Liza was separated, an' they married her to Jeta. She an' Jeta the Pogues took in the army. Dr. Pogue was a great surgeon—an' the Yankees had captured Liza an' her little boy. An' the gen'ral knew her an' brought her back to Dr. Pogue, who was on his staff. An' Liza-------"
Here she was interrupted by the applause of Fairfax announcing that Miss Alice Ilill, Juddy Hill's daughter, would sing a solo while they were waiting for the president's return.
The interest of the two women bent on the beautiful girl going up on the rostrum to sing. Mrs. Holt whispered to me: "Joe, suppose Gus is?"—and paused, looking into my eyes.
"Had you ever thought of it before?" I whispered.
"Yes, and have told Dave so a hundred times."
"Have you ever hinted it to him and Julia?"
"No, nor to any one else," she answered cautiously.
Said I: "I don't think it worth while to do so. It may not be true. If it is true, but nobody knows, what difference does it make? If it is true, and Julia and Gus find it out, what then ?"
"That's just what Dave asks."
"What do you say if it is true?" I asked, looking her straight in the eye.
"I don't know! I don't let myself think of the dreadful possibility!" said she, much moved.
"If it should prove true, my advice to you is, let Julia and Gus decide what they will do."
"That's just what Dave says!"
"Then for you, madam, mum is the word. Mum here," continued I, touching my breast with the forefinger of my right hand, then giving my attention to Miss Alice Hill's solo, more, I admit, to the exquisitely pretty girl than to her singing.
The solo over, and the prolonged clapping, after everybody else had stopped, of the half dozen fellows in love with pretty Alice, we had the rest of the programme: the speeches of "distinguished visitors," somebody, now that the Governor had gone; flowers and presents of doting friends, remarks by the president, announcements, benediction.
Then the congratulations and the myriad-voiced hubbub of the breaking up of a great, enthusiastic throng of the offspring of Ham—demonstrative children of the tropics—hopeful for the future because of the tear-stained, blood-flecked past; and because "There is a divinity that shapes our ends, Rough-hew them how we will," who is effecting the only solution of the race problem.
The only solution? Yes; "nothing is ever settled until it is settled right." The drama of the right solution is now on the stage. Here it is: Ham, rising in Christian civilization; Japhet, getting used to it; aye, for despite "wrongs that need resistance," Power benign is moving Japhet to help Ham to rise in civilization, as, according to Acts the third, the Apostle Peter helped up the lame man at the Gate Beautiful.
"And he took him by the right hand, and lifted him up. * * * And all the people saw him walking and praising God. * * * And they were filled with wonder and amazement at that which had happened unto him."
"What hath God wrought!" The miracle drama of Ham's uplifting is the marvel of the world I Quite natural, then, is the hopefulness of the sun-kissed folk, recently ransomed from thraldom by the nation's best blood, now being uplifted by the nation's best conscience.
Hurt To The Heart.
"Then must the Jew he merciful."
"On what compulsion must I? Tell me that."
"We do pray for mercy: and that same prayer doth teach us all to render The deeds of mercy."
—The Merchant of Venice, Act IV., Scene i.
There are lots of folks in this world who are hurt to the heart over other people's good fortune. The Hon. Nathan F. Cleggett, a member of the legislature, one of the gentlemen who accompanied the Governor to Rockford commencement—this gentleman got his feelings hurt that day. He had visited the school before. Holt, in great courtesy, took him through the college and showed him everything from Alpha to Omega.
When he saw the students' dining-room, the professors' rooms, the president's house; when he beheld what was being studied, and how—well, like the Queen of Sheba upon her visit to Solomon, he said: "The half was not told me."
He left the institution hurt to the heart. Then he came back with the Governor commencement day. What he then saw and heard hurt him still more. He was quite sick of heart at the evidence of Negro uplifting.
Yes, he was hurt to the heart as Joseph's brethren were over Joseph's coat of many colors; as Ahab was over Naboth's vineyard; as that Roman senator was who, seeing the glory of the Punic capital, ended every speech thereafter, on no matter what subject, with the words: "Carthage must be destroyed."
Now, you know that this sort of heart-hurt leads to action. You know what Joseph's brethren,—Ahab,—and the Romans did.
To what action did the heart-hurt of the legislator lead? Well, now, what did he who was heart-hurt over the happiness of our first parents in Eden? Did he not go about to break up that happiness? Yes, and the heart-hurt lawmaker went about to break up Negro uplifting by means of Rockford, as he who is described in Genesis as "more subtle than any beast in the field which the Lord God had made" took steps to put an end to the happiness of earth's first pair of lovers.
The angelic Solon swore he was going to introduce a bill in the legislature to turn the college into an insane asylum, as the State could not provide for all the colored insane of the State.
Now, the Hon. N. F. Cleggett knew there were a large constituency throughout the State whose views of Negro education may be expressed as follows: Industrial education for the Negro is better than higher education; but no education is still better than industrial education.
He knew he would have backing that would bring him distinction, even if the measure should fail. It is not improbable that the Hon. Cleggett was more anxious to boost himself politically than he was to ease his heart-hurt over Negro progress; more zealous to find an issue that would keep him in the legislature and bring him into prominence than he was to break up Rockford College. He had seen other men rise to power by kicking the Negro; why might he not do the same?
It is clear that no matter what Mr. Cleggett's motives were, his move to present such a bill at the coming session of the legislature might prove disastrous to Rockford College, since it was true that the State was under the necessity of providing additional accommodations for the large number of colored insane confined in poor-houses and jails. The colored people of the State were apprehensive for Rockford College. Delegations of colored men and petitions had been sent to every source of political influence in the State to avert the threatening evil. Holt saw the Governor, and everybody else with whom he had influence.
It was a time to make every edge cut that would cut.
Now, while it was true that the Governor was Holt's supporter, yet it was thought wise to send to him Wilson, who had no connection with the college. His Excellency was a member of our denomination—and a great stickler for his church. Before he was elected to his present post, he had become very much interested in Wilson as the pastor of our church. Wilson had asked the official to help us when we were building; this he did quite liberally. He, in common with the white people of the region, members of our denomination, had great pride in our church, and in Wilson. For these reasons, Holt asked our pastor to go and see the Governor in behalf of Rockford College.
Also Fairfax was asked to see the Attorney-General of the State.
This official had got acquainted with Fairfax in the Gulf State, wherein Julia's intended taught before coming to Rockford.
While conducting a case in the city in which Fairfax taught, the great lawyer's life was saved by the young colored teacher. He overheard a plot to waylay and murder the lawyer, and Fairfax, by revealing what he knew, caused the plot to fail. The Attorney-General thought a great deal of Fairfax in consequence. Hence, Holt's request that the young professor see the great man in the interest of maintaining the college.
Now, both Wilson and Fairfax had sought to see, the one the executive, and the other the Attorney-General, who, with the Superintendent of Public Instruction, constitute the State Board of Education.
Wilson got His Excellency's classmate to write the Governor asking for an interview; but his private secretary wrote that His Excellency was away, and that Wilson would be informed if he might call. Fairfax went to the capitol to see the Attorney-general, but the great lawyer was over ears in a great case. He told Fairfax to call again when the case was decided When that came to pass, however, that official was on a critical bed of typhoid fever.
Both Wilson and Fairfax, therefore, were doing that thing so hard to do: they were waiting.
Instant In Season And Out.
"And it came to pass, when Moses came down from Mount Sinai with the two tables of testimony in Moses' hand, when he came down from the Mount, that Moses wist not that the skin of his face shone while he talked with him."—Ex. 34 ".29.
Mrs. Harper, with whom and her husband Wilson made his home, was, in consequence of being a trained nurse, much away from home. Her younger sister, Miss Alma May Montague, kept house in the wife's absence and cared for Alfred, Junior, a chap in frocks. Alma was quite an attractive and interesting woman—though not what I'd call a handsome girl. She had, however, three beautiful features, namely, a pretty light mahogany color, an abundant suit of hair as glossy as a raven's wing, and a pretty mouth filled with perfect pearls.
She was not a Christian, though a constant attendant on our church and Sabbath School and a most doughty champion of our church and its pastor against all assailants.
It was a foregone conclusion that Wilson would strive to lead her to the Cross. He had, ever since he went to Harper's, in season and out of season, been instant in trying to bring Miss Montague into the fold. The upshot of Wilson's constant, fervent pleading with the girl to give her heart to the Savior was, that she gave it to the preacher. That she had done so was apparent to every one in the church except the earnest divine himself. Mom Kitty was at our church one Sunday morning. It was the pastor's custom, after the service, to shake hands with every single one of his congregation.
When he shook hands with Alma that morning, Mom Kitty squeezed my arm to attract my attention to them and said: "Dat gal sholy does love dat preacher! All durin' de preachin' she set almos' holdin' her bref to ketch ev'ry word he said, an' jes eatin' him up wid her eyes."
Alma's love for Wilson, after a time, made her unhappy; she knew he was not thinking of her in that way. The pastor thought the girl was unhappy about her soul, and so redoubled his efforts to lead her to the Holy One, while Alma, the meantime, grew still more unhappy.
Three weeks after Zeke had told us how he lost his "deyconry," Isaac Scattergood drove by and asked me to go out to his truck farm to see Juddy Hill, who was sick. I drove by Harper's on my way out to get Wilson to take him for a drive, and to see the sick woman. That was about three in the afternoon.
As soon as Wilson came to the buggy, I saw at a glance (I knew him so well) that he was in the seventh heaven of spiritual fervor; for he had on his face the look it wore when he was at his best in the pulpit. I found he had just had a talk with Alma, which he was overjoyed to believe would lead her to the Light.
He gave the following account: Alma had finished her work, changed her dress, and was on the secluded, vine-sheltered side porch in a comfortable rocker resting after having cleared up the dinner dishes. Here Wilson found her and pleaded with her to give herself to the Savior, explaining that she had only to take Him at His word, as in all the relationships of life we every day take men at their word Said he: "Alma, I am but a poor, sinful mortal; yet, if I told you that I loved you, and asked you to surrender your heart and life to me, you know me well enough to know that I would not disappoint you. Now, here is the Savior—perfect, sinless and loving you so much as to die for you. Why will you not trust Him, Alma? You would trust me if I told you that I loved you—why will you not surrender to Him?"
"When I said that," he went on rapturously, "she burst into tears, and the next moment threw her apron over her face and rushed upstairs to her room!"
I had a struggle to keep from laughing in his face! I was sure it was human affection, and not, as he supposed, divine love that made Alma flee his presence; but Wilson, the dear fellow, with his head in the clouds—he didn't see the situation. He did not see that Alma loved him and that his personal appeal had stirred up her feelings. And under the circumstances, I would not for the world have disillusioned him; for to have done so would have rendered him self-conscious and turned him aside from trying to lead Alma to the fold.
Sure enough, events proved that I was right.
I am sure Wilson expected that Alma would find peace by the time we returned from Scattergood's. When we arrived at Harper's gate, she came tripping down the walk to the buggy. Wilson's excitement was visible. He thought she was coming to tell us of her new-found joy. Instead of that, she began in brisk, breezy manner to talk commonplace—asking after Juddy Hill and Belle. Poor Wilson's spirits went down to zero. He was so disappointed that he did not get out of the buggy, but went on down town with me.
When Moses came down from Sinai from holding communion with Jehovah, the law-giver's face shone, but he knew it not. Wilson's face shone from a like communion. I loved him because it did and he knew it not. I was quite anxious that he should lead Alma to the Cross. She was a fine girl, and all the church folks loved her.
Yes, I was anxious that our pastor should succeed in bringing her into the kingdom; but, nevertheless, Belle and I had many a good laugh that night at Wilson's holy blindness to Alma's love.
"A Little Child Shall Lead Them "
"A Little Child Shall Lead Them."—Tsa. it:6.
It was Wednesday I went to Scattergood's. Friday I had to go out again; besides this, I had an engagement to take Wilson out to the poor-house. Jeter had sufficiently got oer his jim-jams to know he was very sick. He feared he was going to die, and strange to say, begged to have, not Granville, but Wilson to come and see him. This my pastor had several times done.
About three o'clock Friday afternoon, on my way back from Scattergood's, I stopped by Harper's for Wilson; but he was out, Alma knew not where. Dressed up as if she expected a visitor, I found Alma on the vine-clad, secluded side porch. She was alone, except for Alfred, Junior, a pretty, chubby, hazelnut colored chap in frocks. As I sat talking to Alma where I found her, Alfred left off playing with his tin soldiers and came to me; and resting his elbows on my knees, he silently, for a while, fixed his dreamy eyes in my face; then he startled me by saying decisively: "Dr. Wade, you is a lie."
"Alfred!" chided Alma, "you mustn't be naughty!"
"Well, auntie," piped he in injured tones, "didn't you say 'at folks 'at don't do like they say they is goin' to do, —didn't you said las' week they is a lie?"
"Yes, pet; hut you must not be rude and speak like that to Dr. Wade."
"Well," persisted the little logician in kilts, "he promised me a penny las' week, an' he ain't gie it to me; he owes me my penny."
"Oh, ho! little man!" said I, stooping down and kissing the child and laughing at his holding me to my promise, "thou are more righteous than I! Now, sir, you shall have your penny and more, too."
I gave him a ten-cent piece.
No sooner did the little fellow feel the dime in his chubby fist, than he bounded off the porch to go to a nearby store.
"What do you say to Dr. Wade?" she called after the fleeing urchin, at whom we were both laughing.
"Fank you, Dr. Wade! an' much obliged, tool" came back the sweet baby voice.
When he saw my horse at the gate he called: "Auntie, I'm goin' to buy cake bosses to-day; but when I git a man, I'm goin' to buy sho 'nough bosses, real meat bosses, auntie."
"All right, darling," she laughingly answered him, her voice full of love.
We heard his little bare feet slapping the unpaved sidewalk as he hied toward the corner grocery, in his own eyes a multi-millionaire.
I looked in silence for a moment into Alma's eyes, and slowly said: "And a little child shall lead them."
"There is faith for you, Alma! What a pity that we don't all take God at His word and just depend on His promises as a little child holds you to your word."
For a moment she looked in silence on the floor; then lifting to my gaze a face full of feeling, she asked irrelevantly: "Did Mr. Wilson tell you anything day before yesterday ?"
"He told me he had been having a talk with you. He wholly misunderstood, however, why you rushed upstairs and left him."
"How do you know why I did, you weren't here," she said, her mood entirely changing.
In response to her changed mood—and I suppose she detected the mischievous twinkle in my eyes—I said: "No, I wasn't here; but still I know why you rushed upstairs."
"How do you know? You're always prying around into something!"
"No, I didn't pry into that. Haven't you been talking to Julia? And doesn't Julia talk to Belle? Indeed, don't you yourself talk to Belle?"
"That's the way with married women!" snapped she, "they can't keep a thing!"
"I've been on the point several times of telling Mr. Wilson which way the wind is blowing," said I with a quiet smile.
"No, don't you! If you do, Dr. Wade, I declare I'll never speak to you again!" flared she, rising to her feet in her excitement.
"Keep cool! Keep cool, girlie! I'm just joking."
"I declare!" laughed she shame-facedly at betraying her feelings, "that's why a girl can't keep up her friendships with married women; they tell their husbands alt they know!"
"You don't mind my knowing, do you?"
"No use if I do; you're always prying into things!"
"No, little girl, I don't pry, I just open my eyes and see what is to be seen. I've seen for some time that you are in love with your pastor."
"My pastor? I have no pastor!" she said sadly. "No, you have not; but I trust you soon will have. Oh, Alma, let little Alfred teach you! You have only to take Christ at His word, and love Him back again for His love to you!
"Can't you, will you not do that, Alma?"
With deep feeling she answered: "I will try, Dr. Wade!"
A Sunday In June.
"All thoughts, all passions, all delights, Whatever stirs this mortal frame, Are but the ministers of Love, And feed his sacred flame."
—Coleridge.
A rare day in June was the Sunday following- the Friday I had the talk with Alma. Zeke Brown was visiting our church, fulfilling the promise made to our pastor Decoration day, though President Holt was preaching that morning for Rev. Walter Granville. Except Mrs. Holt, who was with her husband, the rest of the Nor-walkers were at our church this perfect day in June, and a good-sized congregation besides.
I felt sure Mr. Wilson had prepared his sermon with Alma's need on his heart. I felt sure of this as soon as he began to preach. This is the text: "God so loved the world, that He gave His only begotten Son, that whosoever believeth in Him should not perish, but have everlasting life."
For nearly three-quarters of an hour we hung on the preacher's Spirit-breathed words. I could see the quivering of Alma's whole frame at times. The "fountains of the great deep" of her soul were broken up. In closing, the pastor used the same illustration he used with Alma on the vine-clad, secluded porch. Tall, walnut-colored, thin and refined of feature, I can see him now in the fervor of appeal lean gracefully forward, both hands extended, as he said: "I am but a poor sinful mortal; yet if I should tell you that I loved you, and should ask you to surrender your hearts and lives to me, you know me well enough to know that if you did this, so far as my ability goes, I would not disappoint you. Must I say, why will you not trust the sinless Savior who is all love and all power? No; I need not say that. You do trust Him ! You do surrender to Him ! I know you do! You cannot but surrender to one so tender, so loving!"
How thrilling was his voice!
I saw a wave of feeling go over the congregation. Alma's whole frame quivered. Down dropped her head on the back of the pew in front of her. She was on her feet the next instant, her hands clasped out high. Tremulously her musical voice rang out: "Blessed Savior! I do surrender! 'Tis all I can do!"
Down she sank in the arms of her sister in the pew with her. The effect was electrical! Sobs could be heard all over the congregation!
How they did sing the closing hymn, "Rock of Ages." Then followed the benediction.
Rockford colored people in general believed in noisy, emotional demonstration. The more demonstration, the more piety, was the prevailing notion. During his ministry Wilson sought to teach his flock better; but his teaching was put to a severe test that morning; for when services closed they "made a joyful noise unto the Lord" over Alma's conversion.
Our church was like one family.
From group to group the happy girl went shaking hands; receiving an embrace here, bestowing one yonder, among those who had long known and loved her. Alma received an embrace from each Relic and Julia, and bestowed one on Fairfax and myself; but I was amused to see that she gave Wilson, who was in ecstasy, only a handshake.
Zeke Brown made plenty of noise over Alma—"de darter of my ole frien', a chile I've knowed befo' she knowed herself!" Later, as we were going home, when he was about to turn off from our party, consisting of Julia, Fairfax, Belle and myself, he said: "When Alma hugged me to-day hit done ma very soul good! Humph! I hope I'll be at you all's chu'cli when some mo' good-lookin' gals gits religion, ef dey all is gwine to do dat away."
We laughed at this.
When Zeke was gone, I said to Julia: "What did you say to Brother Wilson when I saw you go up to him that made him start and look at Alma so strangely? I hope you didn't tell him that she learned to love the Savior by first learning to love him."
"No," replied she, "I'm not a man, and so I didn't put it that way."
"What did you say?" asked Fairfax.
"I congratulated him on the fact that Alma had learned the divine love by what she knew of the human," she replied.
"Well, that's the same thing! and I am sure from the way he looked and acted he understood it," replied her lover.
"I wanted him to know," answered Julia.
Said I: "Oh, Julia, how could you disillusion him— and that, too, to-day, when he is on the mountain topi I'm sure he has not thought of Alma, except as one to lead to the Master."
Replied Belle: "But Alma loves him! and though he doesn't know it, it's my opinion that Mr. Wilson loves her. Why are men so blind?"
"Men so blind?" laughed Fairfax; "I've known women to be blind. I knew one lady that needed a runaway horse to open her eyes."
"Oh, you! you!" pouted Belle, pointing her finger in smiling protest at Fairfax, while the rest of us laughed at her discomfiture.
Said I: "One thing is certain: Brother Wilson will not longer be blind to Alina's feelings."
"I just hope something will happen to open his eyes to his own heart; for Alma would make a fine pastor's wife," said Belle.
Said I: "There you go—match-making!"
"No, no; matches are made in heaven—that is, the happy ones," she answered.
"The happy ones? Who makes the unhappy ones, then?" asked Fairfax.
"I don't believe they are made in heaven." stoutly maintained Belle.
"Ho! ho! Madame Darling!" laughed the professor; "we'll have to have you up for heresy! for that's mighty poor theology, and still poorer logic. If all things are not controlled—unhappy marriages too, then, some uncontrollable thing might upset some decreed matter. What becomes of the divine sovereignty if God's plan can be upset as men's can?"
"Oh, get out with your logic," said Belle, cornered.
"We are talking about love, not logic," put in Julia; "what has logic to do with love?"
"Not a thing!" he answered with unction, his eyes in Julia's.
"If it had, there'd not be a ghost of a chance for a fellow like me."
Her answering look indicated that he had more than a ghost of a chance with her. When nature that glorious June day was in tune with our happy hearts, how sweet seemed love? And the beautiful sermon and Alma's new, beautiful joy helped us to know more of divine love by what we knew of pure human affection.
As we turned up the street leading to our home, a sight met us that made Julia and Belle instinctively cling close to Fairfax and myself. Evidently, Jeter Horn's recuperative powers had been underestimated. Quite as evidently he had broken out of the poor-house; for stepping high and wide down the middle of the street, his arms held up as a hen lifts her wings when about to fly, came Jeter, crazy drunk, barefooted, his hat in one hand, his head thrown back, his eyes rolling, staring, glassy, ghastly I A profanation of the holy calm of that glorious Sabbath day was the delirious rigmarole he was getting off in a voice high-keyed and loud: "I'm a man you don't see every day. Circumstances alters cases. Skimmed milk masquerades fo' cream. De bottom rail done got on top; fo' de nigga's whose daddies was branded wid deir marsta's name like cattle, done got eggucation an' is actin' jest like whiete folks; an' ole Jeta Horn is glad to see his color a risin' in de worl', ef he is gwine down hissef."
"Good-mornin', ladies an' gentmuns," he addressed us, bowing profoundly and swinging low his hat, "Gawd bless de ladies! Don't dey look sweet! Jes like fine whiete folks!"
Whatever else he would have said, was cut short by the clatter of the police patrol wagon, which, thundered around the corner after the crazed old sot.
With a blood-curdling shriek he started to run, but was soon overtaken and carried, yelling back to the poor-house, to be guarded thereafter more carefully, lest he should again break out, and find the means of getting drunk.
The streets at the time of his arrest were filled with people of both races, going home from church, and the exhibition that Jeter made in the face of all Rockford, (for there were as many as six churches in the neighborhood of his arrest) made us ashamed for our race.
"As for me, it filled me full—full of thought!"
Zeke Brown's Vision.
"Which Things Are An Allegory.''—Gal. 4:24.
The next day, when, late in the afternoon I saw Zeke Brown in the park, he said to me: "I've been thinkin' all day long 'bout dat sermont I heerd at you all's chu'ch yestiday, an' 'bout Alma. Her daddy, Jim Montague an' me was fellow sarvants an' jes like bruthers. She looks like her daddy; an' she's got fine feelin's an' a sweet voice jes like him.
When she 'fessed yestiday, her voice fotch up to my mind Jim Montague an' ole times."
"If she is the daughter of your dead friend, I can understand how happy it made you to see her start for the Kingdom."
"Yas, in deed. When I heered dat chile's voice yestiday, so full o' feelin' hit brung up ole times, when me an' Jim used to make up shouts an' sing 'em. I tell you what it is, Jim Montague was a .shout songster sho's you bo'n! Fact is, de white folks said Jim was some sort o' poet. He made up one piece o' po'try, dat I liked so well, dat I learnt hit by heart. An' I used to speak it so much dat one night I had a dream, an' I dreampt dat I spoke hit to de whiete folks. I tole my dream, an' de people said I had done had a rale vision like de ole Bible prophets used to have. Den de folks 'gun to call me prophet."
I knew he was called prophet, hut supposed it was because of his name, and I said as much to him.
"No sail," replied he, "I s'pose I'd a been a preacher dis very minute ef it hadn't been fo' dat ole nigga, Jeta," —this with warmth.
"How so?" I asked.
"Oh 'cause, when he knocked me outen my deyconry, he knocked me outen bein' a preacher too! Dat nigga sholy he has bin in my way in dis worl'!"
"I hope you don't hate him!"
"No, Doctor Wade, I don't hate ole Jeta; but I don't love 'im. Hit takes so much of my strength," grinned he, "to keep fum hatin' him, I ain't got none lef' to love him wid."
I chuckled over this.
His mood immediately shifting, in a low dreamy voice he continued: "Ef my Liza had o' lived, I'd jes had to leave Rockford; hit nigh 'bout kilt me to see her wid dat low down man; an' me fairly warshippin' de very groun' she walked on; a dreamin' an' a dreamin' 'bout her night an' day!
"You see me gwine 'bout laffin' an' runnin' on so; but Dr. Wade, hit peers like to me, I jes can't git over Liza! Nobody but Gawd knows how I has cried in my heart!"
I felt my throat tighten.
Mingled with the old man's plaintive voice the music of a nearby playing fountain fell on the balmy June air where, in a secluded spot, we sat on a park bench beneath a lordly beech-tree whose top was glorified by the setting sun.
I asked him to tell me the dream which the folks had called a vision. He informed me that he had had it written down so as not to forget; and offered to let me read the manuscript, but I wanted to hear it in his own picturesque dialect, so I got him to promise to let me see the manuscript later. From the manuscript and the narrative hot from his lips I am able to give the following account of Zeke Brown's vision.
He was keenly alive, alike to the humor and pathos of it.
As has been said, he was a capital story-teller. It follows, therefore that no reproduction in cold type can do justice to the old man's dramatic rendition of what the folks called his vision.
Zeke Brown had a way of pulling his mustache when he was about to tell a tale. When you go fishing, if you wish to catch anything, even if you have good bait, you must keep quiet. I kept quiet when he began after his mustache. With good bait, Zeke's own vanity and by keeping quiet, by tactful angling, I was at last able to land the following story: "Hit was a long time ago dat I seed de vision; or ruther, dat I had de dream."
This statement is to be credited; for the manuscript brought me later was yellow with age.
"Hit was durin' de time I was in my deyconry—in fac' I was in de highday of my deyconry. I don't know how I come to dream de vision, 'les 'twas our Elda—not Granville, he wa'n't knee high to a duck den—gi'n dat Sunday night a mighty powerful sermont 'bout Satan showin' Chris' all de kingdoms of de yearth, an' said, 'all dese will I give you ef you'll only fall down an' warshup me.'"
"Hit was Sunday night when I dreampt it. I was in de Spirit all dat day. Dat mornin' I had done tote roun' de yelements at de communion. Dat night Elda Jeems Whitman preached de mos' powerfulis sermunt I evah heered 'bout how in dese days ole Satan offers folks de whole worl' ef dey will only fall down an' warshup him; an' how a heap o' people, both black an' white, done tuk de devil at his word an' is servin' him wifi all deer might, to fin' dat he is a big liar!"
"Yas, I was happy all dat day. Liza was at chu'ch both mornin' an' night; an' I was so full o' de Spirit I said: 'Lawd don't sen' down no mo.' I jes can't hold no mo.' "
"Well, I went to bed dat night, I did, an' had a dream. Yas, 'twas more an' a dream—hit was a vision.
"I dreampt dat all de whiete folks—de gennals, de jedges, de newspaper men, de guvners, de senators an' things—had all come together in a big meetin' 'bout our folks."
"Dey met in fine big Broadnax hall I was janita of an' had de bigges' speakin' you evah heered; an' some o' de best eatin's a man evah laid in his jaws. Hit made me hungry jes to dream 'bout all dat good grub!"
We both laughed at this.
"I dreampt dat de meetin' sot fo' a whole week, an' dat de secon' day a purty little man come in an' sot off by hissef to listen to proceedin's."
"He was dressed fine, had a gold-headed cane, gold glasses an' a shiny beaver. I thought nobody but me could see him; an' when he talked nobody but me heered him."
"Dat day jes as de purty little man tuk his seat I dreampt dat a one-legged man got up to speak. Dar was lot's o' one-legged, one-armed, and one-eyed men in de meetin.' Dis one dat got up to speak was a big 'ris-tocrat, but he wasn't no chu'ch member."
"I dreampt dat he said: "Gawd made de whiete man to rule an' de nigga to serve. Hence, it was a sin to free de nigga an' give him de ballot. I'm in favor of changin' de constitution—of puttin' de nigga whar Gawd intended him to be. I lif' my voice to put de nigga back whar he was befo' de wall. Den dis South will be a fittin' place fo' whiete folks to live in!"
"When he had said dat, an' whole lot mo' like it, an' was settin' down fannin' hissef, I dreampt dat de purty little man drapt down in de seat bellin' dat big 'ristocrat an' 'gun whisperin' in his ear. Man! I sholy was scart, fo' when de little fine dressed man turnt 'round to set down, bless my soul! I seed a forked tail stickin' out fum under his frock coat De purty little gentman was de ole devil!"
"Haw! Haw! Haw!" roared Zeke.
"I didn't heah all de little gentman whispered in de one-legged man's ear. I did ketch dis though: 'My son, what makes you sech a fool? What fo' you talkin' 'bout changin' de constitution? Ain't I tole you over an' over agin dat you don't need no change o' de consti-tutun to put de nigga whar you want him an' to do wid him what you want? What you keep on talkin' 'bout changin' de constitutun fo', when all you got to do is to go 'round de constitutun?"
"Now, sah, ef you ain't gwine to talk wid sense, I don't want you to make no mo' speeches in dis meetin.' De kind o' talk you gin out will do my cause mo' harm dan good—Hit will make friends fo' de nigga.
"Finn behind de 'ristocral, dc little man went to whah lie fust set down.
"Den a chu'ch member got de floo."
"De man had de face, Agger an' voice of an angel. He was one o' de leadinest members o' de body. His speech was as smooth as oil an' as purty as po'try; but hit made my spirits go down to zero, fo' ev'ry time de man open his mouth he let out a blue flame! .Hut nobody saw hit 'cept me; de bouse jes rocked an' roared wid applause. Dat mought have been 'cause his speech was so purty. Anyhow, de little gentmun laughed an' clapped so he come mighty nigh failin' offen his seat.
"When de chu'ch member sot down in a storm o' applause, de little man lookin' as pleased as a basket o' chips, grabbed his beaver hat an' gold-headed cane an' strutted past me.
"I heerd him say to hissef as he started out o' de hall: 'I'm a fool fo' wastin' my time heah. I'm gwine on a holiday while dis meetin' las'; 'cause some o' dese chu'ch members is tendin' to my business better'll I ken tend to it mysef.' "Wid dat, out de hall we went.
"I dreampt dat when de devil had gone on a holiday, a soft, solemn voice what nobody but me could heah said: 'Ezekiel, Ezekiel, plead fo' yo' people!' "But I sot still scart an' surprised. Den de voice come again, but I sot still, 'cause, 'sides not knowin' whut to say, how was I, nothin' but a poo' nigga janita, gwine to talk to all dem big whiete folks? I dreampt dat draps o' cold sweat rolled offen me.
"But dat voice come again solemner an' solemner an' I was mo' 'fraid o' de voice dan o' de whiete people; so I got up an' 'gun to plead fo' my poo' people, de whiete folks wid mouths open spellboun' wid surprise. But tremblin' like an aspen leaf I spoke on an' on waxin' elo-quenter an' eloquenter till by an' by I busted fo'th in Jim Montague's po'try I had done learnt by heart. I said, I did: "Oh whiete folks, whiete folks, honies, What shell we black folks do To please you all we live among And have yo' frien'ship true?
We're told we is too wuthless In Dixie lan' to stay; An' yet dem agents git in jail Whar try to 'suade us way.
Some say, 'Hit's low down niggas Dat make dis South lan' sad'; Yet when we try to raise ourselves Dey git so pizen mad!
When we is poo' an' ig'nant Den, 'No count!' is de cry; When we git sense an' money Den, 'Niggas is too high.' O Dixie whiete folks, honies, I ax you on my knees What's we poo' niggas gwine to do You whiete folks fo' to please?
Ef you all love ole Dixie, We love both her an' you; Ef you all want a chance in life, Don't niggas want dat too?"
"I dreampt dat dere was wa'm times in dat hall while I was speakin' my piece—some o' de whiete folks was lookin' mad an' some laughin' fit to kill deerselves.
"When I got thro' de storm broke loose! A man got de floo' what was a big 'ristocrat. He made a long an' mighty feelin' speech. He closed by sayin: 'Zeke is mighty presumptous to talk in dis meetin'. But he is right, we ought to continue to give his people a show. My father was a captain in tie wall. De mornin' o' de battle o' Sharpsburg he saed to ole Uncle Reuben Stitt, his body servant, "Reuben, I feel dat I ain't gwine to come out o' dis battle. Here is a purse o' gold an' a letta. You keep near me to-day, an' ef I fall you bury my body an' take de purse an' letta home to you' Mistis."
" 'Well, my father fell in dat battle. The faithful slave buried his body an' brought home to my mother de purse an' letta. In dat letta my father committed my mother an' my two little brothers an' myself to Reuben's care. Faithfully that ole man worked to support us. Much that I am to-day, I owe to ole Uncle Reuben's faithfulness. An' I tell you, gent'men, I'll not strike han's wid anybody who wants to put anything in de way o' de progress o' de race to which ole Uncle Reuben belongs.' "When dat man sot down de house was in tears. De president o' de meetin', wid tears in his voice, saed: 'Zeke, you is de janita, an' you didn't have no business speakin' in dis meetin'; but I forgive you, an' assure you dat yo' people's frien's in de South is mo' dan deir enemies.' "Of co'se I felt good dat de big whiete folks tuk my pa't, 'cause de news o' my speakin' had spread like wild fire in town. De niggas rejoiced, but some o' de whiete folks was mad.
When de las' speaka sot down, I seed outside whiete men at one o' de doors lookin' mad enough, so I started home out o' dat hall by de back door, 'cause I was afraid.
"Well, I had got out by a back street on my way home when a crowd dat looked like dey had been lookin' fo' me met me. De leader hollered: "Dah he is I dat presumptuous fool nigga! Kill him! Kill him!' "I heerd a voice say unto me: 'Zekiel, run fo' yo' life." "I didn't wait fo' no secon' voice. I tore down de street, de crowd arter me; but chile, I jes natchcly lit up in bird company. I run clean out o' my shoes. De whiete folks stopped foller'n me at de edge o' de town; but I didn't stop till I got down in a low groun' 'bout three miles from town down side o' a lonesome woods. Dah I sot puffin' an' a-blowin' same as a steam engine.
"I dreampt dat I drapt off to sleep arter so long a time 'cause I was so tired. I slept a long while. When I woke up I was nigh 'bout skeered to death! fo' dah stood de purty little man wid his shiny beaver on de side o' his head! He wagged his head sort o' sassy at me an' saed: 'Heap o' dem men dat chased you was chu'ch members. Didn't I tell you dat some chu'ch members is 'tendin' to my business better'n I ken 'tend to it myself?' "I was nigh 'bout skeered to death! an' started to run. But de ole devil hollered, 'Stop, you ole fool you! I don't have to run arter niggas to git 'em!' "Twixt de niggas dat make 'tend dey is Gawd's servants but ain't, an' dem dat commit all grades o' sin fum dat o' bein' lazy an' no 'count up to de crimes o' murder an' rape—I don't have to run arter niggas; I git all de niggas I want 'dout havin' to run arter 'em.
"But mind you, all de time de ole devil was doin' all dis big talk, he kept inchin' up closa to me till he made a break fo' me, an' I tuk out an' run.
"I was gittin' up a purty good gait a-runnin' when all at onct I heerd somethin' go bla-a-a-m ! bla-a-a-m !
"I thought sho' ole .Satan had me! But I looked up an' seed de moonlight shinin' in de room. Bless me! ef I hadn't done fell out o' de bed on my haed.
"Well, de folks 'gun to call me prophet arter I told my dream; fo' dey saed my vision meant dat I was called to be a preacher an' a prophet. But when I'd 'bout made up my mind I was sho' 'nough called, dat no 'count nigga Jeta riled my soul 'bout de bes' ooman dat evah drawed breath o' life, an' I gin him a good heatin', an' den de chu'ch tuk my deyconry away fum me. Sence dey tuk my deyconry, I ain't thought no mo' 'bout bein' no prophet nor preacher nuther."
Wilson's Ungenerous Act.
"For thy sweet love remember'd such wealth brings That then I scorn to change my state with kings."
—Sonnet XXIX.—Shakespeare.
I am afraid Wilson felt a trifle chagrined over his labors with Alma when he found out that she loved him.
At first he was disposed to doubt her profession. He said to me: "I was thinking only of Christ, while she was thinking only of me."
"Oh, no," said I, "I don't think that. I think rather that her love for you taught her what it is to love the Saviour."
"That's what Julia told me at church," he replied.
"That's what your church folks all believe," said I, "and it seems to me you are to be congratulated that it is so."
A pained look came into his face.
"You misunderstand me," I quickly assured him. "What I mean to say is, that I think you are to be congratulated that you are able to inspire a pure young woman with such a love as leads her to give her heart to the Saviour."
My pastor said nothing to this. His long silence seemed to indicate that a new idea had dawned on him.
I had this conversation with him Wednesday following the beautiful Sabbath.
As time went on, Alma was so different—Wilson living in the house with her had abundant opportunity to mark this difference—that no one knowing her could doubt that she had experienced a change of heart. The young preacher ceased to feel chagrined that so interesting a young woman was in love with him, when Alma rang the true gold of the kingdom, although he declared that he was not interested in any woman.
He saw just as much of Alma now, as he did when in season and out, he besought her to surrender herself to the Master.
That young lady must, however, have made some discovery about the preacher who persisted in declaring that he had no interest in any woman; for Alma's love ceased to make her unhappy as it had formerly done.
Belle had said that she hoped something would happen to open our pastor's eyes to his heart. Well, that something did happen.
Monday, the fifteenth of July, Rev. Walter Granville's church gave a steamboat excursion down the river. Now, who does not know that colored folks love watermelon, chicken and excursions? Well, if they love these three things more than the white people, it is doubtful if they get more of the three things than the white people do.
Negroes are often scolded for the money expended on summer excursions. It is not to be forgotten that they have fewer outlets for pleasure than white people have. Indeed, while we laugh over the fact that colored people go to funerals as recreation—that is, certain classes of them—yet it remains true that the Negro church furnishes the principal pleasurable occasions open to the race: all the public amusements open to white people of the South are closed to the people of color.
The foregoing prepared for the announcement that Rev. Granville's church picnic carried an immense crowd ; chicken, chicken and chicken; and so many watermelons that a colored green grocer, a droll wag, said: " Watermil-lions is gone up in price, 'cause so many darkeys has gone down de river."
Wilson was the only one of our coterie left in town. It will be understood that he would hardly care to go on Granville's excursion. Alma did not care to go with the Harpers, but with Belle and myself, so that she could be with Julia.
We had a most delightful time. Fairfax and his sweetheart were so happy that everybody remarked about it. It was an open secret that they were to be married after the opening in September of Rockford College, so that the faculty and such students as they desired to be present might attend the marriage, which was to be an elegant home affair.
Mom Kitty, who was standing with Belle, Blake, Warren Pogue and myself, remarked, looking at Fairfax and Julia: "Ain't dem chillun happy?"
"Yes," replied Blake with a sigh, "very happy indeed."
"Hit does my soul good to see 'em so happy," continued she, with sweet motherliness.
A look flashed between Belle and myself as we saw Pogue flush in silence, while around handsome Blake's mouth lurked a sardonic smile. Apropos of Julia's engagement, a white man, one of the trustees of Rockford College, remarked at commencement: "I can't see why she accepted the blackest one of all her suitors."
Blake was Julia's own color, while Pogue looked what he was; he was Dr. Warren Pogue's son, and his mother was an octoroon. Mrs. Holt, I fear, held the white man's view about her step-daughter's preference; but who can give the why of any woman's choice? Or, for that matter, of any heart's choice of a mate?
We had a most delightful day off on the historic river and in the pleasant wood where the picnic was held. The excursionists were due in Rockford at seven o'clock that evening, but we did not get hack until nine-thirty. The cause of this is, that we had a slight breakdown. This, however, was soon repaired; but when the news of the trifling accident reached town, it had grown, as traveling news has a trick of doing, out of all semblance of the truth. The rumor of our mishap gathered as it rolled, so that when it reached Rockford this is the size of it: "The boat has sunk; lots of folks have been drowned !"
Now, although the exact truth came lagging into town some time after the wild-eyed, dishevelled rumor, nevertheless, when our steamboat sided up to the wharf, a large, anxious crowd were awaiting it.
Wilson was in the assemblage. The rumor that had smitten colored Rockford had evidently hit my dear pastor and classmate so hard as to open his blinded eyes to his own heart. Zeke Brown told me afterwards in great glee: "I seed Elda Wilson gwine down town like ole Satan was arter him ! T tried to run on wid him fo' walkin' so fast. I saed: "Hold on dah, Elda!—take yo' time! Don't you know you is free? You is dressed up like a white man, but runnin' like a nigga!'' Jake Simpson said to me: "Hush man! Don't you know de boat done sunk?"
"Dat was de fust o' my bearin' de news; but Lawsee man! Elda Wilson was gwine down town dat fas' dat he didn't pay a bit mo' 'tention to me dan a rabbit!" Well, to make a long story short, "de Elda" had a carriage at the wharf; and then and there Wilson did the only ungenerous thing I ever knew him to do.
Mr. and Mrs. Harper were there ready to go home. He had a double-horse, four-seated landau. Did my pastor offer Mr. and Mrs. Harper seats in his carriage? Not a bit of it! He took only Alma home in it! Afterwards, he told me in high feather that, although the hackman drove like Jehu, nevertheless, before they got to Harper's Gate, it was all settled that his convert, over whom he had worked so faithfully, was to be his wife.
"Wade, old boy! I don't blame you folks for laughing at me. As I look back over my experience with Alma, I have to laugh at myself! But Wade, old fellow, I'm not blind now! 'Alma is,' as Zeke Brown would say, 'jes de sweetis thing dat evah drawed breath!'"
We were all happy in our dear pastor's happiness.
Days of Waiting.
"O leal heart! O pure heart!
O royal heart and true!
To make more bright The day's sweet light I watch and wait for you."
E. N. Gunnison.
How A "Friend of the Peopul" Made Himself.
"Why should the poor be flattered?
No, let the candied- tongue lick absurd pomp, And crook the pregnant hinges of the knee Where thrift may follow fawning."
Hamlet.
Soon after Rockford commencement the Hon. Nathan F. Cleggett had been moved by his hurt of heart over Negro uplifting to vow to introduce a bill in the coming session of the legislature to turn the institution into an asylum for the colored insane now confined in jails.
The proposal of this magnanimous solon had been pretty thoroughly ventilated by the State press since commencement. This chivalrous gentleman was evidently seeking popularity by kicking the Negro; but the high-souled law-maker found that he was about to miss his aim. The trouble was, that this gallant member of the Assembly proposed to kick the black man too hard. There were a large class of people whose sense of fair play would not allow them to stand for kicking the people of color of the State. Still others felt that the State would be ashamed in the eyes of the nation by such an injustice. Yet another class believed that while Negro education, both lower and higher, is a gratuity, nevertheless that it is beneath the dignity of the Anglo-Saxon to withhold this boon from those he considers his inferiors. Still another class felt that Negroes must be uplifted by the white people, or else they would drag the white people down.
By autumn the statesman Cleggett was thoroughly convinced that in threatening to turn Rockford into an insane asylum, he had bitten off more than he could chew. Just as thoroughly was he convinced that if he was to make the port for which he had set sail (namely, to land in the harbor of political prominence and power), he must tack, and tack quick, to catch the strong wind of public opinion.
This he did.
He saw that the people of the State were against his chivalrous proposal to pluck up Rockford College by the roots. If he was not to be relegated to his native obscurity, he must find some way to let himself down easy, and still on his feet. Well, now how did this great "friend of the pepul" manage to let himself down easy? Simply enough.
He told the absolute truth. He said his primary desire was not the destruction of Rockford College (that was the truth), but (and this was not) his real object was to focus attention on Rockford College so that the white people could decide whether or not it was wise to spend money for Negro higher education when the State had so many other demands upon it.
The springing of the Negro higher education issue was a master stroke. It brought the feline law-maker down on his feet, not only easy, but firm. (To change the figure), he found his sail bellied with the strong wind of popular approval. He felt sure that by January he who proposed that Rockford College should cease to be a college and become simply an industrial normal school, he felt sure that the man who championed the measure would certainly make the harbor. Yes, this political tumble bug (and you know the tumble bug works in filth; it rolls together a ball of filth in which it deposits its eggs) had, by kicking a lowly people, secured his future.
Of course, as Holt and the colored people had put forth most strenuous efforts to keep Rockford from being turned into an asylum, so now they had done all in their power to keep it from being turned into simply a normal and industrial school.
To avert the destruction of Rockford, Fairfax had seen the Attorney-General and Wilson, the kind-hearted Governor. The latter gentleman, notwithstanding his theory that Negro education is a gratuity, was quite hot in his opposition to converting the college into an asylum.
He went so far as to say that any white gentleman (and gentleman in his mouth meant aristocrat) ought to be above advocating any such scheme. Now, the Hon. Nathan F. Cleggett was one of the South's new men. Zeke Brown called him "one o' dem rich poo' white folks dat ain't used to nothin''t all."
The Governor's outspoken opposition to Cleggett's project led Holt to expect the support of the chief executive and the aristocrats in retaining Rockford's college department.
When the president saw His Excellency, however, Holt found him noncommittal on the higher education question. He said to my classmate: "I'm a friend to your race and to the school; but since the white people pay most of the taxes, you people had better let well enough alone about Rockford College; you'd better let the taking out of the college course alone for fear the white people will get angry and tear up the whole school by the roots, as Mr. Cleggett first proposed."
You can imagine that after hearing the most staunch champion of our school talk that way, you can imagine that Holt did not have much hope of retaining the college course; however, the president thought it wise to do his best to avert the change threatened; so he had asked both Fairfax and Wilson to go to the capital.
Waiting were the professor and the minister to be sent for in the interest of retaining Rockford's higher course.
Monday, September The Twenty-Sixth.
"I love thee—I love thee!
'Tis all that I can say; It is my vision in the night My dreaming in the day."
Hood.
'Twas Monday, September twenty-sixth. Rockford College had been in session three weeks. Autumn has been sung thus: "The melancholy days have come, the saddest of the year."
But it was of a Northern autumn and the month of November, too, at that, which Bryant sang as "the melancholy days."
You could hardly get any Rockforder (certainly not any one with any sense of beauty in his or her soul) to agree that these closing days of September were the saddest of the year. No; for the frosts had turned the forests into a fairyland of gold and green, a variegated mass of color that beneath the cloudless sunshine reminded one of the Eleysian fields of the classic Greeks.
Now, whoever else might regard those autumn days as "melancholy," it is certain that Professor Fairfax and Miss Julia Holt did not so regard those days which witnessed the issuing of their wedding invitations.
These went out on Wednesday, the twentieth. In the Holt home, which had been tastefully decorated for the occasion, the grand affair was to take place Thursday, the twenty-ninth, in the parlor in the recess of the large bay-window, the bride and groom standing under a flower bell and facing the window, where was to stand the celebrant of the marriage, President David J. Holt. (I wonder how a man feels marrying his own daughter?) Several were to wait on the couple; but Wilson was to be the best man, and Alma best maid; Julia's sisters, Olga and Gladys, aged six and seven, were to be flower girls, while on the piano in the broad hall, down into which came the wide stairway, Belle was to play the wedding march from Lohengrin.
Two hundred invitations had been given to the house; announcement cards were to be issued. Everybody of note in colored Rockford society, some students, and all the faculty of Rockford College were bidden. Mrs. Holt wanted to have a wedding supper, but her husband said he was satisfied that the refreshments should be cake and cream. The new couple were to have a room in Rockford college as all the teachers, for the sake of discipline, were required to do.
Monday night, September twenty-sixth, Belle gave a bridesmaids' tea. I called it a hen-party, because Belle decreed that no man should be present—not even myself.
Julia, Mrs. Holt, Alma, all the bridesmaids and even little Olga and Gladys were present. They had a fine supper and a jolly time.
Of course the affair came off early in the evening.
Holt was to go over for his wife and little girls, but Julia was to stay all night with Belle.
That very morning, Wilson and Fairfax had been called to the State capitol in the interest of Rockford College higher course.
A Wedding Gift.
"\et heed thou wisely these; give seldom to thy better; For such obtrusive boon shall savor of presumption."
"Moreover, heed then this; give to thine equal charily."
TUPPER.
The Romans and the Greeks worshipped idols of wood and stone.
The dog, the cat, the bull—these were gods among the still more refined ancient Egyptians.
Why did so refined a folk as the Greeks bow down to wood and stone? Why were the wonderfully artistic ancient dwellers on the Nile such gross nature worshippers?
At first blush this may seem strange; but you have only to look around you to see the reason why these peoples bowed down before objects so ignoble. Both the dwellers in Hellas and those on the Nile bowed before objects at first intended as symbols of either the Deity or of some benevolent or malevolent power of supposed divine origin. But after the lapse of time, the idea which was symbolized was forgotten; then there remained nothing but the symbol.
In all religious and social affairs how easy it is to forget the idea for which a form or symbol stands ! How easy it is to degenerate into holding on simply to forms and symbols!
These holidays—Thanksgiving, Christmas and Easter—what are they to the vast majority but empty symbols, meaningless ceremonies, idealess, heartless forms !
So it is with many social customs. A wedding gift ought to mean love. How often it means fear—the fear of being considered short if one is not sent when an invitation is received.
How often wedding invitations are sent out in the spirit of greed. This is frequently just as surely the meaning of a wedding invitation as if it was printed on that invitation: "Please bring or send a present; silver is preferred."
Holt insisted that Julia's invitations should be verbal. He said to me: "I told Myrtle that she wanted to send cards to everybody she ever heard of so as to reap a rich harvest of presents. Julia feels about the matter as I do."
Now it cannot be denied that even a few verbal invitations brought in a rich harvest of presents; but while there was some "toadying," as there will be on all such occasions, yet what President Holt said is a fair indication that the Fairfax-Holt verbal invitations were not sent in the highwayman spirit of "stand and deliver."
But as has been said among colored people as among white folks, there is plenty of "toadying." Some, therefore,'sent presents to the presidential residence of Rockford College principally because it would never do in the world not be to be connected with the wedding of the accomplished daughter of a college president who was to give her hand to one of the most brilliant men of the race.
Some other presents were sent by people not in what may be called the social four hundred, but by people who wished to pay their respects to the college president who did not think the lowliest of his race beneath his notice, and to show love for the kind hearted mother and the lovely bride-elect who had helped so many by sympathy and material gifts—not letting the left hand know what the right did.
How did I know about Julia's presents, do you ask? Well, I saw them daily.
The girls' matron, Mrs. Ada Harmon, was a well-to-do widow in middle life whose husband left her a well-stocked farm; rather left her and her only child, a girl of nine.
Mrs. Harmon, during the vacation, had so given her energy to the superintendence of her farm that she returned to Rockford at the opening of the term run down physically and mentally. Typhoid fever had fastened upon her by the time the invitations were out, and, consequently, I was at Rockford College sometimes twice a day to see Mrs. Harmon. Both Julia and her parents, if I visited the presidential residence, showed me the gifts that came in—rich and quite varied were the gifts displayed on a large mahogany table in a corner of the parlor on the opposite side of the hall from the parlor in whose bay-window the ceremony was to be performed.
Monday night, the twenty-sixth, Mrs. Harmon grew worse, and a messenger was sent for me, who arrived at my house just as President Holt drove up in a closed carriage to take his wife and little girls home from the bridesmaids' tea.
I always hate to hitch up my horse. That I would have had to do that night if I drove over to the college, for my boy had gone home. President and Mrs. Holt offered me a seat in their carriage, but I declined, because I feared I'd crush the little girls' dresses if all of us crowded into the carriage; but rather than either to hitch up my horse or to walk to Rockford College, I accepted Holt's invitation to go with him, by climbing up and riding with the hackman. When we got to the college, Holt went into the house and hurried the little girls off to bed, while Mrs. Holt went on into the college building with me into the sick room.
You know, in typhoid fever the temperature rises at night. Mrs. Harmon's would continue to rise higher each night until the disease reached its climax. Hers had not yet reached its crisis. I was not, therefore, alarmed at her condition, so did what I could to relieve her, and to reassure those who attended the sick lady.
I had accompanied Mrs. Holt to the steps of their porch and was about to return to town when she urged me to come to see the very handsome present from Mr. Warren Pogue, which had been received just before she, Julia, and the little girls had started to my house for tea. Holt, from the porch, heard her invitation and went into the parlor where the presents were, and lit the gas.
We three were standing at the mahogany table admiring Pogue's present, a handsome tea service that must have cost twenty-five dollars, when Mrs. Holt's eyes fell on a bundle—a present that must have arrived even since the husband went to town after the wife and little girls. Hastily she tore open the bundle. The present proved to be from Zeke Brown, certainly not one of Rockford's four hundred. He had sent a gift that expressed his appreciation of the kindly notice of him by the Holts, and the Norwalk coterie's sympathetic hearing of his tale of how he lost what he called "my deyconry." He had had retouched an old likeness of the wife of his youth. This he had put in a silver frame.
"My lost Eliza" was written on a card tacked in one side of the frame.
Our three heads together, we gazed on that photograph. Then, in silence, we looked into each other's astonished eyes.
Mrs. Holt broke the silence. "Now, Dave! what did I tell you?"
Her lips quivered.
"Look at that chin, Joe Wade! Don't you see that's Gus's mother? I've told you, Dave Holt, a hundred times that Augustus Fairfax is Jeter Horn's son!
And down she flung herself in tears in a chair.
There was no denying what she said. The likeness between the pictured face and Fairfax's was too startling to be accounted for in any other way. I had suspected the truth. Holt had, too; nevertheless, we were deeply moved as we stood gazing at each other and at Mrs. Holt weeping in the chair. Suddenly she leaped to her feet and, pointing a finger at her husband, said, in a voice hoarse with feeling: "Dave Holt, if you had listened to me, Julia would be engaged to someone else!"
I saw Holt's back stiffen: "Myrtle! calm yourself!" came in measured, masterful tones.
"I've told you a dozen times that Gus is no stranger to us. We know what he is no matter who his father is, and Julia herself shall decide whether or not she will marry him."
"My God! old drunken Jeter Horn's son for my son-in-law," she cried, wringing her hands and flinging herself into a chair.
"Myrtle! be careful of what you say! You will be sorry for your words some day."
"Oh, Dave! if you had only listened to me, if you had only just listened !--"
"Well, if I had, my dear, how would that have helped the matter?"
Moaned she: "Oh, Julia might have been engaged to someone else!"
"Yes, to Warren Pogue; and you know you would be perfectly satisfied if she were, although he, too, is a drunkard's son."
She leaped to her feet and said, as she flashed out of the room: "Dave, you know I am not prejudiced to color!"
I thought it was time for me to leave too. As I went towards the steps, Holt wrung my hand and asked: "Joe, don't you think I'm right to let Julia decide for herself?"
"I do, indeed, Holt. And furthermore, I think the thing to do is to keep quiet. Fairfax has not the slightest suspicion of the truth ; neither has Zeke, for he thinks Jeter's lost child is a girl. I wouldn't even tell Julia about it. If she does not discover it from the picture, so well—so good. If she does, then I'd let her decide for herself."
"Those are just my views of it, Joe."
Wringing my hand, he said: "Joe, I am burdened, burdened! Come in to see us when you come over in the morning. Now, good-night, Joe; I must go and hunt up Myrtle."
"Good-night," I replied, holding his hand in a long, silent clasp.
The night was crisp and cloudless.
I, too, was burdened as I started to walk home, where Julia was with my wife. I hoped Belle and I never would have such a disagreement as I had just witnessed between my friends.
As I walked beneath the silver stars, I thought that if they control human fate, as the ancients said they do, I felt that the stars were busy, very busy that night with the fate, the happiness of Holt and his wife, and of Julia and her affianced.
Who could tell what a day would bring forth?
I saw nothing of Julia nor of Belle either that night, for they slept together. However, I heard a-plenty of them both, for, girl like, Belle and Julia talked nearly all night.
My thoughts about what I had on my heart however. kept me awake rather than the droning of the voices in an adjoining room.
Much Land Yet To Be Possessed.
"There remaineth yet very much land to be possessed."
Josn. 13:1.
Yes, so long I kept awake Monday night between the burden on my heart and the talking of Belle and Julia, that I overslept myself Tuesday morning.
When I got up, the boy had made the fire, attended to the horse and Belle had almost got breakfast. Everything was all straight in the house, though we had had a party; because Belle had got Sister Adeline Hood, as it was her custom to do in an emergency, to help her clean up. My wife would not let me get a cook for her, though I was willing and able to do so. Colored people don't usually like to work for their own color. They feel it to be a humiliation to do so. Then, too, some colored employers are so afraid that a domestic will encroach on their dignity that well-to-do colored employers often prove the hardest masters.
What with the colored employers' morbid fear for their dignity, and the feeling of the average wage earner that it is a humiliation to work for one's own color, as big a bugaboo as the domestic servant question is with white employers, it is a still bigger one with colored people who must employ help. Southern people have generated a good bit of heat over the domestic servant question. One lady of Rockford wrote a newspaper article in which she blamed all the troubles on Negro education.
Asked she quite bitterly in this article: "Are white men going to continue to educate Negroes, when their wives have to go into the kitchen because you can't get a decent Negro that has been educated to be a domestic?"
There is no use in any one's getting red in the face over the fact the foregoing questions revealed. What fact does the query reveal ? This: that no Negro becomes a domestic if that person can find other employment.
Now, ought any one to blame people of color for pre-fering not to be servants, especially if they have by education, been fitted to work for themselves? White people that can do something else do not prefer to be domestics; and human nature is but human nature!
There are, however, special reasons why no Negro becomes a servant if she or he can help it.
One is, that slavery has dishonored manual toil in the South. White people are quite sensitive about the matter of manual labor—indeed, so much so that it is almost impossible to get white men and women to engage in certain kinds of manual labor which, for time immemorial, has been done by dusky hands. Now, while both white and black Southern folks are learning to set a higher estimate on manual toil, yet with reference to the matter of their estimate of labor's dignity, "There remaineth yet very much land to be possessed."
Then, too, another thing that makes the servant question a burning one, is that in the South domestic wages are poor, and the South's treatment of the dusky domestics is what might be expected from employers less than a half century from Negro slavery. Because Dixie has been living on Ham's enforced labor, and has had the sun-kissed folk wholly at her mercy, the Southland has no deep sense of how poorly she pays, and how badly she treats her domestics. Slavery, in the master class, fosters emperious arrogance, and in the slave class, servility; so that it is not strange that the South is impatient that the Negro domestic is disposed to resent now treatment that Dixie from time out of memory has thought it her privilege to mete out to her black toilers.
Now while it is true that stern necessity, the fruitful mother of invention, has taught Anglo-Saxons that live South of Mason's and Dixon's line much about payment and treatment of Negro domestics that the white people of this section never knew before Appomattox, yet, nevertheless, as regards wages and treatment of servants, for the Southern people: "There remaineth yet very much land to be possessed."
The whole servant question is a matter of the Golden Rule. If people will only, in imagniation, put themselves in the domestics' place, pay them better and treat them better, they will get a higher grade of domestics and so better service; for less and less will it be true that only the least intelligent and least reliable element of the race will hire out in domestic service.
I had a boy to attend my horse, bring in water and fuel and to make fires; but Belle preferred to do her own housework. A white woman in her position would think her dignity demanded at least one, if not two, servants. That is why a Southern Negro that does mental work will often save money on an income on which a Southern white man in like position will barely eke out an existence.
"O Fond Dove."
"Let me alone, the dream is my own And the heart is full of rest"
Jean Ingelow.
As I started to say, Belle, leaving Julia in the guest chamber, when I got up had breakfast almost ready.
I went into my office, intending to go into the kitchen to greet my wife. But I was beguiled to sit down at my work to skim my Medical Journal. I had barely time to open it when Belle heard me; and my "Heaven's last best gift to man" came rushing into my office, plumped her little self on my knee and gave me such a soulful labial morning salutation as makes life worth living.
Belle left me to return to the kitchen. Upon putting my hand in my breast coat pocket I fished out two letters that my wife had given me the night before to post. The cat would be out of the bag about my lapse of memory if I called the boy to mail them. Instead, therefore, I put on my hat and softly stepped out to go to the Star mail box two squares down the street, opposite Mc-Call's tobacco factory.
An early accident to a laborer at this factory, however, deprived me of the pleasure of breakfasting with the two sweet ladies at my house. My services were called for a boy who had got his leg broken by an elevator. I sent home for my satchel containing what I needed, with word to Belle not to wait breakfast for me.
It was nine o'clock by the time I had done what I could for the injured youth and returned home. As I entered the gate, I heard Belle accompany Julia in "O Fair Dove! O Fond Dove!" Unseen by either of them, I stole by the back hall up to the half-open parlor door, and, through the crack, saw Belle's shapely fingers gliding carelessly over the piano keys, while as the cloudless morning flooded the beautiful parlor, with her head thrown back, her eyes looking into vacancy, stood Julia facing me, her mellow contralto voice flooding the air with these dreamy words of that plaintive song: "My love he stood at my right hand, His eyes were grave and sweet; Methought he said, in this fair land O! is it thus we meet?
Ah! maid most dear, I am not here; I have no place, no part, No dwelling more, by sea or shore, But only in thy heart.
O Fair Dove! O Fond Dove!
Till night rose o'er the bourne The dove on the mast, as we sailed fast, Did mourn, and mourn, and mourn."
The perfect sympathetic accompaniment, the rapt, tense pose and the feeling, surcharged voice of the singer—how it all thrilled me! Was that song of hopeless love prophetic? Would Julia be a fair, fond mourning dove when she came to know what I already knew?
These reflections were cut short, however, when the piano ceased and I was discovered eavesdropping and overwhelmed with questions about the accident and with sympathy for not having had my breakfast. Even as Belle hurried off to get my dejeuner word came that the closed carriage Julia had ordered to take her home at half-past eleven would be on hand according to order.
Often colored people complain that the element of the race that are most intelligent and law-abiding get scant notice by the Southern newspaper press; whereas, the disreputable and criminal element are kept constantly before the public gaze.
While it is to be feared that in this matter there is "method in the South's madness," nevertheless the thing complained of is not to be set down wholly to race prejudice.
It's a fact patent to careful observers that the best things and people never figure as largely in the public prints as do things and persons less worthy. The reason of this is that goodness, the every day, the usual do not constitute news, but rather what is unusual and out of the ordinary. History, says one, is an account not of the doings but of the undoings of men. Accordingly, some one else has said: "Blessed is the nation whose annals are brief." Brief are the annals of Rome during the age of the Antoines, one of the happiest eras of the Roman Empire.
Blessed indeed, therefore, are those days in one's life when there is no news, because nothing unusual has happened; but instead, the current of one's life has flowed uninterruptedly on. Until something interrupts the flow of one's life, we are apt to forget how placid is that flow and to underestimate the strength of the current. So, too, we may underrate the depth and strength of the stream of love until the current encounters let or hindrance.
Above the Falls, where the Niagara River is not interrupted, that stream is placid and commonplace—not unlike a thousand other rivers of the world; but Niagara, interrupted by its sheer leap down a precipice of one hundred and sixty feet, becomes a world wonder, sublime and awe-inspiring!
Julia's love as I saw it at nine o'clock when, in mellow voice, she poured out "O Fond Dove"—Julia's love was calm and ordinary; but Niagara Falls, magnificent in power, did I behold Julia's love at twelve o'clock in her father's house.
My services at Mc Call's factory made me late in all my morning work. Hence, it was that Julia's carriage went up the hill to the campus in front of me as I was making my usual morning visit to Mrs. Harmon. Having seen that lady, I was about to drop into Holt's to talk over matters, as the night before my friend had requested me to do.
He spied me from his office in the college building, and, as the dinner bell had rung, he made his way home. Also Mrs. Holt saw me coming and was coming to let me in; so that she, her husband and myself met in the broad hall, she in the door of the north parlor, and Holt and myself by the door of the south parlor.
In the instant of our meeting, Julia was coming down the broad stairs to meet her father, whom she had not seen since last night. She had Zeke Brown's present, the picture, in her hand; and in her hazel eyes, now dark with feeling, the humiliating discovery that her affianced is Eliza's child and, therefore, old drunken, disreputable Jeter Horn's lost son. Evidently her lover's likeness to Eliza and his mental resemblance to Jeter which, she had noted so often with uneasiness, she could explain upon no other hypothesis than that her promised husband was the lost child, and that Zeke Brown was mistaken in supposing that lost child was a girl. Now the Holts were proud of their family's respectability; evidently then, when the unwelcome truth that she was bound by promise to the besotted pauper's son was thrust upon the proud girl, she fled to her room, taking the picture with her, there to fight her battle alone.
Now coming to meet her father with the humbling news, she was at the foot of the steps, the fateful present in her trembling grasp. There all four of us stood in silence.
Julia's eyes began to travel backward and forward between her stepmother, standing in the door of the north parlor, and her father and myself, standing in the door of the south parlor. What in her mother's face did the girl discover, in the face of the mother who, all along, had been tacitly opposed to Fairfax on account of his color? Whatever she saw made her turn from her stepmother to her father and fling herself in his arms, hiding her face on his bosom, the while her lithe frame convulsed with silent weeping.
How gently, in tender voice, he patted and soothed her !
The step-mother, with high head and blazing eyes, disappeared into the study!
A moment later, back in flight to her room Julia's sylph-like figure was also disappearing up the stairway two steps at a single bound; she was sobbing, not loud but deep. We two meanwhile stood in awkward silence in the hall where we had been left by the daughter whose pride was sore wounded, and the step-mother as resentful towards the bride-elect as if she had purposely sought to discredit the family.
Holt broke the silence between us. He asked in thick voice, with an irrelevance that would have been laughable had it not been so sad: "Joe, won't you stay and take dinner with us?"
"No, I thank you, Dave; Belle will be expecting me home."
A silent hand-clasp between us; and, a few minutes later, I was in my buggy on the way home to Belle, wondering whether or not there would be a wedding. The Holts were proud, Julia the proudest of the three.
"As The Tents Of Kedar."
"I am black, but comely, O ye daughters Of Jerusalem, as the tents of Kedar."
Tidings.
"If thou seest the oppression of the poor, And violent perverting of judgment And justice in a province, Marvel not at the matter; For He that is higher than the highest regardeth; And there be higher than they."
Ecc. 5:8.
Holt was anxious for the tidings from the capital about Rockford College course; so eager that he met the three-thirty train on which Wilson and Fairfax were to return Tuesday afternoon. The professor got left, however, and consequently would not arrive until the next train, at five-fifteen; so that it fell to the minister's lot to apprise the president of the outcome of the mission— Fairfax, to the Attorney-General, and Wilson, to the Governor, which two gentlemen, with the Superintendent of Public Instruction, constituted the State Board of Education.
The Governor, as has been intimated, was a fair-minded man and a friend to the race; but while he personally was in favor of the State continuing to provide higher education for the Negro as it did for the white race, he did not encourage Wilson to hope that the college course would be retained, because public opinion was in favor of providing only industrial education for colored people; and he thought the coming legislature hoped to make itself a name that would give the party faction which it represented a new lease on power in the State. As His Excellency was not of that faction, he feared he would not be able to do much with the incoming legislature.
The Attorney - General was more optimistic. He pledged himself to do all he could to have the college retained. He did not himself think that sober, conservative public opinion was against Negro higher education.
He believed that thoughtful people felt that Negroes needed, and can take the same kind of training white people need and get.
The Superintendent of Public Instruction, whom Fairfax and Wilson saw jointly, was quite hot against Cleg-gett, who had precipitated the whole discussion about Rockford College. He went so far as to call him a contemptible nobody who had raised the issue, not because he was interested in public welfare, but simply to stir up race feeling for his own political advancement. The Superintendent, as he bade Wilson and Fairfax good-bye, called attention to his often expressed position regarding education, which is this: "The best education the State can afford for every child, white and black."
Holt felt encouraged. He believed the chances were pretty good for the retention of the college course, since both the Superintendent of Public Instruction and the Attorney-General belonged to the faction that controlled the incoming legislature, and the Attorney-General would probably be the next Governor of the State.
A Man.
"Mine honor is my life; both grow in one; Take honor from me, and my life is done."
Rich. II., Act. I.—Scene I.
Of course I emptied myself to Belle when I went home to dinner Tuesday.
We had often talked over Fairfax's case, especially after what we had learned by the talk together of Mom Kitty and Juddy Hill on commencement day. I had not, however, discussed the Zeke Brown present episode with her, for the reason that Julia's being with my wfie Monday night and Tuesday morning up until I went out on my daily calls gave us no opportunity to do so, privately; and our loyalty to our little friend sealed our lips about the matter.
She might never have made the discovery. If she had not, and Gus had not, we never would have breathed the affair. But now she had unearthed the secret and was miserable beyond words. Mrs. Holt's lack of sympathy with Julia in her crucial hour made her turn to Belle. I imagine the Holts had quite a stormy time after I left—Mrs. Holt insisting that her husband should call off the marriage, but he insisting that Gus and Julia alone should decide whether or not the marriage should take place. The bride in her anguished perplexity had asked my wife to go over to Rockford College Tuesday night. I had taken Belle over about eight o'clock. Belle and Julia were closeted in the room of the fiancee. Mrs. Holt and myself had a long talk over the affair, her husband (a thing unusual) being busy in his office in the college building.
I don't know whether he was out of the house because he was so busy, or perplexed, or because the relations between himself and wife over Julia's case were a little strained.
As I started to say, she and I had a long heart-to-heart talk about Julia's affair, such as is possible only to life-long friends. At first, she was disposed to pitch into me for siding with her husband; but I think I succeeded in convincing her (at least she said she was convinced) that Holt's proposal to let Julia and her lover decide for themselves was the wisest course.
This was after we had talked an hour and a half and I was about to go and hunt up Holt. Just as I got seated in his office, there was another knock at the door.
"Why, it's you, professor," said Holt, opening the door and letting Fairfax in, extending the young man a warm hand.
"I haven't seen you since you came back from the capital; but Wilson told me all about it."
"No, sir, I missed the train."
"Have a seat, won't you?" said Holt, pushing out a chair.
"I haven't seen you either, Gus," said I, shaking his hand heartily, so heartily that he looked at me curiously and said: "Oh, I haven't been gone so long or so far."
"No," said Holt, "but you went far enough to do the school a great service. I was just writing some important letters about the matter; and I want to thank you for going to the capital."
"I am glad I have been of service to you; but I did not call to see you about that," continued Fairfax, rising. "I was on my way to the house to see you; I saw a light in here, but I didn't expect to find anyone with you. I came to see about a personal matter." Then there was silence, in which he looked at me. I stood up as if to go.
"All right, professor, I suppose you want to see me alone."
"Dr. Wade can stay, Mr. President, unless you object," said Fairfax; "in fact, I would rather he would stay."
"Very well," said Holt.
"I have something to show you," he said, advancing towards Holt and handing my classmate a companion picture to the one sent Julia. Holt took it and looked at it long and curiously in surprise, while Fairfax and myself watched him in silence.
In a voice of suppressed feeling the young professor asked: "Did you notice anything peculiar about the picture?"
"Well, yes, I—I think I do, professor," hesitated Holt.
He drew a step closer to the president and, with something of the confidingness of his boyish days when he used to go to Holt with his troubles, he said with all his soul in his voice: "Mr. Holt, that's my mother's picture that Zeke Brown sent me as a wedding present! I am anonymous no longer. Jeter Horn is my father—I remember her. I've come to say this—this because of Julia!"
Here his feelings stopped him. We were both full.
"Mr. Holt," continued he, regaining self-control, "I don't think if you had known you would have been willing for me to enter your family; and while I feel that I am just as good as anybody that walks God's green earth" —and here he straightened up and looked Holt straight in the eyes—"yet my self-respect, Mr. Holt, demands that I tell you all, so that you can decide whether or not the —the marriage shall take place."
He was under stress of great feeling. Without hesitation Holt put his hand on Fairfax's shoulder and, in a fatherly tone, said: "Gus, you do not tell me anything I didn't know, as Dr. Wade can tell you. Julia received a like present from Zeke Brown and we saw what you have discovered—saw it last night. Yes, Gus, we saw it last night, Myrtle, Dr. Wade and myself; and my wife and I have reached a decision."
Here Holt paused to let Fairfax grasp what he had said.
The young man backed a few steps away from my classmates and, lifting his eyes to Holt's, asked in a firm but respectful voice: "And what is your decision, sir?" "My decision is to let you and Julia decide what you will do. I shall not attempt to influence her one way or the other. I know you, Gus; I think a man ought to be judged by what he is, not by what somebody else is." Holt was so delicate that he would not say "by what his father is."
Fairfax was deeply moved and greatly relieved, and said, gently: "I thank you, Mr. Holt, for that speech; and I also appreciate the fairness of your decision." Then he turned to go.
"Will you see Julia to-night, Gus?"
"No, no, Mr. Holt, not to-night! Let me hope until to-morrow !"
"Good-night, Dr. Wade; I am glad you were here. I am glad you know all about it! It seems to me this discovery has made me all alone in the world. Goodnight, Mr. Holt, I can't see Julia to-night!"
When the door closed behind him, we sat in silence a moment. Then I said: "What do you think Julia will do, Dave?"
"I don't know, Joe. While, as I told Gus, I'll not attempt to influence Julia's decision, that's more than I can say for Myrtle. They are both very proud; and if my wife continues to try to convince Julia that it will bring ridicule on her to marry Gus—well, there is no telling what a woman will do out of fear of ridicule." "Yes, that's so," replied I.
"No, Joe," continued he with a sigh, "I don't know what effect Myrtle is having on Julia; but this I know, Joe: Gus is every inch a man!"
It must have been one o'clock when Belle and I started home; but at that late hour the watchman, as we were leaving, brought a letter for Julia from Fairfax. Lover like, he changed his mind about communicating with his fiancee that night. I imagine, however, that Fairfax must have written a part at least of the letter before he went in to see Holt. I judged this from the bulk of it—though a man in his state of mind can write voluminously in a very short time; howbeit a fellow in his state of feeling is usually exceedingly critical over what he has written—critical because oversensitive; so I guess Fairfax must have spent some time on the bulky letter I saw in Julia's trembling fingers.
A Progressive Fairy Tale.
Duke.
"I think this tale would win my daughter, too.'"
Othello. Act I., Scene III.
The Harpers, just before Rockford College opened, gave a delightful porch party, principally for the Nor-walkers.
What a jolly party it wasl One of the amusements was a progressive love story, which someone started and carried on to a certain point, when someone else took it up until seven had taken part, each trying to see how touching, how thrilling or how funny each could make his or her part.
It was interesting to note how characteristic was the contribution each made: Holt's serious; Wilson's homi-letical; Belle's and Mrs. Holt's inatter of fact; Alma's love-filled; Julia's dreamy, and Fairfax's—well, all the best of all the others combined and, withal, now pathetic, now poetic, now rollickingly funny.
He was by nature fun-loving. Your laughmaker is usually such a person. The reputation of laughmaker, however, may become a burden. The laughmaker may be very serious minded; but his habit of putting serious things in a funny vein may result in his being thought only funny when he is most in earnest. I suppose Fairfax's performance at Harpers' porch party (and how proud of that performance Julia was) "led him to adopt" the progressive story as the vehicle of his message to Julia. It evinced the young man's mental kinship to Jeter Horn, that in his circumstances he could thus put a message on a matter of so grave moment to himself and fiancee.
Also, it evidenced Julia's perfect understanding of her lover that there was not one chance in a thousand that she would think he was trifling.
She had learned to know that Fairfax was one of those natures that are usually most dead in earnest in meaning when most facetious in expressing that meaning.
When Julia broke open Fairfax's bulky letter, she found that a part of that bulk was made by two sheets of paper pinned together. These sheets, making eight pages, were blank, except for the following: "I love you to the last drop of my blood!"
"Imagine these eight pages filled with every term of endearment that has ever been written; then you have only a faint picture of my heart's love!"
The blank sheets did not surprise Julia, nor did the forthcoming letter (evidently started before he called on Holt) in the form of a progressive fairy tale: "Dear Julia: "Once upon a time a fairy youth to fortune and to fame unknown loved a fairy princess rare and radiant.
"In sooth to fortune and to fame he was unknown; for he thought he was an orphan and knew he had no home nor name; Augustus he called himself. And, oh, he was lonely in the wide world and mother-hungry; for grim-visaged war that stalked fairy land had filched him of his mother. 'Twas thus: "The race to which the youth and maiden belonged, for two weary centuries, had clanked loud the thrall that greed of gain had riveted upon their helpless limbs—aye, clanked them so long with hoarse cry of pain that men of the other race, of the North, rushed furious at the throats of their brothers of the South that the enthralled might go free.
"The battle of the brothers—how it was brave, how it was fierce! When the strife had almost spent its fury, one night some men of the South fell silent and swift on the camp of the men of the North. In the confusion, when death filled the darkness and brave men bit the dust, the youth, a mere child, was separated from his mother, and ever after moured her as dead.
"Events moved swift in fairyland. The youth found for guerdon, toil as a tiller of the soil in the North country.
"A hunger of learning gnawed his soul. He sought a court of learning. There he met the princess; not then a princess. Her sire was fellow seeker of truth with the youth; and for that unfeeling fellow knowledge seekers laid imposing hands upon the motherless fairy-boy and against him waged cruel bantering tongues, the noble father faced the ribald throng and said: 'Whoso touch-eth the youth or waggeth unkind tongue against him, with me, even me must reckon.' "The taunting and imposition ceased; and much the youth loved the sire of the maiden and sought his home, where oft he beheld the maiden and noted the comeliness of her and the sweetness of her and that she despised him not. So, as time fled the youth and the father of the maiden wrought at the books until it came to pass that the soul of the youth was knit to the soul of the maiden; but he knew it not, nor knew she.
"Other years fled and the maiden became a princess in that her sire was elevated to a throne of the realm of learning, and he chose his fellow truth-seeker to support his throne and be a great lord in his realm. Then the princess and the youth plighted their troth.
"How happy they! How smooth flowed the stream of love, reputed in fairyland never to run smooth!
"But a bitterness the future held for them.
"Within reach of the realm of the father of the princess was a city; about the city's highway there walked an old man addicted to pouring liquid fire down his throat—liquid fire that at first cheers, but latterly inebriates. Long years the old man drank until the fiery fluid had destroyed his manhood, made loathsome his body and rendered his name, once a fair one, a hissing and a by-word.
"An ancient prophet also dwelt in this city of fairyland. Ezekiel was his name. Years ago, he and the drunkard had the same woman to wife. The prophet was, by the law that held his race in thrall, separated from his wife, called Eliza; and she was given, by the same law, to the drunkard named Jeter.
"Jeter and Eliza had born unto them a child, which was lost from them in war-time. How the prophet hated the man into whose arms his wife had been put!
"When the youth and princess came to know the prophet, for that the love of the maiden and the youth was beautiful in the eyes of the old man, he took the youthful lovers to his heart. He loved the maiden for her charms, and the youth because he reminded him (the prophet) of his lost Eliza.
"Time brought near the wedding night of the youth and the princess. The palace was decorated. The invitations had gone forth. The wedding feast had been prepared. How the people of fairyland loved the king of the realm of learning and his daughter and her betrothed l "Wedding gifts, rich and rare, began to flow into the palace. The bride-elect walked on air. The groom was so happy that he feared to be happy.
"Monday before the Thursday the wedding was to be, the king sent Augustus on an embassy of grave importance to the realm. Faithfully and well he discharged his trust; and with every drop of blood tingling in blissful anticipation, he hastened back to report to his over-lord and see his betrothed.
"It was not quite six of the clock Tuesday evening when he returned to his abode. As he was preparing to refresh himself with a hath, a change of apparel and his evening's repast, he discovered on his dressing table a wedding gift from the old prophet. He opened it. The present proved to be a picture of the wife, from whom, long years before, the old man had been separated. When the youth beheld the pictured face the sight made his heart flutter. He was partly disrobed. As he took the picture towards the window to scrutinize it—all the time his breath quick and hot—in a mirror he passed the youth got a glimpse of himself. Petrified with astonishment was he. How like as 'two peas' were he and the pictured woman.
''All the past flashed through his mind. He needed not to question who the woman was. His heart leaped to its feet, stretched out eager arms and cried: 'Mother! Mother!' " 'Twas so. At last, he had found whom long, long heart hungry he had sought, his mother, who had been the wife alike of the prophet and the swiller of liquid fire.
"Then burst on him the certitude that he was the fire drinker's son, since Eliza and the prophet were childless.
"Sands of the seashore, were ye alt words, yet were ye too few in number to tell the youth's anguish! O miracle of fairyland that he slew not himself!
"Full well knew he the king and queen, that they were proud. Also, full well'knew he that the princess, rare and radiant, would not have plighted him her troth had she known he was the drunken pauper's son.
"Until he was weak, he had raged against circumstances like a caged lion threshing himself against prison bars until he exhausts himself. Then the youth's better self awoke; his honor spoke to him. Then, what did he say? He sat himself down and wrote the princess this missive: " 'Breath of my body: In anguish unspeakable I write thee.
"'We have plighted our troth; and oh, to the last drop of my blood I love thee; but I fear me that hadst thou known me to be such as I have discovered myself to be—I fear me. O princess, that thou wouldst not have plighted thy troth to me.
" 'I am neither orphaned nor nameless. This day, as a wedding gift, I received a picture of prophet Ezekiel's lost wife—my lost mother. What time I gazed upon the pictured face, I knew it for my mother's. By the same token I knew myself to be the lost son of Jeter, the drunkard.
" 'Since I am not such as thou didst deem me when thou didst swear to bear my name and share my lot, my manhood, my honor cry to me and bid me release thee from thy vow.
"Not, O princess, for that I would be unbound; but that thou mayest be free to reject or accept me, such as thou now knowest me to be—the son of Jeter the shameful—Jeter, the swiller of liquid death.
" 'Here ends, dear Julia, my part of a progressive fairy tale. Take it up where I leave it and finish it—telling whether or not the rare and radiant princess accepted the release that the fairy youth, moved by a sense of honor, laid at her feet.' "P. S.—Since I began the above, I saw your father and told him the discovery I made, when he told me, to my great surprise, that you know all I have been telling you; and that he leaves the whole matter in our hands. Your knowing this and his leaving the matter with us makes it easier for you to decide. It is too late for me to ask a reply from you till morning; but oh, please remember that, in waiting until morning, I wait several eternities! As ever, "Gus."
The Fruitage Forbidden.
"Woman's at best a contradiction."
Pope.
Julia did not keep her lover in suspense the several eternities he expected; but late as it was, in a daintily perfumed note, sent him by the burly night watchman a refusal to accept release from her engagement.
I had use for my satchel of instruments Tuesday afternoon ; they were still in the buggy when I drove Belle over to Rockford College for her to see Julia, from sheer force of habit (for I never liked to leave them in the buggy at night), when Belle and I alighted at Holt's I took the satchel in the house with me and set it down just inside of the hall. I forgot it when my wife and I started home, and did not remember it until we had got down the hill off the campus.
We drove back for it. Mr. and Mrs. Holt were in the south parlor. She called out to my wife as I stood in the hall: "Belle, come in, and let Julia tell you the news in her letter."
In an instant, Belle was on the way to Julia's room.
"What news in Julia's letter?" I asked, addressing Mr. and Mrs. Holt, who were standing side by side before a sofa from which they had just arisen.
"Oh, nothing that you don't know," answered Holt, "only that Gus has released her from her engagement." "What do you think of that, Myrtle?" I asked. "Why, it's just fine!" she replied; "Dave was just telling me that Gus had said the same thing to him in your presence."
"Fine? What do you mean by that?" I asked. "Why, I mean I think his conduct is just fine. His letter to Julia is just splendid. Gus is a high-toned gentleman, that's what he is, and I am proud of him."
"Why, madame, I thought you were opposed to their going on with the marriage?"
"Who said I was?"
"Why, Myrtle, I gathered as much from what you said to me and Dave when we first saw Zeke's present." "Oh, Joe, it's a case of 'forbidden fruit,' now that Gus has practically asked Julia for his ring."
"No, Dave, it isn't that. Gus himself has always been all right so far as I'm concerned; but Joe, when I first heard it, heard that he was old Jeta's son—well, I confess my pride was hurt; but now I am so proud of Gus, I don't care whose son he is."
"That is very sensible talk, my dear," said her husband, looking at her tenderly just as Julia, who, with Belle, had arrived at the foot of the stairs in time to hear what her mother said, left Belle and nestled fondly to her step-mother, who put around the bride-elect a caressing arm.
Belle and I left the Holts that night, all of us greatly relieved.
Holt looked as if a great burden had rolled from his heart. Julia was so happy she was almost hysterical, while Mrs. Holt seemed more like her own gracious self than I had seen her for some time. Some one has said that our first parents would not have cared for the forbidden fruit if it had not been forbidden. I would not like to think Mrs. Holt's change of front was due simply to Fairfax's becoming in a sense forbidden fruit by his releasing Julia from her engagement.
The Flight From A Plight.
"And I, of ladies most deject and wretched, That sucked the honey of his music vows.
........................O woe is me, To have seen what I have seen, see what I see!"
Hamlet.
My door-bell rang about eight o'clock Wednesday morning.
The boy went to answer the call. When he told me President Holt was in the parlor, you can imagine my surprise.
"Why, good-morning, Holt," extending my hand.
"Good-morning, Joe."
"What on earth has happened? You look as if you were at a funeral, old fellow."
"You haven't seen him, have you, Joe?"
"Seen whom?"
"Gus; he's not at the school; Julia hasn't seen him— wasn't in to breakfast."
"Whew!" I whistled. "Why, no; he hasn't been here."
"He's not at the school; no one has seen him; Julia wrote him last night asking him to call this morning. Nobody has seen him; I thought, maybe, he was here or at Harper's with Wilson."
"No, I haven't seen him nor heard of him since last night. Are his things gone?"
"I can't tell; I got a master key and went into his room. His traveling bag is gone; but not his trunk; and I don't know how many of his things."
"I wonder what motive he could have for leaving? Didn't he and Julia make it all right?"
"Yes; she told me she refused his release and asked him to see her this morning; and she and Myrtle are almost crazy. Joe, the clouds are all back. It's a mighty strange thing."
"It is, indeed, Dave; but it may be he is up at Wilson's."
"I believe I will go up and see."
"Why, if you don't want to bother with that carriage, my buggy is hitched up, and I am going up that way and then over to the school; I'll take you, Holt."
"All right." And he went and dismissed the carriage.
We went to Wilson's, but no one there had seen him. Wilson was very much troubled.
When we got to Rockford College, Julia and her mother met us at the door.
"Have you seen him?" asked Mrs. Holt.
"No, we haven't seen anybody that has seen him." Myrtle began to wring her hands while Julia, in tears, fled to her room.
She had hardly got there, while we three were puzzling our heads, when a student came to the door with a note for Julia from Fairfax, which the watchman, who had just waked, had forgot to deliver.
Myrtle flew upstairs with the note, in the hope that it would give us some clue. It ran thus: "Miss Julia Holt: "Since you can not decide, circumstances having- decided for you, I see no necessity of my seeing you in the morning. I had hoped for a kinder fate; but your will is your own. There is nothing for me to do but to take myself away from Rockford—away from further humiliation. Adieu. Augustus Fairfax."
Julia was wild over the note. I never saw her so moved. Evidently, Fairfax had regarded her answer as unfavorable, and had left Rockford.
I insisted that she let us know what she had written her lover. Fortunately, she had a copy of the missive she had sent him by the watchman. This was her note: "Dear Gus: "There is no need to keep you in suspense to-night. From the first hour of my discovery, I knew my mind. I can not decide what I shall do in relation to you; circumstances have decided for me; and until death there shall be no revocation of that decision. Come to see me in the morning, and let us talk heart to heart.
"Good-night, "Julia."
At once I saw what the trouble was. Julia was so positive in her loyalty to Fairfax, never from the moment she made the discovery thinking of anything else but that she would marry him—I say, Julia was so settled in what she was going to do, that she did not make it clear to Fairfax whether or not she accepted or refused his release.
' What she meant by saying, "I can not decide"; "circumstances have decided for me," is that the fact that Gus was under a great burden by reason of his discovery, that fact so thrilled her heart with sympathy for him that if she had tried she could not do anything else but to decide to cling to him.
In the light of Julia's purpose and feeling, it is apparent that her note is a most unequivocal declaration of her loyalty; to Fairfax, however, hoping, fearing, sensitive and proud, you can see that the note was as ambiguous as a message from the Delphian oracle, which prophecies were so worded as to be true no matter what happened.
Holt and I hastened to the depot to make inquiries, and found that Fairfax had bought a ticket for Norwalk and had gone on the train leaving Rockford at three o'clock in the morning. Evidently he did not sleep after getting Julia's note.
Now, the problem was to head him off by telegraph, apprise him of his mistake and urge him to return.
We left Julia in bed with her face to the wall, that sign of mental anguish as old as man.
Mrs. Holt, now as zealous for the marriage to Jeter Horn's son as she had been strenuous against it, was drinking a bitter cup of remorse, fearful lest some inkling of her tacit, howbeit shame-faced opposition to the brilliant young professor, had helped him to misinterpret Julia's note.
We sent telegrams as far north as Washington, beyond which point he could not have arrived at the time we telegraphed.
Would the telegrams find him, a needle in a haystack?
That was the problem. He was asked to reply so as to relieve us of suspense; but a message from Holt, as late as six o'clock, informed me that no word had come from the groom-elect, who fled from what he thought was a very humiliating plight.
Holt mentioned in his wife's presence how much it had cost to send such full telegrams, and so many of them. Her reply indicated her complete change of heart as to the desirability of Jeter Horn's son as her son-in-law, She said, with worried tears in his voice: "Well, Dave, my dear, that's what money's made for—to spend." Now, I've always thought that if I were a dollar, I'd like to belong to Mrs. Holt; I know I would be fondly cared for.
At Twilight "I love thee so. Dear, that I can only love thee."
Insufficiency.
Mrs. Browning.
A tense nervousness pervaded the Holt home all day Wednesday, but Rockford College folks thought it only natural in view of the great coming event, the marriage of the President's daughter with the most popular Rockford professor, Augustus Fairfax. They knew he was away, but thought the president had sent his son-in-law-elect on a pressing embassy in relation to Rockford's threatened college course.
The Holt children had been kept in the dark as to the status of affairs. Their mother's and Julia's perturbation of spirit Gladys and Olga attributed to that anticipated affair which the little lassies thought was going to be the greatest thing that ever transpired, because, in their pretty dresses of which they talked by day and dreamed by night, these little maidens were to take a prominent part as flower girls to "Jule," as they fondly called the bride-elect.
The shadow upon the Holt household, therefore, cast no damper on the exuberant spirits of these two happy, healthy, tom-boy romps, who lived so much out of doors that their mother often said, "I declare, you girls are birds that light at home only long enough to feed and roost."
The tense nervousness pervading the Holts' household all day Wednesday was calmed, and the gloom that hung thereover at twilight was lifted.
Nobody was surprised to see Fairfax alight from a public carriage that drove up to the entrance of the main building of Rockford College; nobody who saw him.
Mrs. Holt was in Mrs. Harmon's sick room trying to find rest by giving consolation; the little girls were off to play, for it was not quite supper time. Holt was in the city, thoroughly discouraged, to make arrangements with the newspapers about announcing the postponement of the marriage. None of these saw the carriage drive up and Fairfax alight and go to his room. No, none of these saw this; but Julia did. She was not surprised, for had she not all day been straining her eyes for just this sight? No, she was not surprised; but oh, wasn't she glad!"
The truant groom-elect must have taken time both to bathe and dress, for the college community had gone to supper, when, looking as if he had just stepped out of a bandbox, the young man, who was somewhat of an exquisite, bent his steps towards the presidential mansion.
Julia opened the door, not waiting for him to ring. She shut it, and in the south parlor for just an instant in silence they looked into each others eyes, nor needed words. Their love-lit eyes told it all.
He opened his arms, taking one step towards her. "Oh, Gusl" came in tenderness. She walked into them and allowed him to fold her reverently to his heart.
"My Julia ! My life! My God's gift!"
After a brief cry, she looked up in his face: "Oh, Gus! how could you misunderstand me? How could you think that I meant to reject you?"
"I don't know; my pride made me misunderstand you, I guess."
Then they sat on the sofa.
"So you never were undecided?" he asked.
"No; never, not from the first moment.
"Of course my pride was hurt just as yours was, Gus; but from the first moment I knew you would feel alone in the world. I'd give my life to stand between you and all the world!"
A moisture was in the young man's eyes.
"I thank God that you feel that way! I thank God that you understand me so well!"
Then, with a characteristically swift change from the grave to the gay, he said, with twinkling eyes: "If the hub of truth had revolved around the axle-tree of my understanding, I wouldn't have gone, goose-like, chasing off to Norwalk to let dear old Dr. Dale hear my tale of woe. And now, knowing how my princess "rare and radiant" feels, I shall not care how festive the old gent Jeter gets what time he is full of the juice of corn!"
"Oh, Gus!" laughed she, "that letter was just beautiful ! and funny, too! And what a botch I made of answering it!"
"No, that was my blunder, and not yours."
"No," she insisted, "it was mine. I ought to,have taken up the fairy tale where you left off and answered it—let me see—I've got it written off"—jumping up from by his side and running with light steps upstairs to her room for it.
While she was gone, he sat perfectly still—his lips moving, his hand to his brow.
This is what she brought downstairs and they took to the window to read in the twilight: "And the fairy princess said unto the fairy youth, 'Oh, Augustus, little thou knowest of woman if thou deemest I could do aught but cling to thee in this thine hour of sorest need. I know thee, not as son of Jeter, but as king of my heart; and were Jeter ten thousand times more shameful, and thou ten thousand times his son, still I love and cling to thee. I love thee so, I can but love thee!"
Fairfax drew Julia to him and kissed her again and again. When he released her he said: "This ought to be added to the fairy story, 'And the youth and the princess did wed; and ever after they lived happily; for the princess blamed not the son for the father, and the youth thrust not his father upon the princess nor her family; but, on the other hand, for that Augustus loved the truth and despised a lie, he made it a point of honor neither to proclaim nor deny the fact that he was the son of Jeter the shameful.'"
"Gus!" she said, nestling close to him, "you are a man of honor! I would not ask you to hide the fact that Jeter Horn is your father; and if you did, I could not honor you as I do."
"He is nobody to be proud of, Julia; but it is the grace of God and environment that make the difference between people in this world."
"Yes, all of us are blessed above our merits," she replied; and they lapsed into silence, standing arm in arm by the window in the bewitching, tender gloaming. The same spell was upon them both.
She instinctively knew what he meant by pulling her gently by the sleeve. At a chair near the window side by side they knelt, each with an arm about the other, and in reverent voice, with bowed head, he said: "Oh, Lord, our Heavenly Father, we thank thee for all thy mercies to us. Help us, we pray Thee, to serve Thee."
They arose from their knees. He was about to put his arms around her again, when, into the room like a storm, burst six-year-old Gladys. "Mamma, here's Gus !"
Mrs. Holt came into the room. In her hand was the delayed telegram from Fairfax.
"Gus, you here? I was just coming to Julia with your telegram !"
"Why, Julia, I thought you had heard from said, surprised.
"No, Gus, not a thing until I saw you."
"That's strange," he marveled.
"But you are here, Gus !" exclaimed Mrs.
"Yes, mother," he replied feelingly.
"She ain't your mammal" burst out Glady Mrs. Holt's eyes were moist. "Yes I a Kiss me, my son."
She took a step towards him, and he kisseing reverently, "Mother!" The feeling was "Don't you want me for another brothernnnrrnmnnt he asked, scarcely able to steady his voice.
"No; I'm going to wait till I get a grown I'm going to get a husband just like you!"
This gave them all a chance to laugh, a relieve their feelings.
Holt's arrangement with the newspapers the postponement of the marriage—it is needle he countermanded.
A Voice Out of the Darkness.
"Do thy duty; that is best Leave unto thy Lord the rest."
The Legend Beautiful.
Longfellow.
Whose voice? Well, wait and see. Out of win darkness? Out of that existing when Julia and Fairfa spoke their vows; for it was not very dark. The ceremony took place early, promptly at seven o'clock Thursday night, the invitation reading "from seven to ten. By ten, all the more than two hundred guests had conn seen, congratulated, chatted, admired, been served wit a hand-around, chocolate, cake and cream, and gone; all except the inner circle of friends, principally the Noi walkers.
I can see that scene yet!
I wish some of the newspaper men who industriously keep before the public gaze the no account and criminal element of the race could have seen the assemblage a Julia's marriage, Rockford's four hundred, well-to-do well-dressed, refined, intelligent people of color.
Yes; emphatically people of color; all shades, from the ace of spades to lily white. And their dress—well, can not trust myself to describe them; for Belle tell me I don't know anything about women's clothes. Per haps I do make myself ridiculous when I undertake to catalogue fabrics, colors and styles; but nevertheless, I know what I like; and I've been around rich, elegant white folks enough to know when a woman is tastefully gowned.
Yes, Rockford's colored four hundred were there—I believe Zeke Brown came nearer being a domestic than any other guest that was present—and Negroes' money will buy the same fine things that white folks' money will.
Now, I testify that these Negroes looked like white folks, so far as clothes go. Furthermore, they acted like refined white folks. I've seen refined white folks both in the South and in the North.
Yes, I say it is a pity that white people of the South seldom see or hear of colored folks like those at that marriage, although to Northern folks some Southern people boast that they know the Negro! Yet they keep themselves in such a frenzy about social equality, or rather social intercourse, that it comes to pass that in this matter the best Negroes and best white people are Jews and Samaritans that have no dealings!
Thus it transpires that Southern people get most of their notions of the race from their domestics, with whom they come in contact, and the worthless and the criminal element about whom principally they read in the Southern press.
It's a great pity that white folks are so desperately afraid of Negroes—afraid of social equality, or rather, social intercourse. It is a pity for two reasons: first, because the dread of social equality is baseless. Negroes no more want to associate socially with white people than white people want to mingle socially with Negroes!
Secondly, this baseless fear of social equality betrays the people of the South into many, many injustices toward the once enslaved race. Indeed, the fear of social equality is so entirely baseless, that when I hear white people, sensible about everything else, rave about this, I sometimes wonder if they are not faking! .I wonder if this wild talk is not indulged in not because there is real apprehension of social intercourse, but to stir up race feeling for political purposes!
But I started to tell about the scene when Julia and Gus said the fateful words. I like to call them Julia and Gus, for I feel a proprietorship in them, though neither of them is related to me! I am proud of them! I should feel that God had greatly blessed Belle and myself if He gave us a daughter as noble as Julia, and a son as manly as Gus.
Yes, I can see that scene now!
Lights everywhere, falling in mellow tints. The well-dressed, refined, good-humored company massed near the doors of the study—the south parlor, the broad hall, and all around the north parlor. Belle at the piano in the broad hall. Holt in the north parlor alcove, beautiful with its bell of flowers. Decorations everywhere. A quiet hum of conversation. Belle strikes up the wedding march from Lohengrin. A hush falls. Olga and Gladys, sweet in white from head to foot, each with an exquisite basket of flowers, mince daintily amid a hum of loving admiration. Now they take their places in the alcove, one on one side, and the other on the other of the father who, with book in hand, stands waiting.
Next come the bridesmaids. Next Wilson and Alma. Then, Mrs. Holt, dowager empress resplendent. Then a pause.
Down the broad stair, looking like a Hindoo princess, comes the dainty little bride.
Fairfax, the tall, pleasant-faced black prince, meets the brown princess at the door. A deeper silence marks their measured graceful march up to beneath the bell of flowers before the president-minister-father celebrant of the marriage.
The low, soulful music perfectly harmonizes with the sacred, tender service. Absolute silence. The ceremony begins.
It had progressed to that juncture where, on the solemn silence in mellow, resonant tones, fell these time-hallowed admonitions: "If any man can show just cause why these two may not lawfully be joined in wedlock, let him now speak or else forever hereafter hold his peace."
Upon the death-like silence rang out, at that instant, loud, shrill and uncanny these words: "I'm a man you don't see every day ! Circumstances alters cases! Up on dis very hill, whah in times pas' an' gone, ole Jeta used to slave fo' de whiete folks, de niggas is got a fine college; an' is actin' poure white! Ha! Ha! Hal"
A thrill of excitement quivered over the company!
Holt waited in self-possessed silence; but his wife clung to the back of a chair as if she feared the owner of that voice would bolt into the room. Julia trembled like an aspen leaf. I saw Fairfax's back stiffen; meanwhile, he swallowed hard. But the interruption was for only a moment; for the clang of the bell of the police patrol wagon sounded in an instant after the cry. In less time than it takes to tell it, all was quiet. The patrol wagon was out of hearing, Jeter in it on his way back to the poor-house—so weak and ill that he died before the wagon reached its destination.
Yes, the interruption was only for an instant; but it was not too brief for this swift tableau between the man and woman before the altar: Julia trembles like an aspen leaf; Fairfax drops her hand; turns around, facing her; looks intently into her eyes; then, at Holt. Julia calms herself, lifts her face to Fairfax's—all her soul in her eyes. He takes her hand again; they turn around; the groom looks at Holt; the ceremony goes on!
Who of that company could guess the meaning of that pantomime? Only the Norwalkers, who, alone, were in the secret, divined that Fairfax, even at the altar, had offered to release Julia if she desired to be freed.
I am proud of him for making that offer I and of Julia for refusing it!
THE END.