LITTLE RED-CAP


Once upon a time, there was a sweet little girl, who was loved by every
one who looked at her, and most of all by her Grandmother. There was
nothing that she would not have given the child!

Once she gave her a little cap of red velvet, which suited her so well
that she would not wear anything else. So she was always called Little
Red-Cap.

One day, her Mother said to her, “Come, Little Red-Cap, here is a piece
of cake and a bottle of wine. Take them to your Grandmother. She is ill
and weak, and they will do her good. Set out before it gets hot. Walk
nicely and quietly. Do not run off the path, or you may fall and break
the bottle; then your Grandmother will get nothing! When you go into
her room, don’t forget to say ‘Good morning,’ and don’t stop to peep
into every corner, before you do it.”

“I’ll take great care,” said Little Red-Cap to her Mother, and gave her
hand on it.

The Grandmother lived in the wood, half an hour’s distance from the
village, and just as Little Red-Cap entered the wood, a Wolf met her.
Red-Cap did not know what a wicked creature he was, and was not at all
afraid of him.

“Good-day, Little Red-Cap,” said he.

“Thank you kindly, Wolf.”

“Whither away so early, Little Red-Cap?”

“To my Grandmother’s.”

“What have you got in your apron?”

“Cake and wine. Yesterday was baking-day, so poor sick Grandmother is
to have something good, to make her stronger.”

“Where does your Grandmother live, Little Red-Cap?”

“A good quarter of an hour farther on in the wood. Her house stands
under the three large oak-trees; the nut-trees are just below. You
surely must know it,” replied Little Red-Cap.

The Wolf thought to himself, “What a tender young creature! what a nice
plump mouthful--she will be better to eat than the old woman. I must
act craftily, so as to catch both.”

He walked for a short time by the side of Little Red-Cap, and then he
said, “See, Little Red-Cap, how pretty the flowers are about here--why
do you not look round? I believe, too, that you do not hear how sweetly
the little birds are singing. You walk gravely along as if you were
going to school, while everything else in the wood is merry.”

Little Red-Cap raised her eyes, and when she saw the sunbeams
dancing here and there through the trees, and pretty flowers growing
everywhere, she thought, “Suppose I take Grandmother a fresh nosegay.
That would please her too. It is so early in the day that I shall still
get there in good time.”

And so she ran from the path into the wood to look for flowers. And
whenever she had picked one, she fancied that she saw a still prettier
one farther on, and ran after it, and thus got deeper and deeper into
the wood.

Meanwhile, the Wolf ran straight to the Grandmother’s house and knocked
at the door.

“Who is there?”

“Little Red-Cap,” replied the Wolf. “She is bringing cake and wine.
Open the door.”

“Lift the latch,” called out the Grandmother, “I am too weak, and
cannot get up.”

The Wolf lifted the latch, the door flew open, and without saying a
word he went straight to the Grandmother’s bed, and devoured her. Then
he put on her clothes, dressed himself in her cap, laid himself in bed,
and drew the curtains.

Little Red-Cap, however, had been running about picking flowers. When
she had gathered so many that she could carry no more, she remembered
her Grandmother, and set out on the way to her.

She was surprised to find the cottage-door standing open. And when she
went into the room, she had such a strange feeling, that she said to
herself, “Oh dear! how uneasy I feel to-day, and at other times I like
being with Grandmother so much.”

She called out, “Good morning,” but received no answer. So she went to
the bed and drew back the curtains. There lay her Grandmother with her
cap pulled far over her face, and looking very strange.

“Oh! Grandmother,” she said, “what big ears you have!”

“The better to hear you with, my Child,” was the reply.

“But, Grandmother, what big eyes you have!” she said.

“The better to see you with, my dear.”

“But, Grandmother, what large hands you have!”

“The better to hug you with.”

“Oh! but Grandmother, what a terrible big mouth you have!”

“The better to eat you with!” And scarcely had the Wolf said this, than
with one bound he was out of bed and swallowed up Red-Cap.

When the Wolf had satisfied his appetite, he lay down again in the bed,
fell asleep and began to snore very loud. The huntsman was just passing
the house, and thought to himself, “How the old woman is snoring! I
must just see if she wants anything.”

So he went into the room, and when he came to the bed, he saw the Wolf
lying in it. “Do I find thee here, thou old sinner!” said he. “I have
long sought thee!”

Then just as he was going to fire at him, it occurred to him that the
Wolf might have devoured the grandmother, and that she might still be
saved. So he did not fire, but took a pair of scissors, and began to
cut open the stomach of the sleeping Wolf.

When he had made two snips, he saw the little Red-Cap shining, and then
he made two snips more, and the little girl sprang out, crying, “Ah,
how frightened I have been! How dark it was inside the Wolf!”

And after that the aged grandmother came out alive also, but scarcely
able to breathe.

Red-Cap then quickly fetched great stones with which they filled the
Wolf’s body. And when he awoke, he wanted to run away, but the stones
were so heavy that he tumbled down at once, and fell dead.

Then all three were delighted. The huntsman drew off the Wolf’s skin
and went home with it. The grandmother ate the cake and drank the wine
which Red-Cap had brought, and grew strong again.

But Red-Cap thought to herself, “As long as I live, I will never leave
the path to run into the wood, when my mother has forbidden me to do
so.”
