The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Ultimate Criminal, by Archibald H. Grimke

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: The Ultimate Criminal
       The American Negro Academy. Occasional Papers No. 17

Author: Archibald H. Grimke

Release Date: February 17, 2010 [EBook #31299]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE ULTIMATE CRIMINAL ***




Produced by Suzanne Shell, Stephanie Eason, and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net.









  OCCASIONAL PAPERS, NO. 17.

  THE AMERICAN NEGRO ACADEMY.


  THE ULTIMATE CRIMINAL

  ANNUAL ADDRESS
  ARCHIBALD H. GRIMKE


  PRICE  :  :  15 CTS.

  WASHINGTON, D. C.:
  PUBLISHED BY THE ACADEMY
  1915




THE ULTIMATE CRIMINAL.


It is the fashion nowadays for every one with a stone in his hand to take
a shy at the poor Negro on account of his sins of commission and omission.
It is enough that some member of the race is caught _flagrante delicto_ or
merely on suspicion of evil doing to get himself into the public pillory
and the rest of the colored people into our national rogues' gallery,
where they evoke instantly the loud lamentation of white saints and
sinners alike, and the statistical and sophistical conclusions of a lot of
fools and hypocrites. Now do not misunderstand me. I do not deny that
Negroes commit crimes. Not at all, for I know full well that they
do--altogether too many for their own good. But what I object to among
other things is that America, because of the crimes of individual Negroes
or because of the suspected crimes of individual Negroes, draws an omnibus
indictment against the moral character of the whole race, which is
monstrously unjust and wicked.

Who cares to inquire into the origin of Negro crime, or into the causes
which have contributed mightily to produce the Negro criminal? The book of
the Genesis of this man's crimes awaits to be written by an impartial and
sympathetic seeker after truth. The causes which have operated for fifty
years to produce Negro criminals will some day, I trust, be traced without
fear or bias to their source. I do not pretend to possess any scientific
qualification for such a task, but I do intend in these imperfect remarks
to try to indicate in outline merely the dismal stream of these causes
during the last half century, hoping thereby to cast a little light on a
dark and difficult subject: namely, how out of hostile and unequal social,
industrial and political conditions Negro crime emerged and why Negro
criminals abound.

To say that individuals and races are the creatures of circumstances--that
they are the products of their social heredity and environment--is to
state a commonplace in the accepted doctrines of science to-day. It is
therefore perfectly safe to postulate that the greatest circumstance in
the life of the Negro before emancipation was the institution of slavery.
For it furnished for two and a half centuries both his social heredity and
his environment, and so shaped his growth and character along moral,
religious and industrial lines. Chattel slaves had no rights, the most
rudimentary, which their southern masters were bound to respect. They did
not, for example, possess that most elementary of rights, the ownership of
self and of the products of their labor. They were the legal property of
others and so were the products of their labor. They did not own the
cabins they slept in or the clothes they wore or the food they ate or the
tools they worked with or the air they breathed or the water they drank or
the bit of ground that they were buried in at last, any more than did the
cattle of those self same masters. The slave system owned the minds and
bodies of its victims, who loved but had no legal title to their mates, or
to the offspring who were born to them any more than did the cattle of the
masters own their mates or the young which were born to them. The slaves
were rated as so many human machines by the masters for the production of
wealth for themselves and to add to their liberty and leisure and pursuit
of happiness. Amid such evil conditions ignorance necessarily abounded and
moral degradation deposited its slime, generation after generation, over
the souls of masters and slaves alike. And in this moral mud there bred
apace bestiality and cruelty, superstition and sensuality, tyranny and
fear--the black brood of man's inhumanity to man.

At the close of the war which destroyed slavery the two races emerged
together into the midst of vast changes. The old social structure had been
disrupted in the civil convulsion, and the old political order likewise.
The slave half of the national house had tumbled about former masters and
slaves. The slave race possessed no more and knew no more as freedmen than
they had possessed or known as slaves. Yes, they possessed themselves and
the hard hands which God had given them for their support. But being
landless and moneyless they were dependent for employment on the old
master class. This put them at an immense economic disadvantage as a labor
class on the threshold of their new life of freedom, and in the power of
the old master class. The outlook for the new freedmen under these
circumstances was not propitious. All the same these people, poor and
ignorant and at the mercy of a ruthless employer class, were happy as
children in the delight of their newfound freedom. The sound of their
childlike joy was heard in the land amid the grim desolations of war and
the sullen faces of their old masters. Care free and fear free, in spite
of unfriendly conditions and a threatening outlook, they gave themselves
up to such joy as God has rarely given in the history of the world to four
millions of people. Now no race can pass through such a spiritual
experience without being the better for it. For great happiness like great
suffering operates oftentimes as a moral purifier. Before the overwhelming
fact that they could no longer be bought and sold--that they could no
longer be separated from their loved ones, these simple black folk fell in
transports of gratitude before God, their mighty deliverer, their
everlasting Father. Love was in their mouths and love was in their hearts.
Cheerful they were by nature and hopeful, and gifted withal with an
extraordinary amount of the milk of human kindness. Service was natural
and easy for them, and the cherishing of friends and foes in their need;
but resentfulness and revenge moved them hardly at all during their long
years of bondage. Comparatively few crimes against persons or property had
been recorded against them before emancipation. The few slave
insurrections or attempted slave insurrections were exceptions to the
general tenor of their peaceable disposition and conduct, to the uniform
and singular absence of ill-will, of a spirit of revenge in them as a
race.

This gentle trait was strikingly illustrated during the war of the
rebellion. They had opportunity enough and provocation enough, God knows,
to attack the property and the lives of the defenseless families of their
hard task-masters during those four dreadful years of sectional strife.
But in their beautiful simplicity and kindness of heart and fidelity to
the sacred and amazing trust reposed in them--the most sacred and amazing
ever reposed in a slave race by a master race in the history of the
world--they let their terrible opportunity for revenge pass them by and
seized instead the noble one to feed and cherish the helpless women and
children of masters who were fighting to rivet the chains of slavery on
them and on their children forever. This behavior of the slaves is the
supreme example which American Christianity has yet given of the vital
presence of the spirit of its divine founder in its midst. No other act in
its whole history approaches it in simple grandeur of forgiveness and
service. And it came literally out of the humble lives of a much oppressed
and long suffering race.

This simple and kindly black folk issued then out of their two and a half
centuries of bondage without malice toward the whites, without any of the
violent emotions which lead to the commission of great crimes. The only
violent emotion which stirred their child-like minds, which filled almost
to bursting their kindly hearts was deep thankfulness to God and to Mr.
Lincoln for their deliverance--an emotion which no pen can describe and no
tongue can put into words. Out of such kindly hearts, out of such deep and
holy emotions crime does not come and it would not have come had there
been no injection into the race soul of the Negro of new and bitter
experiences of wrong at the hands of the whites. But this is exactly what
actually took place. On the simple and kindly hearts of the new freedmen
the old master class might have graven large the law of peace and
goodwill. All that this child-like race needed at this initial stage of
their education and forming character were wise and sympathetic guidance
and treatment on the part of the whites in order to convert all their deep
and holy emotions into moral and civic values, into social and industrial
service to the South and to the nation at one and the same time. Did the
blacks get this wise and sympathetic guidance and treatment at the hands
of the whites? To answer this question is to open up the whole subject of
the causation of Negro crime during the last fifty years. And this I will
try to do as concisely and clearly as possible.

The first act of the South after the war was most unfriendly to the
blacks. For it was state legislation which remanded them to a new species
of bondage. Southern slaves they had been but by the new labor legislation
they were transformed into Southern serfs, chained to the soil by
cunningly devised laws to regulate their labor and movement. Force and
violence toward the blacks were relied upon to put through this
legislative and administrative program. This program was the cause of
Northern interference in the Southern situation at this juncture. But when
Congress intervened by its reconstruction measures to defeat the
reactionary program of the South, there swept over that section a
crime-storm of devastating fury. The old master class organized their
purpose in respect to the Negro, and their hatred of everything Northern
into a secret society known as the "Ku Klux Klan," which was nothing else
than a gigantic conspiracy for the commission of crime. Lawlessness and
violence filled the land, and terror stalked abroad by day and night. The
"Ku Klux Klan" burned and murdered by day, and it burned and murdered by
night. The Southern states had actually relapsed into barbarism. During
that period a new generation was conceived and born to the South by both
races--a generation that was literally conceived in lawlessness and born
into crime-producing conditions. Lawlessness was its inheritance and the
red splotch of violence its birthmark.

The period covered by this crime-storm was a bad way to begin the
education of the Negroes in respect for law, in self control and in
civilization. For they found no law strong enough to protect them in their
lives or property or freedom from the murderous attacks of that terrible
secret organization. Education in self-control, and in respect for
constituted authority became impossible where the dominating feeling of
the Negroes was one of terror. And as for civilization it was beaten down
by the red hand of violence. The blacks during these years were crushed
between two irreconcilable forces, two antagonistic governments which were
locked in a death grapple for possession of that section. The one
government was open and regular, while the other was secret and lawless.
The first was supported by a few native and Northern whites and by the
great body of the blacks, and the second was upheld by the great body of
the native whites under the trained and ruthless leadership of the old
master class, who would have no government, no social order which was not
set up by themselves.

During those dark years the blacks were much more sinned against than
sinning. They were sinned against by their white leaders, who in the main
used them to advance their personal and party interest, and who employed
the positions they thus gained to steal the people's money, to enrich
themselves at the expense of the states. There were colored leaders who
followed closely in the footsteps of the white leaders in perverting
public trusts to corrupt ends, but the chief malefactors, the biggest
scoundrels were members of the white race. In these circumstances the
blacks were the helpless victims of the misrule of their own leaders and
of the organized lawlessness of the Southern whites. In their need they
asked for bread and were given a stone, they required sympathetic and
wise leadership and were handed instead a bunch of scorpions. They prayed
for peace and for that happiness which goes with freedom, and there swept
over them for six dreadful years a crime-storm which filled their nights
and days, the season of their planting and the season of their reaping
with terror and destruction, and they just out of the house of bondage.
They were able in these circumstances to get from the whites no lesson in
obedience to law, in reverence for constituted authority, for as we have
seen those selfsame whites were everywhere breaking the law and beating
down and destroying constituted authority. Nor did they get any training
in personal and civic righteousness from their own leaders of either race.
For those leaders initiated them promptly by the power of example into the
great and flourishing American art and industry of graft.

This much however ought to be said in justice to the carpet-bag
governments, namely, that bad as they were the lawlessness and violence of
the Southern whites were a great deal worse. For while some good can be
placed to the credit of those governments nothing but bad can possibly be
set down to the account of Southern lawlessness and violence. To the
carpet-bag governments belongs the introduction into the South for the
first time of the democratic principles of equality, and of the right of
each child in the state, regardless of race or color, to an education at
the hands of the state. These are two vital things which the South needed
then and which it needs to-day but which the old master class opposed then
and which their successors oppose to-day. That is what the whites did to
educate the blacks during the most impressionable period of their new
freedom in orderly government and in civilization. That was the way their
education in citizenship and character building began and that was the way
it proceeded until the year 1876.

In that year the two irreconcilable governments grappled in a final
struggle at the polls for mastery and possession of that section. When the
smoke of battle cleared over South Carolina, Florida and Louisiana, the
Southern forces of re-action were in complete possession of those states,
and the solid South had become an accomplished fact. Nothing stood now
between the blacks and their ancient enemy. They were again at the mercy
of the old master class, who returned promptly to the execution of their
interrupted program of inequality and injustice. As the whites could not
now reestablish constitutionally their old slave system, or directly their
new serf system they proceeded to do the next best thing, that is to
construct a caste system based on race and color. Such a system, once
firmly established, would fix the status of the blacks as a permanently
inferior caste, and to that extent would render nugatory the three great
amendments to the constitution. For members of an inferior caste would by
the force of circumstances, law, or no law, be deprived of certain rights
civil and political enjoyed by members of the superior caste. Citizenship
of the one caste would not mean the same thing as citizenship of the
other. The lower caste could not possibly possess the same
rights--constitution or no constitution--which the upper caste possessed.
Inequality became thus the chief corner stone of the new Southern edifice.
Under this society there grew up two moral standards and two legal
standards for the government of the races. For example what under such a
system is bad for a black man to do to a member of the white race might
not be regarded as bad at all if done by a white man to a member of the
black race. The cruel and iniquitous sex relations of the races in the
South has grown out of this caste system. Under it we have the double
moral standard and the double legal standard operating throughout that
section with a vengeance. A white man cannot with impunity seduce another
white man's daughter or wife in the South. But were he to seduce a colored
man's daughter or wife the case would be wholly different. No bastardy
process lies in favor of the colored girl as lies in favor of her white
sister under like circumstances, and no maintenance could she possibly
obtain for her child from the white man who wronged her. Intermarriage
between the races has been made illegal by every Southern state and by
some Northern states also. Such a law makes colored women the safe quarry
of white men, and nowhere in the South do law or public opinion impose
upon them any deterrent punishment, moral or legal, for their crime, but
quite the opposite. For such men do not lose standing in Southern society
or the church or the state in consequence of their sin. In all this sexual
inequality and iniquity the South has eyes but sees not and ears but hears
not what is taking place everywhere in its midst.

On the other hand what happens to the black man who ventures to look upon
a white woman with love or carnal desire, or who is even suspected of
doing so? Ask Judge Lynch, ask the blind and murderous sex fury of white
men, the red male rage of Southern mobs. Nevertheless black men cannot be
made to see the difference between the lust of black men and the lust of
white men, or to acknowledge the justice of such a distinction. Hold the
blacks responsible by all means for the crimes they commit, but hold the
whites responsible also for creating social and legal conditions which
lead directly to the growth of crime among both races. Race and color not
efficiency and character are the basis of the Southern caste system, and
such a system produces unavoidably ill-will, oppressions, and resentments
between the races which lead directly or indirectly to the commission of
crime. For all those who are black, regardless of what nature and
education intend them to be are born into a fixed state of social and
political inferiority, and all those who are white, regardless of what
nature and education intend them to be are born into a fixed state of
social and political superiority, and for no other or better reason than
that those of the first class are black, and those of the second class are
white. Civilization finds it well nigh impossible to advance under such
iron bound conditions and against such a fatal obstruction to progress,
while civic righteousness must certainly share the same fate. Such social
injustice is as sure to provoke crime as stagnant water is to produce
disease. Yet, in spite of this iniquitous caste system the leaven of
democracy, of equality has found lodgment in the black man's mind, and he
craves the chance to become all that the white man has become and to do
all that the white man does by virtue of his American freedom and
citizenship. Nothing less than this is going to satisfy the blacks, the
Southern caste system and appearances in spots among the blacks
themselves, to the contrary notwithstanding.

But there is yet another aspect of the same subject, which tends to
produce the same result. I refer to the Southern policy of civil and
political repression and oppression of its colored population in order to
keep them within their caste of inferiority and subordination to the
whites. Discontent under such oppressive conditions is sure to arise among
the colored people, and this because of their growth and of the existence
of the hard and fast lines within which this growth must go on. For this
kind of discontent the South has no vent such as free institutions
provide. Its caste system sits upon this safety valve of democracy. Much
of the crime committed by oppressed peoples is in the nature of fullness
of life seeking greater freedom, of pent up energies seeking an outlet,
and much of the crime committed by oppressors is in the nature of
attempts, perilous always, to sit upon this safety valve of popular
governments, which is intended to relieve dangerous pressure within the
steam-chest of human expansion and progress. But the South is determined
to keep the Negro down however great may be his effort to rise. He is to
be kept down by brute force if he cannot be kept down in any other way,
below the social and industrial and political level of the lowest and most
worthless of the whites, because he is black and because they are white.

This is the meaning of the Southern movement for segregating the races, of
its jim-crow car laws and waiting-rooms. This is the meaning of the
Negro's exclusion from dining-cars and from restaurants along the line of
Southern railroads. He pays the same fare as the white passenger but he is
given inferior accommodations and in many instances these accommodations
are monstrously unequal and inferior. He is black and therefore the same
law which protects the white passenger against bad accommodations does not
apply to him. He is at the mercy of railroads, which may treat him as
badly as they choose, and there is none to say them nay. Why? Because all
these iniquitous distinctions and discriminations serve to teach colored
men and women, however intelligent and wealthy and respectable, that their
intelligence and wealth and respectability do not entitle them to equal
treatment with the most vicious and worthless of the whites. At the moral
retchings and manly revolt of the victim against this unequal treatment
the South either sneers or else grows angry, because it affects to see in
them the Negro's ambition for social equality, his secret desire to leave
his class and to enter that of the whites and to marry white women. And so
down on the safety valve which free institutions provide, and regardless
of the steam pressure within, the South has planted its brutal might with
reckless and insolent disregard of consequences.

Everywhere the treatment of the Negro is the same, and everywhere the
purpose of the South is plain. What with its contract labor laws and
emigration laws and vagrancy laws and convict-lease and plantation-lease
and credit systems the South is working mightily, night and day, to reduce
the Negro laborer to wage slavery, to fix him in an industrial position
where he shall have no rights which the white employer class is bound to
respect. Negro labor toils and produces without adequate reward or
protection against the rapacity of Southern employers. What it gets as its
share bears no comparison with what the employer gets as his share. The
employer gets wealth while the Negro gets a bare subsistence. I am
speaking of course broadly, for there are many Negroes who get more than a
bare subsistence out of the products of their labor, and that in spite of
bad and unequal laws and conditions. But the great mass of Negro
agricultural labor is exploited and plundered by the white employer class,
and kept poor, because being poor they are esteemed less capable of giving
the South trouble. It is the only labor class in the South that is
deprived of the right to vote, and so is rendered powerless to influence
legislation and administration and the courts in its favor. If the poverty
of Negro labor renders it as a class less capable of giving the employer
class trouble this poverty is at the same time a crime breeder and a huge
crime breeder into the bargain.

Take this case which has just been decided favorably for the colored
laborer by the United States Supreme Court, as a fair example of what
Southern law and administration are doing to reduce the Negro to a
condition of helpless industrial slavery:

     An Alabama case, involving charges of peonage in connection with the
     operation of a convict labor law, now is before the Supreme Court,
     where its disposition may have an important bearing on similar
     statutes in other Southern States. The government contends that the
     Alabama statute permits peonage in violation of the Federal
     Constitution.

     The test case is that of a colored man named E. W. Fields, who was
     convicted in Monroe County of larceny. Upon his failure to pay his
     fine, J. A. Reynolds, a plantation owner, became surety for him, and,
     as permitted by the Alabama law, contracted to work out his
     indebtedness during nine months at the rate of $6 a month and keep.
     The government charges that Reynolds later had Fields arrested for
     failing to complete the contract. As a result of the arrest, Fields,
     in court, entered into contract to work fourteen months for G. W.
     Broughton, another plantation owner.

     Both Reynolds and Broughton were indicted by the Federal government,
     but the Federal district court for southern Alabama held that peonage
     had not been committed.

I want to ask your attention in passing to a few points about this case.
First the Negro laborer is convicted on a charge of larceny. This charge
might have been trumped up by some white person who wanted the Negro's
service. I do not know. I would not take the word of a Southern Court on
this point. At any rate the Negro laborer is convicted and a fine is
imposed upon him, which he is unable to pay. Now comes the opportunity of
the white employer, who happens to be conveniently in Court, to come to
the rescue of the poor Negro. He pays the fine and the Negro contracts to
pay him back by giving him nine months of his labor. The Negro thereupon
enters upon the performance of this contract, but fails for some reason,
not stated, to finish it. How long he worked does not appear either, but
this much does. He is haled into Court a second time and a second time a
fine is imposed upon him. And again an employer, who is opportunely
present at the second trial, pays the fine. The Negro now binds himself to
the service of this second man for fourteen months, which, to use a slang
expression, is surely "going some." At this stage of the game, however,
the United States Government stepped into the case, otherwise a third
charge might have been preferred in due time, and again the term of
involuntary service lengthened, and so on ad infinitum until death
released the victim. This is a well-known Southern method for multiplying
Negro criminals to meet the demands of Southern employers of cheap labor.
It is a danger to which every colored man is exposed in the South, because
Southern Courts are as a rule administered in the interest of the employer
class wherever the Negro is concerned. There have been a few notable
instances of Southern Judges who have refused to lend their Courts to this
iniquitous business, like Judge Emory Speer, of Georgia, and the late
Judge Jones, of Alabama, but such examples are like angels' visits--few
and far between in that land of race repression and oppression.

Take another and different case, which is common enough in the South also.
It is, like the preceding clipping, taken from the _Washington Post_:

     LYNCHED BY MOB OF 1,000.

     LITTLE GIRL'S ASSAILANT DRAGGED FROM JAIL AS TROOPS ARE ASSEMBLING.

     Shreveport, La., May 12.--Edward Hamilton, colored, held on the
     charge of attacking a 10-year old white girl, was taken from the
     parish jail shortly after noon and lynched.

     For three hours a mob of 1,000 men and boys stood in the rain outside
     the jail doors, hammering away with a heavy railroad iron at the
     barrier. Steel saws finally were used, and entrance was gained by the
     mob. Sheriff J. P. Flourney had telegraphed the governor for troops
     and orders had been sent the Shreveport company of the national guard
     to report for service. Before the company could be assembled the
     prisoner had been taken from the jail. A rope was placed about
     Hamilton's neck and he was dragged half a block from the jail to a
     telephone pole opposite the parish courthouse, and strung up. A knife
     was left sticking in the body.

Here we have Judge Lynch's Court in full operation in the execution of one
suspected Colored criminal and the manufacture at the same time of a
thousand white criminals. This Colored man was only suspected of the usual
crime. There was no trial of him to find the facts, not even by Judge
Lynch himself. Edward Hamilton might have been guilty and then again he
might have been innocent. I think that a private inquiry into his case
subsequent to his murder, pointed to his probable innocence. But he was an
object of suspicion, and that was enough to justify the act of his
murderers. If the mob failed to lynch the guilty and lynched instead an
innocent man, it was so much the worse for the innocent man, not at all
for the mob, however red their hands were with that innocent man's blood.
Why? Because that innocent man was black, and because his murder helps to
uphold white supremacy over millions of people whose only offense is that
they are black. Into the violent death of a man like Hamilton there might
not be instituted any official inquiry at all in many parts of the South
any more than if he had been a horse or a dog. But if there happens to be
an official inquiry the usual verdict is that "the deceased came to his
death by the hands of a person or persons unknown," and that ends the
matter so far as the Negro is concerned. But it does not end the matter so
far as the South is concerned, for the Devil will exact his share of the
black deed from that section to the uttermost farthing. What has such a
mob done? In the murder of one black man, whether innocent or guilty, the
South has, as in the case of Hamilton, made hundreds of white criminals,
has tainted the blood of whole communities like Shreveport with the virus
of lawlessness and crime. In this same Shreveport there were five colored
men lynched in ten days and eight in a year, and one white woman testified
at an investigation conducted by the attorney general's office that she
rode in an automobile crowded with men eighteen miles to see an old
colored man burned at the stake! Like begets like, and crime crime, and
there is no help for it. Because what a state sows that it shall surely
reap. If it sow sin it shall reap suffering and shame, and if it sow the
wind it shall likewise reap the whirlwind. Is not the South sowing into
the souls of both races the seeds of sin and violence, and shall it not
then reap its full crop of crime and misery, the wild and anarchic harvest
of the whirlwind?

Hard indeed is the lot of the Negro whether in the country or the city of
the South, and in those of the North too for that matter. For wherever he
goes he carries the marks of his race with him, and that is the essence of
his offense in America. His lot is practically the same everywhere. He
faces either in city or country the white man's courts and police power
and race prejudice and his industrial and residential exclusiveness and
jealousies, but above all he faces the white man's church with its
undisguised color-phobia, with its virtual rejection of the brotherhood of
man in respect to all races who happen not to be white. They are in the
regard of this church unclean and socially beyond the pale of its
Christian fellowship. They are salvable to be sure but from afar by
missionary efforts, the farther away the better, in China and Japan, in
India and Africa. For there this church is in no danger of race
contamination in its pews and at its altars and in its homes. The American
church is saying with the spirit of the unseeing Peter of old, "Not so
Lord, we have never accepted any man who is brown or black or yellow as
really our brother, for we are white and Thou hast made us of different
clay, of purer blood than all these millions of brown and black and yellow
peoples. Thou hast made us white and white we mean to remain, Thy common
fatherhood and the brotherhood of all these alien races to the contrary
notwithstanding. We try to be humble Lord, but we have never yet succeeded
in humbling the proud blood which Thou hast given us to the level of
brotherhood with these strange dark peoples."

That is the spirit which the Negro encounters in the American church; that
is the spirit which crushes him down and crowds him back whenever he tries
to rise and advance. He and his are denied the White man's chance to make
the best of themselves and to get the most out of themselves. And when
many of them fail, as fail they must, they are beaten with many bitter
words by this so-called Christian people because of this failure, and when
some succeed in spite of the gates of this hell of race hatred and
oppression they are beaten with even more bitter words and sometimes with
bitter blows, and told to stay where they are put behind the poorest and
most worthless of the whites in America's long procession of progress and
civilization. Is it any wonder that crime emerges out of such cruel and
unequal conditions? The wonder is that the colored criminal class is not
larger and more dangerous to person and property. Take a glance into the
alleys of misery, into the ghettos of wrong where human beings beaten by
other human beings stronger than they in the battle of life are penned in
their destitution and wretchedness to live and die like poisoned rats in a
hole, a prey to heat in summer and cold in winter and disease the year
round, a prey to vice, a prey to the saloons which the white man thrusts
upon them to steal away their last nickel and the remnant of their self
respect. One need not be a prophet to foresee that out of all this
injustice and inequality God's avenging angel will come some day with
sword, double-edged and deadly with disease and crime, to smite and to
blight this land where white people having eyes refuse to see whither all
their race injustice is leading, and ears but who are deaf to the prayer
of Christ's little ones crying for a man's chance to get with others into
the sun and to grow the free and beautiful life which God intended them to
grow when first they came into the world, and that whether they are black
or red or brown or yellow.

In the matter of education, to recur again to the South in particular, the
blacks are most outrageously discriminated against in favor of the whites,
who have more and better school buildings, more and better paid teachers
even where the blacks out-number them, longer school terms and a much
higher per capita rate of the public school funds than have the children
of the blacks. The problem of the South appears to be not how much
education but how little it can possibly give the blacks in comparison
with what it gives the whites. In all this educational business the South
reasons that the blacks must be kept well in the rear of the whites,
because they are to remain a permanently inferior class. That section is
not anxious to reduce the illiteracy of its colored population and to
raise the standard of their intelligence, for it thinks that an ignorant
labor class is less difficult to manage than an intelligent one. Ignorance
is indeed apt to be stolid and submissive under circumstances in which
intelligence becomes restless and discontented. Therefore the South has
little love or use for an intelligent labor class, but desires above all
things an ignorant one, and does what in it lies to hinder educational
progress among its colored population. But ignorance is a breeder of crime
just as poverty is. They are the parents of much of the crime committed by
the Negroes just as they are the parents of much of the crime committed by
the whites. Our criminal classes do many things which the law forbids to
be done not because they are of one race or color or of another race or
color, but mainly because they are poor and ignorant. Who then in these
circumstances are the ultimate criminal, those who are unwillingly poor
and ignorant, or those who make and keep them so by bad and unequal laws,
by bad and unequal treatment?

Such is the story of what the whites did to educate the blacks at the most
impressionable period of their freedom in democracy, in orderly government
and Christian civilization. And it is the story of that education during
the last fifty years. There was never kindness to the blacks and sympathy
from the Southern whites as of men to men. The human touch which makes, or
which ought to make, all men brothers has been woefully wanting in the
whites as a race towards the blacks as a race. There has been kindness and
perhaps much kindness from individual white people to individual Colored
people, but never from the mass of the whites to the mass of the blacks,
but just the contrary. Instead of kindness of the one race to the other
there has been increasing ill-will and active injustice as of one enemy to
another. If crime there has been in consequence of this deplorable, this
terrible fact who is the ultimate criminal? At the bar of history and at
the bar of God, I ask, Who is the ultimate criminal?




Transcriber's Notes:

Passages in italics are indicated by _underscore_.

Printer's inconsistencies in the use of "childlike" and "child-like" have
been retained.






End of Project Gutenberg's The Ultimate Criminal, by Archibald H. Grimke

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE ULTIMATE CRIMINAL ***

***** This file should be named 31299.txt or 31299.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/3/1/2/9/31299/

Produced by Suzanne Shell, Stephanie Eason, and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net.


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.net

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
