The Project Gutenberg EBook of Fossil Forests of the Yellowstone National
Park, by Frank Hall Knowlton

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org/license


Title: Fossil Forests of the Yellowstone National Park

Author: Frank Hall Knowlton

Release Date: October 21, 2020 [EBook #63519]

Language: English

Character set encoding: UTF-8

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK FOSSIL FORESTS OF THE ***




Produced by Stephen Hutcheson and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at https://www.pgdp.net (This file was
produced from images generously made available by The
Internet Archive/American Libraries.)






                             UNITED STATES
                       DEPARTMENT OF THE INTERIOR
                         HUBERT WORK, SECRETARY

                         NATIONAL PARK SERVICE
                      STEPHEN T. MATHER, DIRECTOR




            FOSSIL FORESTS OF THE YELLOWSTONE NATIONAL PARK


                             UNITED STATES
                       GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFFICE
                               WASHINGTON
                                  1928

88781°—28——2

                      THE NATIONAL PARKS AT A GLANCE.

              [Number, 19; total area, 11,817 square miles.]

  National parks    Location.   Area in    Distinctive characteristics.
    in order of                  square
     creation.                   miles.

  Hot Springs     Middle              1½ 46 hot springs possessing
  1832            Arkansas.              curative properties—Many hotels
                                         and boarding houses—20
                                         bath-houses under public
                                         control.
  Yellowstone     Northwestern     3,348 More geysers than in all rest
  1872            Wyoming.               of world together—Boiling
                                         springs—Mud volcanoes—Petrified
                                         forests—Grand Canyon of the
                                         Yellowstone, remarkable for
                                         gorgeous coloring—Large
                                         lakes—Many large streams and
                                         waterfalls—Vast wilderness,
                                         greatest wild bird and animal
                                         preserve in world—Exceptional
                                         trout fishing.
  Sequoia         Middle             604 The Big Tree National
  1890            eastern                Park—Scores of sequoia trees 20
                  California.            to 30 feet in diameter,
                                         thousands over 10 feet in
                                         diameter—Towering mountain
                                         ranges—Mount Whitney, highest
                                         peak in continental United
                                         States—Startling
                                         precipices—Cave of considerable
                                         size.
  Yosemite        Middle           1,125 Valley of world-famed
  1890            eastern                beauty—Lofty cliffs—Romantic
                  California.            vistas—Many waterfalls of
                                         extraordinary height—3 groves
                                         of big trees—High
                                         Sierra—Waterwheel falls—Good
                                         trout fishing.
  General Grant   Middle               4 Created to preserve the
  1890            eastern                celebrated General Grant Tree,
                  California.            35 feet in diameter—6 miles
                                         from Sequoia National Park.
  Mount Rainier   West central       325 Largest accessible single peak
  1890            Washington.            glacier system—28 glaciers,
                                         some of large size—48 square
                                         miles of glacier, 50 to 500
                                         feet thick—Wonderful sub-alpine
                                         wild-flower fields.
  Crater Lake     Southwestern       249 Lake of extraordinary blue in
  1902            Oregon.                crater of extinct volcano—Sides
                                         1,000 feet high—Interesting
                                         lava formations—Fine fishing.
  Wind Cave       South Dakota.       17 Cavern having many miles of
  1903                                   galleries and numerous chambers
                                         containing peculiar formations.
  Platt           Southern            1⅓ Many sulphur and other springs
  1901            Oklahoma.              possessing medicinal value.
  Sullys Hill     North Dakota.       1⅕ Small park with woods, streams,
  1904                                   and a lake—Is an important
                                         wild-animal preserve.
  Mesa Verde      Southwestern        77 Most notable and best preserved
  1906            Colorado.              prehistoric cliff dwellings in
                                         United States, if not in the
                                         world.
  Glacier         Northwestern     1,534 Rugged mountain region of
  1910            Montana.               unsurpassed Alpine
                                         character—250 glacier-fed lakes
                                         of romantic beauty—60 small
                                         glaciers—Precipices thousands
                                         of feet deep—Almost sensational
                                         scenery of marked
                                         individuality—Fine trout
                                         fishing.
  Rocky Mountain  North middle       378 Heart of the Rockies—Snowy
  1915            Colorado.              range, peaks 11,000 to 14,250
                                         feet altitude—Remarkable
                                         records of glacial period.
  Hawaii          Hawaii.            242 Three separate areas—Kilauea
  1916                                   and Mauna Loa on Hawaii,
                                         Haleakala on Maui.
  Lassen Volcanic Northern           124 Only active volcano in United
  1916            California.            States proper—Lassen Peak,
                                         10,465 feet—Cinder Cone, 6,879
                                         feet—Hot springs—Mud geysers.
  Mount McKinley  South            2,645 Highest mountain in North
  1917            central                America—Rises higher above
                  Alaska.                surrounding country than any
                                         other mountain in the world.
  Grand Canyon    North            1,009 The greatest example of erosion
  1919            central                and the most sublime spectacle
                  Arizona.               in the world.
  Lafayette       Maine coast.        12 The group of granite mountains
  1919                                   upon Mount Desert Island.
  Zion            Southwestern       120 Magnificent gorge (Zion
  1919            Utah.                  Canyon), depth from 1,500 to
                                         2,500 feet, with precipitous
                                         walls—Of great beauty and
                                         scenic interest.




          THE FOSSIL FORESTS OF THE YELLOWSTONE NATIONAL PARK.


                           By F. H. Knowlton,
                   _United States Geological Survey._




                             INTRODUCTION.


Isolated pieces of fossil wood are of comparatively common and
widespread occurrence, especially in the more recent geological deposits
of the West. Not infrequently scattered logs, stumps, and roots of
petrified or lignitized trees are brought to light, but only
exceptionally are they so massed and aggregated as to be worthy of the
designation of fossil forests. Examples of such are the celebrated
fossil forests of relatively late geological age near Cairo, Egypt, the
huge prostrate trunks in the Napa Valley near Calistoga, Cal., and the
geologically much older and far more extensive forests now widely known
as the Petrified Forest National Monument in Apache County, Ariz. But in
many respects the most remarkable fossil forests known are those now to
be described in the Yellowstone National Park. In the forests first
mentioned the trunks and logs were all prostrated before fossilization,
and it is perhaps not quite correct to designate such aggregations as
veritable fossil forests, though they usually are so called. In the
fossil forests of Arizona, for example, which are scattered over many
square miles of what is now almost desert, all the trunks show evidence
of having been transported from a distance before they were turned to
stone. Most of them are not even in the position in which they were
originally entombed, but have been eroded from slightly higher horizons
and have rolled in the greatest profusion to lower levels. As one views
these Arizona forests from a little distance, with their hundreds, even
thousands, of segments of logs, it is difficult to realize that they are
really turned to stone and are now exhumed from the earth. The
appearance they present (see fig. 1) is not unlike a “log drive” that
has been stranded by the receding waters and left until the bark had
disappeared and many logs had fallen into partial decay. Trunks of many
sizes and lengths are now mingled and scattered about in the wildest
profusion, and the surface of the ground is carpeted with fragments of
wood that have been splintered and broken from them. In the Yellowstone
National Park, however, most of the trees were entombed in the upright
position in which they grew, by the outpouring of various volcanic
materials, and as the softer rock surrounding them is gradually worn
away they are left standing erect on the steep hillsides, just as they
stood when they were living: in fact, it is difficult at a little
distance to distinguish some of these fossil trunks from the
lichen-covered stumps of kindred living species. Such an aggregation of
fossil trunks is therefore well entitled to be called a true fossil
forest. It should not be supposed, however, that these trees still
retain their limbs and smaller branches, for the mass of volcanic
material falling on them stripped them down to bare, upright trunks.

    [Illustration: Fig. 1.—Fossil Logs in Petrified Forest National
    Monument, Apache County, Arizona.]

    [Illustration: Fig. 2.—Upright fossil trunk in Gallatin Mountains,
    Montana.
    Courtesy of E. C. Alderson.]

The fossil forests of the Yellowstone National Park cover an extensive
area in the northern portion of the park, being especially abundant
along the west side of Lamar River for about 20 miles above its junction
with the Yellowstone. Here the land rises rather abruptly to a height of
approximately 2,000 feet above the valley floor. It is known locally as
Specimen Ridge, and forms an approach to Amethyst Mountain. There is
also a small fossil forest containing a number of standing trunks near
Tower Falls, and near the eastern border of the park along Lamar River
in the vicinity of Cache, Calfee, and Miller Creeks, there are many more
or less isolated trunks and stumps of fossil trees, but so far as known
none of these are equal in interest to the fossil forest on the slopes
of Specimen Ridge.

    [Illustration: Fig. 3.—Upright trunk and “hoodoo” in Gallatin
    Mountains, Montana.
    Courtesy of E. C. Alderson.]

The fossil forests are reached over a road from the Mammoth Hot Springs,
or from Camp Roosevelt near Tower Falls, and they are in their way quite
as wonderful and worthy of attention as many of the other features for
which the Yellowstone National Park is so justly celebrated.

Recently another extensive fossil forest has been found on the divide
between the Gallatin and Yellowstone Rivers in the Gallatin Range of
mountains, in Park and Gallatin Counties, Mont. This forest, which lies
just outside the boundary of the Yellowstone National Park, is said to
cover 35,000 acres and to contain some wonderfully well preserved
upright trunks, many of them very large, equaling or perhaps even
surpassing in size some of those within the limits of the park. Two of
the best preserved of these trunks are shown in figures 2 and 3, which
are here reproduced by the kindness of Mr. E. C. Alderson, of Bozeman,
Mont.

In the beds of the streams and gulches coming down into the Lamar River
from Specimen Ridge and the fossil forests one may observe numerous
pieces of fossil wood, which may be traced for a long distance down the
Lamar and Yellowstone Rivers. The farther these pieces of wood have been
transported downstream, the more they have been worn and rounded, until
ultimately they become smooth, rounded “pebbles” of the stream bed. The
pieces of wood become more numerous and fresher in appearance upstream
toward the bluffs, until at the foot of the cliffs in some places there
are hundreds, perhaps thousands of tons that have but recently fallen
from the walls above. One traversing the valley of the Lamar River may
see at many places numerous upright fossil trunks in the faces of nearly
vertical walls. These trunks are not all at a particular level but occur
at irregular heights: in fact a section cut down through these 2,000
feet of beds would disclose a succession of fossil forests (see fig. 4).
That is to say, after the first forest grew and was entombed, there was
a time without volcanic outburst—a period long enough to permit a second
forest to grow above the first. This in turn was covered by volcanic
material and preserved, to be followed again by a period of quiet, and
these more or less regular alternations of volcanism and forest growth
continued throughout the time the beds were in process of formation.




                          GEOLOGIC RELATIONS.


While these fossil forests were growing and being entombed, much of the
area now within the limits of the park, as well as large adjacent areas,
was the scene of tremendous geologic activities. After the Cretaceous
period (see diagram p. 28), there was a time of great volcanic activity,
which appears to have lasted until perhaps the beginning of the glacial
epoch. There were many active volcanoes just west, north, and west of
the park, and some in the park itself. From these volcanoes vast
quantities of material were poured out, building up in places whole
mountain ranges. Thus the major portion of the great Absaroka Range,
just east of the park, as it appears to-day, was built up of volcanic
material.

    [Illustration: Fig. 4.—Ideal section through 2,000 feet of beds of
    Specimen Ridge, showing succession of buried forest. After Holmes.]

Mr. Arnold Hague gives the following graphic account of this and
adjacent areas:

  From one end to the other the Absarokas present a high, imposing
  plateau, with elevations ranging from 10,000 to over 12,000 feet above
  sea level. The entire mass is made up almost exclusively of Tertiary
  igneous rocks. * * * Degradation of the mass has taken place on a
  grand scale. Vast quantities of volcanic ejectmenta have been removed
  from the summit, but no reliable data exist by which the amount can be
  estimated even approximately. All the higher portions have been
  sculptured by glacial ice. Enormous amphitheaters have been carved out
  of the loose agglomerates, and peaks, pinnacles, and relics of great
  table-lands testify in some measure to the forces of erosion. The
  plateau is scored by a complete network of deep valleys and gorges,
  which dissect it in every direction, and lay bare the structure of the
  vast volcanic pile.[1]

Within the park there is evidence of similar volcanic activity, and it
is clear that the basin between the encircling ranges was filled to its
present elevation by volcanic flows, which formed the present park
plateau. The area within which the fossil forests are now found was
apparently in the beginning an irregular but relatively flat basin, on
the floor of which after a time there grew the first forest. Then there
came from some of the volcanoes, probably those to the north, an
outpouring of ashes, mud flows, and other material which entirely buried
the forest, but so gradually that the trees were simply submerged by the
incoming material, few of them being prostrated. On the raised floor of
the basin, after a time, the next forest came into existence, only to be
in turn engulfed as the first had been, and so on through the period
represented by the 2,000 feet or more of similar beds. The series of
entombed forests affords a means of making at least a rough estimate of
the time required for the upbuilding of what is now Specimen Ridge and
its extensions. (See p. 27.)

During the time this 2,000 feet of material was being accumulated, and
since then to the present day, there has been relatively little warping
of the earth’s crust at this point; that is, the beds were then, and
still are, practically horizontal, so that the fossil forests, as they
are being gradually uncovered, still stand upright.

When the volcanic activities had finally ceased, the ever-working
disintegrating forces of nature began to tear and wear down this
accumulated material, eroding the beds on a grand scale. Deep canyons
and gulches have been trenched, and vast quantities of the softer
materials have been carried away by the streams and again deposited on
lower levels or transported to great and unknown distances.

As the material in which the fossil forests are now entombed consist of
ashes, mud flows, breccia, and the like, not all the beds are of the
same texture end hardness, so that erosion has acted unevenly on them
and has produced many peculiar rock forms. The grotesque so-called
“hoodoos” have been carved out in this manner. The fossil trunks, being
usually harder than the surrounding matrix in which they are embedded,
have more firmly resisted erosion and now project to different heights
above the general level. In exposed beds that are nearly or quite
horizontal, disintegration has acted at nearly equal pace on the trunks
and on the matrix, so that the trunks are nearly or quite on a level
with the surrounding surface. On steep hillsides, however, from which
all loose material is easily and quickly removed, some of the fossil
trunks stand up to a height of 20 or 30 feet. If the beds had been
tilted at a considerable angle, these trunks could project from the
surface for only a short distance before their weight would break them
off, showing again the remarkably stable conditions that have continued
since the trunks were covered up.




                           AMETHYST MOUNTAIN.


The fossil forest that was first brought to scientific attention is on
the northern slope of Amethyst Mountain, opposite the mouth of Soda
Butte Creek, 12 miles southeast of Camp Roosevelt. The following
account, by Dr. William H. Holmes, the discoverer of these fossil
forests, shows the impression first made by them:

  As we ride up the trail that meanders the smooth river bottom [Lamar
  River] we have but to turn our attention to the cliffs on the right
  hand to discover a multitude of the bleached trunks of the ancient
  forests. In the steeper middle portion of the mountain face, rows of
  upright trunks stand out on the ledges like the columns of a ruined
  temple. On the more gentle slopes farther down, but where it is still
  too steep to support vegetation, save a few pines, the petrified
  trunks fairly cover the surface, and were at first supposed by us to
  be shattered remains of a recent forest.[2]

These trunks may easily be seen from the road along the Lamar River,
about a mile away. They stand upright—as Holmes has said, like the
pillars of some ruined temple—and a closer view shows that there is a
succession of these forests, one above another. In the foothills and
several hundred feet above the valley there is a perpendicular wall of
volcanic breccia, which in some places attains a height of nearly 100
feet. The fossil trunks may be seen in this wall in many places, all of
them standing upright, in the position in which they grew. Some of these
trunks, which are 2 to 4 feet in diameter and 20 to 40 feet high, are so
far weathered out of the rock as to appear just ready to fall: others
are only slightly exposed: niches mark the places from which others have
already fallen: and the foot of the cliff is piled high with fragments
of various sizes.

Above this cliff fossil trunks appear in great numbers and in regular
succession. As they are all perfectly silicified, they are more
resistant than the surrounding matrix and consequently stand above it.
Most of them are only a few inches above the surface, but occasionally
one rises as high as 5 or 6 feet. The largest trunk observed in the park
is found in this locality. It is a little over 10 feet in diameter, a
measurement that includes a part of the bark. It is very much broken
down, especially in the interior, probably having been so disintegrated
before it was fossilized. It projects about 6 feet above the surface.

At many places about Amethyst Mountain there are numerous fragments of
fossil wood and many hollow trunks. The material in which they had been
embedded has been eroded away, and they lie around in somewhat the same
attitudes that are shown by all the trunks in the Arizona fossil
forests, but there is little doubt that they were originally erect and
have simply fallen by their own weight because of the removal of the
material around them.

Many of the trunks here, as well as elsewhere in the park, had decayed
in the center before they were fossilized, and some of the hollow
interiors are filled with clusters and rosettes of beautiful crystals of
amethyst, which doubtless suggested the name given to the adjacent
mountain. Much of this finely preserved wood, as well as the trunks
containing the crystals of amethyst, was broken up and carried away by
collectors of minerals and curiosities before the Government control in
the park was made sufficiently rigid to insure proper protection.




                            SPECIMEN RIDGE.


In many respects the most remarkable of the fossil forests is on the
northwest end of Specimen Ridge, about a mile southeast of Junction
Butte and about opposite the mouth of Slough Creek. So far as known,
this forest was first brought to scientific attention by Mr. E. C.
Alderson, of Bozeman, Mont., and the writer, who discovered it in
August, 1887. It is found on the higher part of the ridge, and covers
several acres. The trees are exposed at various heights on the very
steep hillsides, and one remarkable feature of the forest is that most
of them project well above the surface.

One of the largest and best preserved trees stands at the very summit of
the slope (see title page). This trunk, which is that of a giant
redwood, is 26½ feet in circumference without the bark and about 12 feet
in height. The portion of this huge trunk preserved is the base, and it
exhibits to a considerable degree the swelling or buttressing so well
known in the living redwood. The roots, which are as large as the trunks
of ordinary trees, are now embedded in solid rock.

    [Illustration: Fig. 5.—Upright trunks in Specimen Ridge fossil
    forest.]

On the steep hillside a short distance below the big tree just mentioned
are the two trunks shown in figure 5. They are about 2 feet in diameter
and 25 feet high, and stand some 20 feet apart, and we may imagine them
to have formed the doorposts of the “ancient temple” of which Holmes
speaks. Both these trunks are without the bark. On the left of the
figure is one of the huge irregular masses of rock that has been carved
out by erosion.

    [Illustration: Fig. 6.—Trunk of fossil pine showing bark. Specimen
    Ridge fossil forest.]

In figure 6 is shown another trunk about 3 feet in diameter and nearly
30 feet high. In several places along the trunk the thick bark may be
noted. This tree is a pine, as are the two last described, and slightly
below and behind it are two living pine trees, which are about the size
it must have been when living. Another trunk, some 12 feet in height, is
shown in figure 7, and in figure 8 there may be noted a standing trunk
and above it another that has recently fallen.

    [Illustration: Fig. 7.—Trunk showing bark. Specimen Ridge fossil
    forest.]

    [Illustration: Fig. 8.—Upright and prostrate trunks, Specimen Ridge
    fossil forest.]

The height attained by the trees of this fossil forest can not be
ascertained with certainty, since the tallest trunk now standing is only
about 30 feet high, but every one observed is obviously broken off, and
does not show even the presence of limbs. Perhaps the nearest approach
to a measure of the height is afforded by a trunk (shown in fig. 10)
that happened to have been prostrated before fossilization. This trunk,
which is 4 feet in diameter, is exposed for a length of about 40 feet,
and as it shows no apparent diminution in size within this distance it
is safe to assume that the tree could hardly have been less than 100
feet high and very probably may have been higher. This trunk is
wonderfully preserved. As may be seen from the illustration, it has
broken up by splitting along the grain of the wood into great numbers of
little pieces, which closely resemble pieces of “kindling wood” split
from a clear-grained block. In fact, at a distance of a few yards it
would be impossible to distinguish this fossil “kindling wood” from that
split from a living tree.

    [Illustration: Fig. 10.—Prostrate trunk of fossil redwood, Specimen
    Ridge fossil forest.]

The large redwood trunk already mentioned (title-page) as being nearly
10 feet in diameter may be compared with its living relative of the
Pacific coast in order to calculate its probable height. The living
redwood is usually 10 to 15 feet in diameter and ranges in height from
200 to 310 feet, and as the two are so very closely related there is no
reason to suppose that the fossil trunk was of less height, but by a
moderate estimate it may be accredited with a minimum height of 200
feet.

    [Illustration: MAP OF YELLOWSTONE NATIONAL PARK
    Norris O Denotes Ranger Station
    ←Direction of Travel
    Distances given are between main points by road
    NOTE THE MILE-POST SIGNS]




                              TOWER FALLS.


The most accessible fossil forest, marked "Petrified Trees" on the map,
is west of the Tower Falls Ranger Station and Camp Roosevelt on the road
from the Grand Canyon to Mammoth Hot Springs, by way of Mount Washburn.
It is on the middle slope of a hill that rises about 1,000 feet above
the little valley and may be reached by a branch road from the main loop
road. As the traveler approaches the forest he will observe a number of
trunks standing upright among the stumps and trunks of living trees, and
so much resembling them that a near view is necessary to convince him
that they are really fossil trunks. Only two rise to a considerable
height above the surface. The larger one is about 15 feet high and 13
feet in circumference (fig. 11): the other is a little smaller. As the
roots are not exposed, it is impossible to determine the position of the
part in view or the original diameter of the trees, as the bark is
nowhere preserved.

    [Illustration: Fig. 11.—Fossil trunk near Tower Falls.
    Photograph by F. J. Haynes.]

Above these standing trunks lie many others, which the disintegrating
forces of nature break up into small fragments and keep at about the
same level as that of their surrounding matrix. Some of these trunks
rise only a few inches from the surface: others are nearly covered by
shifting débris. Their diameter ranges from 1 to 14 feet, and they are
so perfectly preserved that the rings of growth can easily be counted.
The internal structure is also in most trunks nearly as perfect as when
the trees were living.




                              CACHE CREEK.


The forest that is next in size to the one a mile southeast of Junction
Butte is on Cache Creek, about 7 miles above its mouth. It is on the
south bank of the creek and covers several acres. The trunks are
scattered from bottom to top of the slopes through a height of probably
800 feet. Most of the trunks are upright, but only a few project more
than 2 or 3 feet above the surface. The largest one observed was 6 feet
in height and 4 feet in diameter. Most of these trunks appear to the
naked eye to be conifers, but a number are obviously dicotyledons—that
is, they were deciduous-leaved trees. The conifers, however, were the
predominant element in this as in the other fossil forests.

The slopes of the Thunderer, the mountain so prominently in view from
Soda Butte on the south, also bear numerous fossil trunks. Most of them
are upright, but only a very few project more than 2 feet above the
surface. No remarkably large trunks were observed at this locality, the
average diameter being perhaps less than 2 feet.




                           OTHER LOCALITIES.


Mount Norris, which is hardly to be separated from the Thunderer, also
bears a small fossil forest. The trees are of about the same size and
character as those in the larger mountain. Fossil forests of greater or
less extent, composed mainly of upright trunks, are exposed also on
Baronett Peak, Bison Peak, Abiathar Peak, Crescent Hill, and Miller
Creek. In fact, there is hardly a square mile of the area of the
northeastern portion of the park that is without its fossil forest,
scattered trunks, or erratic fragments.

The vast area east of the Yellowstone Lake and the region still farther
east, beyond the limits of the park, have not been thoroughly explored,
but enough is known to make it certain that these areas contain more or
less fossil wood. The stream beds in these areas in many places contain
fragments of fossil wood, which indicates that trunks of trees must be
near at hand.




                     THE PROCESS OF FOSSILIZATION.


The manner in which these forests were fossilized may next be
considered. Though the whole history of the process is not fully
understood, it was undoubtedly dependent on or at least greatly
facilitated by the presence of volcanic and hydrothermal activity, which
was doubtless then, as it is to some extent now, a marked feature of the
park region. At least a hint of the probable process is afforded by the
action now going on in the hot spring areas. Many of those areas are
closely surrounded by forests, and unless the action of the springs is
very violent the trees may be growing only a short distance away.
Occasionally a hot spring may break out near the edge of a forest, the
first effect being, of course, to kill the trees. In a few years, by the
action of the ordinary processes of decay, a tree so killed may have
lost its bark and most of its smaller branches. The hot water which
constantly or intermittently surrounds the tree contains a considerable
amount of silica in solution, and as this hot silica-charged water is
drawn up into the wood by capillarity the silica may be deposited in the
cells of the wood after the water cools or evaporates. The first result
will be a more or less complete cast of the interior of the cells and
vessels of the wood. This much of the process has actually been
observed, but as decay is more rapid than silicification, the wood
crumbles to dust before petrifaction is complete. If the trunk could be
surrounded by ashes or mud and thus protected from atmospheric action,
it might in time be completely turned to stone.

The fossil forests are surrounded by a matrix that is known as an acidic
lava—that is, a siliceous lava—which contains abundant silica in
solution. The first part of the process of silicification may well have
been that above described as taking place in the hot spring areas at the
present day—that is, the silica would be deposited in all the cells and
vessels of the wood, making an accurate cast of all open spaces. Then,
while the slow process of decay went on, as each particle of organic
matter was removed its place was taken by the silica, until, finally,
all the wood substance had disappeared and its place atom by atom had
been taken by silica.

By this or a similar process the wood has been preserved or fossilized
with remarkable fidelity: in fact, thin sections or slices of the fossil
wood may be studied under the higher powers of the microscope with
almost or quite as much completeness and satisfaction as if they were
sections cut from a piece of living wood. Each cell and vessel, with its
characteristic pits and markings, is preserved exactly as it grew. Some
of the wood, however, was evidently more or less decayed before it was
fossilized, or else decay worked faster than replacement, so that in
some fragments the structure is not so clearly preserved. Many of the
trunks were subjected to pressure before replacement was complete, and
this has crushed or distorted the cells. On the whole, however, the wood
is exceptionally well preserved, as may be seen in figures 12, 13, 14,
and 15. These are all magnified 100 diameters and were photographed
directly from the thin sections—that is, they are photomicrographs—and
have not been retouched in any manner. Figure 12 shows a transverse
section of the wood of the large redwood trunk that has been so often
mentioned (see title page). The section is cut through one of the growth
rings, which consists of 12 or 15 rows of very thick-walled cells. The
large, regular thin-walled cells, which begin abruptly above the growth
ring, belong to the spring wood—that is, the wood first formed after
growth starts in spring, when the supply of nourishment is abundant. If
there is sufficient moisture and all conditions are favorable this
vigorous growth of wood cells may continue without interruption until
the approach of cold or dry weather, but not infrequently there may be a
brief shortage of moisture, and this is reflected in the formation of a
few rows of thicker-walled cells. Such a condition may be observed in
the present specimen, in which a slight, partial ring may be seen at
some distance above the main ring.

    [Illustration: Fig. 12.—Thin section of wood of fossil redwood
    (Sequoia magnifica), showing growth ring. Section transverse.
    Magnified 100 diameters.]

    [Illustration: Fig. 13.—Thin section of wood of fossil pine
    (Pityoxylon amethystinum), showing growth ring and resin tube.
    Section transverse. Magnified 100 diameters.]

    [Illustration: Fig. 14.—Thin section of wood of fossil pine
    (Pityoxylon aldersoni), showing medullary rays and resin tube.
    Section tangential. Magnified 100 diameters.]

    [Illustration: Fig. 15.—Thin section of wood of fossil laurel
    (Laurinoxylon pulchrum), showing wood cells, tubes, and rays.
    Section longitudinal. Magnified 100 diameters.]

The very perfect preservation of the wood of one of the pines
(_Pityoxylon amethystinum_) is shown in figure 13, a view of a section
cut through a part of a growth ring and into the spring and summer wood,
the rings in this species being so broad that it is impossible to show a
complete one. The opening near the bottom of the figure shows one of the
large resin ducts, which, in the living wood, is filled with the “pitch”
that so readily exudes when a branch is cut or broken. A longitudinal
section of the other species of pine (_Pityoxylon aldersoni_) is shown
in figure 14. The many little rows of superimposed cells in the midst of
the long wood cells are the cut-off ends of what are known as medullary
rays—that is, the little plates of cells that connect pith and bark. One
of the resin cells cut in the long direction is shown near the center of
the figure; the contents are much darker than that of the wood cells.

The very great difference between the sections of coniferous wood just
described and the wood of a deciduous tree is brought out in figure 15,
which is a longitudinal section of a laurel (_Laurinoxylon pulchrum_).
In this the wood cells are relatively much smaller and shorter, and the
medullary rays are in several irregular rows. The large dotted duct near
the middle of the figure is a feature not present in coniferous trees.




                          SPECIES REPRESENTED.


An enumeration of the kinds of trees that are represented by the woods
in the fossil forests of the Yellowstone National Park will naturally be
demanded. A superficial or macroscopic examination of these trunks would
not permit a close decision as to the kind of wood: in fact, it would
hardly be possible to do more than separate them by this means into
coniferous and dicotyledonous trees. But by studying thin sections under
the microscope it is possible to distinguish the different kinds with
reasonable accuracy. As the result of such study the following species
have been detected:

  Magnificent redwood (Sequoia magnifica).
  Alderson’s pine (Pityoxylon aldersoni).
  Amethyst pine (Pityoxylon amethystinum).
  Laurel (Laurinoxylon pulchrum).
  Aromatic bay (Perseoxylon aromaticum),
  Hayden’s sycamore (Plantaninium haydeni).
  Knowlton’s sycamore (Plantaninium knowltoni).
  Felix’s buckthorn (Rhamnacinium radiatum).
  Lamar oak (Quercinium lamarense).
  Knowlton’s oak (Quercinium knowltoni).

Although only three kinds of coniferous trees have thus far been found
in the fossil forests of the park, fully 95 per cent of all the trunks
belong to these three species. The preponderance of conifers is probably
due to the facts that they were presumably more abundant in the
beginning, and that, in general, coniferous wood decays less rapidly
than that of most of deciduous-leaved trees. But the conditions were so
favorable for preserving any wood that it is perhaps strange that not
more trunks of deciduous-leaved trees have been found there. As it is,
however, a greater number are known from the park than from any other
region. Thus, the Arizona fossil forests embraced only two species of
deciduous-leaved trees: the Calistoga (California) wood only one
species, and the forest at Cairo, Egypt, only four species.

The 10 species of trees represented in the fossil forests of the park
are by no means the only fossil plants that have been found. The
fine-grained ashes and volcanic mud in which the forests were entombed
contain also great numbers of impressions of plants, many of them very
perfectly preserved. Most of these are impressions of foliage, such as
fronds and leaves, but they include also roots, stems, branches,
fruiting organs, and even what is believed to be the petals of a large
magnolia flower. About 150 different kinds of fossil plants have been
found in the park, 80 in the same beds with the forests, and most of the
others in slightly higher and younger beds. The list embraces 10 ferns,
among them a fine chain fern (Woodwardia), several aspleniums, and a
beautiful little climbing fern (Lygodium). The horse-tails (Equisetum)
are represented by 4 species. The conifers include no less than 6
species of pines (Pinus), a yew (Taxodium), and 2 sequoias. These have
been identified either from the foliage or the cones, and it is more
than likely that some of the specimens may represent organs that
belonged to trees represented by the fossil trunks, but as they have
never been found connected they have been described separately. The
monocotyledons, or plants with parallel-veined leaves, are represented
by only a few forms, such as a single large grass (Phragmites), a few
sedges (Cyperacites), a smilax, and a curious broad-leaved banana-like
plant (Musophyllum). The dicotyledons, or deciduous-leaved plants, make
up the bulk of the flora and include walnuts (Juglans), hickory nuts
(Hicoria), bay berries (Myrica), poplars (Populus), willows (Salix),
birches (Betula), hazel nuts (Corylus), beech nuts (Fagus), chestnuts
(Castanea), oaks (Quercus), elms (Ulmus), figs (Ficus), breadfruits
(Artocarpus), magnolias (Magnolia), laurels (Laurus), bays (Persea),
cinnamons (Cinnamomum), sycamores (Plantanus), acacias (Acacia), sumachs
(Rhus), bittersweet (Celastrus), maples (Acer), soap berries (Sapindus),
buckthorns (Rhammus), grapes (Cissus), basswood (Tilia), aralias
(Aralia), dogwoods (Cornus), persimmons (Diospyros), ash (Fraxinus), and
a number of others without vernacular names.




                    COMPARISON WITH LIVING FORESTS.


A brief comparison of the fossil forests with the forests now living in
the Yellowstone National Park may be of some interest. The present
forests are prevailingly coniferous, the most abundant and widely
distributed tree being the lodgepole pine (_Pinus murrayana_), which
forms dense forests over much of the plateau region. It is distinguished
by having the leaves in clusters of two. It is a tree with a slender
trunk, usually 70 or 80 feet high, though in exceptionally favorable
localities it may reach a height of 150 feet. Its diameter rarely
exceeds 2 or 3 feet. The areas ravaged by forest fires are usually
reforested by this pine alone, and the young trees come up so close
together as to form thickets that can scarcely be penetrated.

There are two other pines in the park, both white pines, allied to the
common white pine of the Eastern States, and like it both have the
leaves in clusters of 5. One, known as the Rocky Mountain white pine
(_Pinus flexilis_) is a small tree, only 40 or 50 feet in height, and
usually grows singly or in small groves. The other, called the Western
white pine (_Pinus albicaulis_), is still smaller, being usually 20 to
30 feet high, and has a short trunk some 2 to 4 feet in diameter. It
grows on high slopes and exposed ridges.

Perhaps next in abundance to the lodgepole pine is the white or
Engelmann spruce (_Picea engelmanni_), a tall, handsome tree with
disagreeable smelling foliage. Another rather abundant tree is the
Douglas spruce, or red fir (_Pseudotsuga mucronata_), which, where best
developed on the Pacific coast, attains a height of 200 feet, though in
the drier interior it is rarely over 80 or 100 feet high. There are also
two species of fir, the white fir (_Abies grandis_) and the Balsam fir
(_Abies lasiocarpa_), and a single juniper (_Juniperus communis
siberica_), which is often scarcely more than a shrub.

The deciduous-leaved trees are almost a negligible element in the
present park flora, being confined to an occasional cottonwood (_Populus
angustifolia_) at the lower elevations, along the Yellowstone River, and
small groves of the quaking aspen (_Populus tremuloides_). Along the
streams and in wet places there are many species of willow (Salix) and
several alders (Alnus), and in mountain bogs and valleys there is a
small birch (_Betula glandulosa_). There are, of course, many small
shrubs, such as gooseberries, currants, and roses.




                       AGE OF THE FOSSIL FORESTS.


The question is often asked, How old are the fossil forests? It is, of
course, impossible to fix their age exactly in years, though it is easy
enough to place them in the geologic time scale. The stratified rocks
that make up the crust of the earth, from the oldest we know to the most
recent, have been divided by geologists into a number of major divisions
or systems, each—except perhaps the oldest—containing the remains of
certain kinds of plants and animals. The accompanying diagram (fig. 16),
shows these major time divisions, arranged in their proper sequence from
the lowest to the highest. The star (*) in this geologic time scale
indicates the age of the rocks in which the fossil forests were
entombed. It shows that they were buried during the Tertiary period.
This period is divided into four epochs, the oldest called Eocene,
having been succeeded in turn by the Oligocene, the Miocene, and the
Pliocene, which just precedes the Pleistocene or glacial epoch. The
forests of the Yellowstone National Park are found in the Miocene series
of the Tertiary. As compared with the eons of geologic time that
preceded it the Miocene is relatively very recent, though, if the
various estimates of the age of the earth that have been made by
geologists are anywhere near correct it may well have been a million
years ago. It must be remembered, however, that this estimate involves
more or less speculation based on a number of factors which may or may
not have been correctly interpreted.

A study of the fossil trees themselves gives at least a rough
approximation as to the length of time it may have taken to accumulate
the beds in which they are now buried. As already mentioned, there is a
succession of forests, one above another, through a thickness of 2,000
feet of strata. The unit of the measure of the time is the time taken by
each forest to grow. Pine trees of the types represented in the fossil
trunks require 200 or 300 years to reach maturity, and redwoods may
require from 500 to 1,000 years. Twelve or more of these forest levels
have been found. By multiplying this number by the minimum age of the
trees (200 years) we shall have 2,400 years, and by multiplying it by
the maximum age of the redwood (1,000 years) we shall have 12,000 years
as the possible time during which these forests flourished. It is
possible that the truth lies somewhere between these extremes.

            Fig. 16.—Geologic divisions.
       Era.            Period.          Epoch.

  Cenozoic.        Quaternary.      Recent.
                                    Pleistocene
                                    (glacial).
                   *Tertiary.       Pliocene.
                                    *Miocene.
                                    Oligocene.
                                    Eocene.
  Mesozoic.        Cretaceous.
                   Jurassic.
                   Triassic.
  Paleozoic.       Carboniferous.
                   Devonian.
                   Silurian.
                   Ordovician.
  Proterozoic.     Cambrian.
                   Algonkian.
                   Archean.




              CLIMATE DURING THE LIFE OF THE FOSSIL TREES.


A final word may be added regarding the probable climate of the region
during the lifetime of these fossil forests. It is obvious that the
present flora of the Yellowstone National Park has comparatively little
relation to the Tertiary flora and can not be considered the descendant
of it. It is also clear that the climatic conditions must have greatly
changed since Tertiary time. The Tertiary flora appears to have come
from the south, but the present flora is evidently of more northern
origin. The climate during Tertiary time, as indicated by the
vegetation, was temperate or warm-temperate, not unlike that of Virginia
or the Carolinas at the present time, and the presence of numerous
species of figs, a supposed bread-fruit tree, cinnamons, bays, and other
southern plants indicates that it may have been almost subtropical.
However, the conditions that were favorable to this seemingly
subtropical growth may have been different from the conditions now
necessary for the growth of similar vegetation. It may be that these
supposed subtropical plants were at that time so constituted as to grow
in a temperate land, and that they may have become tropical in recent
times. Following this general line of thought it may be said that
although the Tertiary vegetation of the Yellowstone National Park would
now be regarded as indicating a temperate or even warmer climate, the
actual climate may not have been subtropical. It is certain, however,
that the conditions were very different from those now prevailing in the
park.




               PUBLICATIONS ON YELLOWSTONE NATIONAL PARK.


             DISTRIBUTED FREE BY THE NATIONAL PARK SERVICE.

The following publication may be obtained free on written application to
the Director of the National Park Service:

Circular of General Information, Yellowstone National Park (issued
      yearly). This pamphlet contains general information of interest to
      the tourist.


              SOLD BY THE SUPERINTENDENT OF DOCUMENTS.[3]

The following publications may be obtained from the Superintendent of
Documents, Government Printing Office, Washington, D. C., at the prices
given. Remittances should be made by money order or in cash:

National Park Portfolio, by Robert Sterling Yard. 270 pages, including
      310 illustrations. Bound securely in cloth, $1.

  Contains nine chapters, each descriptive of a national park and one
  larger chapter devoted to other national parks and monuments.

Geological History of Yellowstone National Park, by Arnold Hague, 22
      pages, including 10 illustrations, 10 cents.

  This pamphlet contains a general résumé of the geologic forces that
  have been active in the Yellowstone National Park.

Geysers of the Yellowstone National Park, by Walter Harvey Weed, 32
      pages, including 23 illustrations, 10 cents.

  In this pamphlet is a description of the forces which have produced
  the geysers, and the geysers of the Yellowstone are compared with
  those in Iceland and New Zealand.

Fossil Forests of the Yellowstone National Park, by F. H. Knowlton, 30
      pages, including 15 illustrations, 10 cents. (This publication.)

  This pamphlet contains descriptions of the fossil forests of the
  Yellowstone National Park and an account of their origin.

Fishes of the Yellowstone National Park, by W. C. Kendall (Bureau of
      Fisheries Document 818.) 28 pages, including 17 illustrations, 5
      cents.

  Contains descriptions of the species and lists of streams where found.


                                MAP.[3]

A topographic map of the park may be purchased from the Director of the
Geological Survey, Washington, D. C., at the price given. Remittances
should be made by cash or money order.

Map of Yellowstone National Park. size 28½ by 32 inches; scale, 2 miles
      to the inch. Price, 25 cents.

  The roads, trails, and names are put in black, the streams and lakes
  in blue, and the relief is indicated by brown contour lines.




                               FOOTNOTES


[1]Hague, Arnold, Early Tertiary Volcanoes of the Absaroka Range: Geol.
    Soc. Wash., Presidential Address, 1899, p. 4.

[2]Holmes, W. H., Twelfth Ann. Rept. U. S. Geol. and Geogr. Surv. Terr.,
    1878 (1883) p. 48.

[3]May be purchased by personal application at the information office in
    the park, at Mammoth Hot Springs, but that office can not fill mail
    orders.




                          Transcriber’s Notes


—Silently corrected a few typos.

—Retained publication information from the printed edition: this eBook
  is public-domain in the country of publication.

—In the text versions only, text in italics is delimited by
  _underscores_.







End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Fossil Forests of the Yellowstone
National Park, by Frank Hall Knowlton

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK FOSSIL FORESTS OF THE ***

***** This file should be named 63519-0.txt or 63519-0.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/6/3/5/1/63519/

Produced by Stephen Hutcheson and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at https://www.pgdp.net (This file was
produced from images generously made available by The
Internet Archive/American Libraries.)


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org/license

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
