The American Cavalryman: A Liberian Romance 

Henry F. Downing

1917

John Calvert was one of New York's wealthiest and most influential citizens. He owned a palace in the metropolis, a castle and a park in the Adirondacks, automobiles, yachts, trotting-horses, and many other appurtenances and toys of the rich man. He was a widower. Thus smiled upon by Fortune, he was very happy, though, contradictory as it may seem, not exactly content. He was childless. At least, so he believed.

About twenty years earlier than the date of this tale, Calvert, then a poor man, was living at a certain port on the West Coast of Africa,— the agent of a well-known English trading company — and with him were his wife and daughter, the latter not quite two years of age. One day the little one and her nurse, a native woman, were found to be missing. Search for them was vain. Eventually, however, the child's bonnet,— all soiled as though it had been in water,— was found near the edge of a deep lagoon. From this it was supposed that she had been drowned and her body carried out to sea, and that the nurse, afraid to face her employers, had levanted into the hinterland.

Whatever the facts might have been, neither the child nor the nurse was found. Then Calvert's wife died. As a consequence of his double loss Africa became exceedingly distasteful to him; so he resigned his post and returned to America. He established himself in New York and, as his present position discloses, prospered wonderfully.

Twice had Calvert run on the Democratic ticket for the governorship of New York,— hoping that Albany would be but a stepping-stone to the White House in Washington,— and both times had been defeated only because the colored voters opposed his election. He was much too big-minded to feel a grudge against these people because they were politically antagonistic to him; to the contrary, provided they kept in their " proper places," he was not unwilling to do them any cheap service. In fact, he employed colored persons as domestic servants in his residences, also in all menial positions in the important bank of which he was president.

It was the middle of December, and the sun was vainly endeavoring to moderate the Arctic-like cold that was causing all New York to shiver. Calvert, however, sitting before a fire that glowed in an open grate and puffing away at a big black cigar, was not concerned because of the low temperature outside. He was feeling very comfortable. So much so, indeed, that the entrance of an attendant rather annoyed him.

" Well, what is it? " asked he somewhat sharply.

The attendant whose entrance had disturbed the banker was a black boy, dressed in tight-fitting jacket and trousers resplendent with gilt braid and brass buttons. He came into the room with a grin spreading his countenance and, apparently unaffected by Calvert's mood, continued grinning while he answered: " Sir, a colored lady wants to see you."

" Robert, you mean a colored woman," corrected the banker.

Robert felt very much like arguing the point, but durst not.

" Yes, sir," said he submissively.

" Did the person mention her name? "

"Yes, sir. The la — er — the woman said her name was Mrs. Sarah Dale."

Calvert smiled.

" Oh, Mrs. Dale! " exclaimed he. " Why didn't you mention the name at once? However, it's all right; you may show the lady in."

" Gums ! " thought the lad. " He calls her ' lady ' himself."

" While Mrs. Dale is with me I'm not to be disturbed," added Calvert.

" Yes, sir," said Robert.

He went from the room still grinning, and a moment or so later ushered in Mrs. Dale.

This visitor was a very good-looking colored person of fair complexion. She was costumed fashionably but modestly, and her features, though more refined, resembled Calvert's very closely. The banker, while Robert was present, received her in a most stately fashion, but after the lad had gone and closed the door behind him the man's manner relaxed.

" Good-afternoon, Sarah," said he, smiling, " I'm glad to see you."

" I'm glad to see you, John," responded Mrs. Dale, crossing toward him.

He drew an easy-chair up before the fire.

" Sit down and thaw yourself out," said he.

" I'm not cold," replied the woman. Nevertheless, she placed herself in the easy-chair.

" Now then, Sarah, what is it? " asked Calvert as his visitor sat down.

Mrs. Dale glanced nervously toward the door.

" John, are we in privacy? " asked she.

Calvert chuckled.

" My dear," said he, " we are in the sanctum sanctorum of a bank president. The door is sound-proof, and no one will enter without my permission; Poushkin will see to that."

" Poushkin? "

" I referred to the boy who showed you in,— Robert. He is a poet in posse, hence I have named him after the Russian Shakespeare."

Mrs. Dale laughed softly.

" John," said she, casting an admiring glance about the room, " what luxury! The room is grand enough for a king."

Calvert himself let his eye pass over the room, smiling meanwhile contentedly, and said: "Yes, it is some all right! But I guess it's not too good for John Calvert. But, Sarah, what can I do for you? Is it cash! I hope you are not dissatisfied with the allowance I make you ? "

"Dissatisfied? Of course I am not!" said Mrs. Dale earnestly. " No, John, you are a very kind brother to me."

"To my father's daughter I could not be otherwise."

" If all of us Ne —"

" Stop, Sarah," interrupted Calvert, " don't apply that confounded term to me. I'm not a Negro. Our father was white and my mother was an octoroon; consequently, if there's any African blood in me, it's only about one-sixteenth of the whole. I'm a white man!"

Mrs. Dale smiled.

" If your white friends knew the truth, they wouldn't say so," returned she.

" Possibly not; but they don't know and never will. If a person was possessed of a quality, good, bad, or indifferent, which, if his fellows knew of it, would prevent him from living his life fully and usefully he wouldn't advertise the fact. However, whatever else I may be, I'm a Calvert. So are you. And that being the case, we belong to the salt of the earth."

" Maybe so," said Mrs. Dale doubtfully. " But to deceive people as you are doing, it seems to me, is really sinful."

" Well," said the banker, smiling, " if I'm sinner, Sarah, I guess there's any number of sinners just like me. America is a Bleachery, and I am one of its peculiar outputs. The country is full of my kind. But, that's neither here nor there. What's up?"

"I received a letter from Liberia this morning." " From your son? "

" Yes."

" Anything wrong with him ? "

" I'm not sure," said the woman. " I am afraid he is inclined to act very unwisely."

" I have always considered him rather level-headed." " He is young, John."

" He is old enough to know right from wrong. But what is he about? "

" He is getting himself tangled up with some girl." " Oh, is that all! " exclaimed Calvert lightly.

" Quite enough, too ! "

" I don't see why you should let it worry you."

" I can't help it."

Calvert shrugged his shoulders.

" Very well; if it makes you comfortable to worry, keep it up," said he. " But what do you want me to do?"

" You might write to Paul. He has not forgotten that the doors of West Point were opened for him through your influence, and I am certain he feels very grateful to you. He would be guided by your advice." Calvert was flattered and he smiled accordingly.

" Well, Sarah," said he, " if you think a letter from me will keep him out of mischief, I'll write with pleasure. Is the female a Liberian ? "

"I — I suppose so," replied Mrs. Dale hesitatingly. " It very much depends upon what one means by Liberian. She is a native."

" A savage! " exclaimed the banker amazed, staring at his half-sister.

" Yes," said Mrs. Dale, and she sighed.

" I admire his taste."

" According to Paul's description she has a very fair complexion, with brown eyes and hair."

" A freak? "

" Possibly. Paul states that her mother, Reesha, is a Negress pure and simple."

Calvert's countenance assumed a thoughtful look. "Reesha? Reesha?" repeated he reflectively.

" Yes."

" It seems to me that I've heard the name before,"

said the banker, his brain still exploring the past.

" Probably you heard it when you were residing in Africa," suggested the woman. " It may be in common use among the natives."

" I suppose that's it. And now — "

Just then Robert entered the room.

"Well?" cried Calvert, addressing the boy.

" A gentleman wants to see you, sir," explained the lad, and he handed the banker a visiting card.

" Ask Mr. Paton to please wait," said Calvert, glancing at the card. " I'll see him in a moment." Robert departed to deliver his master's message, and Mrs. Dale, the object of her visit now accomplished, arose, saying she would leave at once.

" John, you'll not fail to write? " she questioned.

" I'll do it to-day," promised Calvert.

Mrs. Dale thanked him, said farewell, and went from the room. Mr. Paton entered shortly afterward.

" Good-afternoon, Paton," said Calvert as the man entered. " What may I have the pleasure of doing for you? "

"You may fork out some cash," replied Paton, and he settled himself in the chair that Mrs. Dale had just vacated. Warming his hands at the fire, he added: " I'm up against it hard! "

" Chronic! " remarked Calvert, smiling.

" 'Tisn't fair to hit a chap when he's down," said Paton. " You should be a good Christian and help him out of the hole."

" Humph! You shouldn't get into a hole."

" I agree. But if the pitfall wasn't in sight, how was I to avoid it? You've come some croppers yourself."

" None that embarrassed me. But how much do you want? "

" A mere bagatelle," said Paton; and he cleared his throat somewhat nervously.

" How much? " repeated the banker.

" Ten thousand."

"Security?"

" Two thousand ' Nightingales.' "

Calvert smiled and gazed quizzically at his visitor.

" I'm afraid your 'Nightingales ' might turn out to be mocking birds," said he.

" Do you suggest that I am trying to do you? " asked Paton somewhat angrily.

" My dear Paton, of course not," replied Calvert suavely. " All's fair in business, just as in love and war, you know. I merely mean that your birds may sing the wrong tune. Try again, Paton."

" I'll see what I have," said the would-be borrower.

He took a small notebook from his pocket, and, in doing so, pulled out a little heart-shaped locket, which, unseen by its owner but perceived by Calvert, fell to the floor. The latter picked up the trinket with the intention of handing it to Paton, who was studying his book. He naturally glanced at it. At first he did so carelessly, then more attentively, and at last eagerly, while his face became pale.

" Perhaps I may be able to —" began Paton, still examining his notebook.

" A moment, please," broke in Calvert, with just a suggestion of agitation in his voice.

Paton glanced up and perceived his property in the banker's hand.

"Hello, that's my mascot!" cried he, surprised. " How did you get hold of it? "

" You pulled it out of your pocket with the notebook. But where did you get it from? "

" I picked it up in London."

"England?"

" Yes; at the White City."

" Strange! " murmured the banker, thoughtful.

"What's strange?" asked Paton, his curiosity aroused.

" How came it into your possession? " asked Calvert, his tone mandatory.

Paton frowned. He disliked being spoken to thus.

" I'm not in a witness-box," said he somewhat tartly.

" No, you are in the Bank of ----, seeking a loan,"

retorted Calvert dryly.

Paton lowered his crest.

" By George, so I am! " exclaimed he. " Are you going to accommodate me? "

"We'll attend to one thing at a time," rejoined the banker. " Before we talk money suppose you tell me all you know about this trinket."

" There's nothing much to tell. I purchased the thing from a nigger in the native kraal at the White City."

"Was he from Africa?"

" Yes, Liberia. He said it was a good-luck fetich, and as good luck was then one of my greatest needs, just as it now is, I bought it." Shaking his head sadly, he dolefully added: " I can't say that it's brought me any luck, for I've been dodging the hammer more often than not ever since I purchased it. The confounded coon cheated me! "

" It may have more virtue than you think," said Calvert. " Did the native mention how it got into his hands?"

" Yes. He said an old native woman gave it to him in exchange for a bunch of beads."

Calvert dried his perspiring forehead.

" Did he mention the woman's name? " asked he.

"Yes. He said it was — was— Confound it, I can't bring it to my mind! I remember, however, that it was a very outlandish name."

" Think of something else that you heard at the time, and probably you'll remember the name," suggested Calvert.

" The young nigger told me that she — Oh, by George, yes! Her name was Reesha ! "

" I thought so," said Calvert to himself, and he placed the trinket in his pocket.

"What are you doing with, my mascot?" cried Paton, unwilling to be deprived of his property.

" I propose to keep it," said Calvert shortly.

"No, you don't!" objected Paton.

" Not if I purchase your ' Nightingales '? "

Paton's objections were removed.

" Oh, if that's the game, it's all right! " cried he. " What's your figure? "

" Five thousand dollars."

Paton was not a nincompoop. He suspected that some very compelling reason was moving the banker to retain the trinket, and he was not unwilling to oblige him — at a price.

" Not good enough," said he. Smiling knowingly into the other's now impassive face, he went: " ' Nightingales ' alone, five thousand; wdth the trinket, ten! "

" You are an opportunist," said Calvert, sneering.

" The nigger said it was a good-luck fetich, and one shouldn't sell one's good luck for a song, you know," said Paton, smiling.

" Very well," said Calvert resignedly. " Deposit the stock, and the ten thousand will be handed over to you. Now, if you don't mind, I'm very busy."

" Right you are! " exclaimed Paton, rising. Inwardly he chuckled as he thought: "By Jove, I've pulled his leg famously." Aloud he cried: " Ta, ta! "

and went from the room.

Calvert rang for Robert, who came at once.

"Robert," said Calvert, " tell Jones that I'm going to Washington to-night to see the President. I want him to secure a drawing-room for me on the Congressional Limited."

The lad replied and left the room.

Alone, Calvert fished the trinket from his pocket. And as he gazed at it his face worked with emotion, and his eyes became moist with tears.

" Good-morning, Miss Pattie! " said Captain Paul Dale, as he entered the parlor of the Mission House.

Miss Helen Pattie was sewing. She was an elderly, motherly-looking spinster who had spent more than thirty years of her life, and the whole of her small income, in the somewhat fruitless endeavour to imbue young Liberia with a respect for sexual morality and a regard for truth. She glanced up from her work, smilingly returned Dale's salutation, and invited him to be seated.

The captain thanked the good lady, drew a chair to an open window that overlooked the roadstead, and sat down. Though thinking of something quite foreign to his subject, he began talking about the weather; but his hostess, knowing what was uppermost in his mind, answered his thoughts and not his words.

" Lupelta is at her lessons," said she. Rising, she added: " I will send her to you." And she went from the room.

Captain Dale was a well set-up, light-brown colored man about thirty years of age, with straight black hair, somewhat prominent, well-shaped lips, and dark-brown eyes. He was an American cavalry officer, who had served in the Philippines and on the Mexican border, and was now in Liberia,— loaned by the United States, — in command of her lately organized Constabulary Force.

On the morning that Dale entered the parlor of the Mission House he had been in West Africa for longer than one year. About a fortnight before, he had returned to Monrovia from the hinterland, whence he had brought a young girl, supposedly an Imbunda, named Lupelta.

When Lupelta was about twenty years of age, Lodango, Paramount Chief of the Imbunda People, had come to reside in the town in which she lived. The townsfolk received him with much rejoicing: feasts were held, sacrifices were made, and many savage rites were performed. Young girls, wearing wreaths made of flowers, danced before Lodango, and among them danced Lupelta. Her movements were graceful, her features beautiful, her figure perfect, and the Imbunda Chief admired her above all the other maidens. He decided to make her his favorite wife and declared his intention to Lupelta's putative mother Reesha. And the young girl was not unwilling. She did not love him, it is true, for that complex passion was as yet utterly unknown to her. But that she had been chosen by the great Imbunda warrior, Lodango, to dwell with him in his compound flattered her vanity and pleased her pride.

Lodango's love for Lupelta grew apace, and he became impatient to have her all his own. But before he could lawfully realize his desire it was absolutely necessary that she should be educated by gree-gree women into a knowledge of the duties that a chief's favorite wife is required to perform. Hence she was placed in the gree-gree bush to be so trained.

This place of instruction was situated about a mile from the Imbunda kraal and in the vicinity of the sacrifice-grove. As a rule gree-gree students were allowed no companions; they were deprived of their hair, and their bare skulls were plastered with a cement-like clay twice a day; the flesh of their breasts, shoulders, foreheads, and cheeks, was upturned with sharp flints, or pieces of glass; they were not permitted to pass out through the gateway of the barricade of the gree-gree bush. By Lodango's command, however, these severe rules were relaxed for Lupelta. Her skin was not sacrificed; her head was not shaven; Reesha visited her frequently, and her maid Jaikie was with her all the time. Furthermore, Lupelta was not required to confine her movements to the inside of the barricade.

And the girl was not negligent of this last mentioned privilege; for almost every morning, immediately after the early mist had been dissolved by the warmth of the rising sun, she left the teaching-place and rambled more or less far afield, with Jaikie in attendance, Reesha often accompanied her. And in whichsoever direction Lupelta at first strolled, eventually she sought a certain clear pool fed by cascading water, near the edge of which wild flowers grew in great abundance. Here she would allay her hunger with ripe fruit and juicy berries, gathered from convenient tree and shrub, and quench her thirst with cool water that spouted from a mossy rock. Many innocent pleasures would keep her occupied here until toward sundown. Then, all bedecked with flowers and singing happily, she would start on her return journey to the gree-gree bush, there to sit through the early hours of night near a fire with the gree-gree women and learn wisdom from their mouths.

Lupelta lived in this Arcadian fashion one whole month, during which time nothing disturbed her peace. At the end of the month the day came when she was to leave the gree-gree bush for good and reside in a new hut, which Lodango had had erected for her in his compound. In the morning of that day she went abroad and bade adieu to the pleasant places she had been wont to visit. She lingered here and there, but at length she reached the pool. Here she rested while Jaikie and Reesha searched Nature's larder to provide their simple meal. And as Lupelta was listening to the song of the falling water,— seeing nothing, but dreaming dreams,— seven swarthy men dressed in flowing robes, with cruelty depicted plainly in their hard-looking faces, and carrying long-barrelled guns, filed into the place from the midst of the surrounding trees. Discovering Lupelta and her companions, they gave a loud shout and rushed toward the women.

When Lupelta and her companions saw themselves thus beset, the young girl sprang to her feet and stood trembling, fear-bound, and voiceless; Jaikie,— equally as alarmed as her mistress, but more vocal,— beat her breasts with her hands and screamed and screamed; Reesha, displaying a stern temper and a readiness to combat, faced the approaching slavers angrily; and when they drew near and essayed to lay hands on Lupelta, she sprang upon them, with fierce cries, and endeavoured to tear their faces with her finger-nails. But the old woman's effort availed naught. The men struck her to the ground. They then seized the girls and forced them,— Lupelta almost fainting, Jaikie screaming and resisting,— from the place into the far-reaching forest.

Soon after they had gone, Reesha recovered from the dazed condition into which the men's blows had sent her, and struggled to her feet. She pursued the slavers; and, though weak with age, soon was close up behind them. She followed all through the day, but toward evening her strength so deserted her that she could advance no further. She was filled with despair. Sinking to the ground, she began appealing to her fetich for help; and while thus employed, she saw Captain Dale, at the head of a company of his constabulary, march from behind a clump of flowering plants, round which the path ran, and meet the slavers face to face.

When Reesha saw Dale and his men, she cried out with joy. She endeavoured to rise, intending to run to them, but could not; so she crawled on her hands and knees. Meanwhile Dale had halted the slavers, and regardless of their clamoring, disarmed and pinioned them. Then the captain and his men marched away, taking the slavers, Lupelta, and Jaikie with them, but leaving Reesha,— of whose presence they were unaware,— still crawling along the path and vainly calling to attract their attention.

Dale was the first civilized person Lupelta had ever seen, and his manner, clothes,— in fact, everything about him,— amazed her. She had been told that Americo-Liberians usually treated natives very harshly. Believing these tales, she expected that the captain would be cruel to her, but this expectation was not realized, for he was not only kind but tender. As the days passed, Lupelta began to feel strangely glad that she was with the captain, just as he became convinced that she was charming.

Dale made up his mind to have Lupelta educated, and when they reached Monrovia, four days after the rescue, made a start in that direction by placing her in the hands of Miss Pattie, who was a somewhat skilled instructress of the unlettered.

Moved by a desire to please Dale, Lupelta pursued her studies eagerly and made very rapid progress; hence, when Miss Pattie came to her and mentioned that the captain was in the parlor, waiting for her to join him, she was able to reply in passable English. But no attempt will be made to write the language as it was brokenly spoken by Lupelta, or by any other person, civilized or savage, who appears in these pages, though there are certain peculiarities of speech common among the natives, which must be retained. However, Lupelta replied to Miss Pattie, dropped the primer that she had been studying, and crossed quickly toward the door,— altogether too hastily to please Miss Pattie.

" Lupelta! " cried the spinster admonitively.

The girl halted and gazed questioningly at the missionary.

"Yes, Miss Pattie?" said she.

" You are much too exuberant, my dear," explained the teacher.

Lupelta was puzzled.

" I don't understand," said she.

" Ladies do not run like mad things," said Miss Pattie gently, and she picked the primer up from the floor.

" Oh! " exclaimed Lupelta enlightened. " I forgot. Pardon me please? " she added, and, though her heart said " hasten! " she walked slowly from the room.

But as soon as the closed door screened her from the spinster's sight, she doffed the ladylike, raced down the passage, and burst into the parlor and the presence of Dale.

When Lupelta entered, the captain's heart quickened its beats, and his eyes sparkled with joy; but before these two had time to exchange any word beyond a greeting, Jaikie came hastily into the room; and she brought consternation with her. Her arms, her face, and,— in places,— her body were tom and bleeding.

" Lodango is coming! " cried the maid as she entered, her voice full of terror.

Lupelta -was frightened and turned pale.

" Hide me! Hide me! " cried she wildly, clinging to Dale.

" Lodango shall do you no harm, Lupelta," said the captain reassuringly, and he placed his arm about her waist.

Thus protected, Lupelta felt safe.

The darkness, which had deeply enshrouded Monrovia all through the long, hot night, had slowly merged into a thin, grey, unhealthy mist that, after a few minutes, passed away. It neither lifted nor scattered, as fogs in more northern latitudes do, but suddenly disappeared all at once, as the tropical sun,— a great flaming disc,— quickly sprang into sight from behind the edge of the Atlantic, distant in the east. Then the waters of the ocean, bay, rivers, lagoons, and creeks, which a moment earlier had appeared dull to the eye and had sounded sad to the ear, glittered in flashes of vivid green and murmured pleasingly; innumerable birds, brilliant in their plumage,— but, alas ! tuneless, — darted to and fro overhead; bees gathered honey; butterflies sailed about displaying their vari-colored beautiful wings; flowers turned their dew-moist faces up toward the heavens, each and all rejoicing in and gladly welcoming the new-born African day.

Lodango, the Imbunda chief, gazed upon this bright scene, but, out of tune with it, frowned heavily. The barbarian was standing on a rocky ledge, which shelved from the crown of a wooded hillock situated at the extreme edge of the metropolis at its land side. He was looking down into the awakening city. His solitary figure, bold against the background of now cloudless sky, resembled a perfectly proportioned bronze statue.

Except for a small topknot holding a plume, his head was bare of hair; his eyes were fierce-looking and deeply sunken under heavy brows; his chin was square, and his full lips curled over two rows of splendid, big white teeth filed to points. Upon his forehead, cheeks, arms, and breasts, were symbols,— little hummocks that had been formed by upturning the flesh,— disclosing that he was of royal rank. He wore a loin-cloth. Resting against his breast was a small leather pouch pendant from a string of beads that encircled his neck. A short spear was in his hand and a broad-bladed sword in a rhinocerous-skin sheath swung from his shoulder.

Monrovia, at which Lodango was so gloomily glowering, had few features,— other than those provided by Nature,— that were appealing to the eye. Though the streets were broad, they were unpaved, ditchy, stony, and covered with rank weed and coarse grass almost without succulence, wherein unattended goats and cattle browsed and swine swilled. The town contained something like three hundred buildings, mostly dwellings, each standing in its own spacious grounds now wastes, but which a little industry would have transformed into charming gardens.

These residences as well as the other structures were located on a portion of the brow and the two sides of a long ridge, which stretched undulating from a bold bluff, that pushed its nose into the Atlantic up to, and beyond an eminence overlooking the city, the ocean, the rivers, lagoons, and an alluvial country that lay beyond a wide fringe of mangrove and swamp.

It was upon this eminence that Lodango stood. He saw the citizens emerge from their homes into the streets. He endeavoured to count them, but his untutored mind was unequal to the task. The animated scene displeased him, and he scowled at it. Startled by the booming of cannon, he gazed toward the harbor, whence the sounds were coming, and perceived a stately man-of-war half-hidden behind a curtain of smoke that curled from her belching guns. It seemed to Lodango that the vessel was spitting fire! And when this peaceful bombardment ceased he heard other guns on the bluff,— over which the Liberian ensign was now fluttering lazily,— begin bellowing an acknowledgment of the visiting war-ship's salute.

The savage became disheartened. He drooped his head and turned to go away; but, happening to notice the pouch that was resting against his breast, he uttered an angry exclamation, halted, snatched the thing into his hand, held it aloft, and addressed it furiously.

" O Fetich! O Witch! O Charm! " cried he, " gaze upon this big kraal! Its huts are made of stone! They are many! See the multitude of warriors on the paths! They are so numerous that Lodango cannot count them! O Fetich, open your eyes! In which of these many huts will Lodango find Lupelta? Lodango's eyes cannot see through those stone walls!

Fetich, you have thrown pepper into the eyes of Imbunda! No longer shall you rest against Lodango's breast! "

The savage started to tear the pouch from its supporting cord, but just then, hearing the voice of some woman approaching, who was singing an Imbunda ditty,— one that he often had heard Lupelta sing,— he paused, and scarcely breathing, listened intently. He remained thus a few seconds, then stole through the shrubbery, barely moving it as he passed, to a tall tree that stood where the bush hedged a wide path, which ran winding down to the city. He placed himself behind this tree and fixed his gaze on a bend in the path, around which, in another moment, came Jaikie. Lodango recognized the girl at once. He murmured joyfully. Again he raised the pouch and addressed it, — but this time softly and humbly.

"O Fetich, forgive Lodango!" muttered he. " When Lodango is again in the Imbunda kraal there shall be a big sacrifice to thee! Lodango has spoken! "

He touched the pouch to his forehead, dropped it to his breast, and fixed his attention on Jaikie, who was approaching him, deftly balancing upon her head a large gourd, from the open, wide nozzle of which watei was splashing and sprinkling her comely black face as she walked.

Jaikie came along the path, singing softly and entirely unsuspicious that danger was lurking near. She halted opposite the tree that screened Lodango and proceeded to readjust her cloth which was loosening and about to fall from over her young bosom; and while she was thus engaged, the chief sprang to the path, rushing towards her. She screamed, staggered back, the gourd toppling from her head, and turned to flee.

" Jaikie will stop! " cried Lodango, and he raised his spear against her.

Jaikie halted.

" Fetich help me!" she murmured; and she sank to her knees, trembling with fear.

The chief lowered his spear and glared down at the frightened girl.

"Would Jaikie run away from Lodango? " asked he sternly.

" No, no; Jaikie wouldn't run away from Lodango! " exclaimed the maid.

The chief was disposed to be sceptical.

" Jaikie's tongue is making crooked talk. Lodango saw Jaikie try to run away."

" Jaikie thought Lodango was a lion," returned the girl, scarcely knowing what she was saying.

That one should think twice before speaking is, doubtless, an excellent rule; but if Jaikie had followed this precept, she would not have made the above excuse, and Lodango's anger would have remained with him. As it was, though, the chief was flattered to have been mistaken for a lion, and his sternness was somewhat appeased.

"Good!" cried he. "Jaikie will stand up! Jaikie will guide Lodango to Lupelta! "

Jaikie did not reply nor did she arise; she merely shivered.

Lodango grew impatient.

"Slave, obey Lodango!" cried ha. "Stand up! Lead Lodango to Lupelta ! "

Jaikie continued kneeling and, except that she sighed, remained mute.

Lodango's patience, never very enduring, now deserted him entirely. He seized the girl roughly and forced her to her feet. Holding her firmly, he cried: " Jaikie will speak! Lodango's ears are open! "

Jaikie quivered with pain in the chief's strong grasp, and the perspiration rolled down her cheeks in great beads.

" Lodango will release Jaikie, then Jaikie will speak," gasped she.

" Jaikie will talk truth! " cried the chief, still holding the girl. " If Jaikie talks lies," he continued, " Jaikie shall die the death." He gave her a shake, then saying: "Jaikie w'ill speak! " released her.

"Lupelta dwells in the Mission House," said Jaikie quaveringly.

The chief growled.

" Lupelta is glad," added the girl.

" Lodango is sorry! " cried the chief. " Lodango is hungry too much to see Lupelta! Lodango will go to the Mission House! Jaikie will guide Lodango. Jaikie will guide Lodango quickly! "

Jaikie was aware that were she to lead Lodango into the city he would be arrested and imprisoned in Monrovia's ant-infested, verminous jail. For a moment or two she was sorely tempted to thus entrap him, but, too tender-hearted to do a deed so cruel, her compassion got the better of the temptation.

" No, no, Jaikie must not guide Lodango," said she.

Lodango rewarded Jaikie for her display of tenderness in just such manner as the foolish girl deserved.

" J aikie shall die the death! " cried he fiercely, and he raised his spear as if to impale her.

The girl gazed affrightedly at the spear vibrating in the angry chief's hand.

"Stop! Stop!" cried she wildly, shrinking back. "Lodango must not kill Jaikie! Lupelta would be sorry! Lupelta would hate Lodango! "

Lodango, evidently, was not eager to earn Lupelta's hate.

Good! " exclaimed he, lowering his spear.

" Lupelta loves Jaikie," added the girl.

" Lodango will not kill Jaikie whom Lupelta loves! " cried the chief; and he hurled the spear into the shrubbery. Then, with a surprising pathos toning his voice, he went on: " When Jaikie's father broke the law, did not Lodango spare his life? Did not Lodango give Jaikie to Lupelta? Famine has come to the Imbunda kraal more than once, but was Jaikie ever hungry? No! Lodango gave food to Lupelta, Reesha, and Jaikie. Has Jaikie forgotten? Did not Lodango prevent gree-gree from tearing Lupelta's tender skin with sharp stones and glass? Has Lupelta forgotten? Jaikie is a slave. Jaikie will guide Lodango to Lupelta, then Jaikie shall be free! Lodango will make Jaikie glad too much! Jaikie shall be married to Lo-dango's bravest warrior! Jaikie's husband shall be set to rule over Lodango's largest kraal! His granaries shall be filled to overflowing! His oxen and his goats shall be too many for Jaikie to count! Jaikie will be rich! Jaikie will guide Lodango to Lupelta! Now! "

Lodango's pleading so touched Jaikie's heart that she was consumed with pity. In her opinion the chief was a perfect specimen of his sex,— eloquent, brave, cunning, persuasive, and cruel,— and she wondered that Lupelta could be indifferent to worth so infinite. She loved her mistress, yet she wished that it might be in her power to assist Lodango to secure his heart's desire. She knew, however, that it was out of the question for her to aid him in this direction, but might it not be possible, she thought, to induce him to abandon his pursuit of Lupelta? She endeavoured so to persuade him.

" Lodango," said she insinuatingly, " do eagles mate with doves ? Lupelta is timid as the water deer [water chevrotain mentioned in West African folklore as being exceedingly timid]. Lupelta is soft. Tears come to Lupelta's eyes easily, apparently without cause. Lupelta is not stern enough to sleep on the skins in Lodango's hut. Lupelta —"

By thus depreciating her mistress Jaikie was maladoite, for instead of persuading Lodango, she thereby displeased him.

" Jaikie will hush! " interrupted he, frowning heavily. " Lupelta is Lupelta! Lodango loves Lupelta. Jaikie talks wind! Jaikie will guide Lodango to the Mission House. Jaikie will do quickly! Lodango has got no more wind inside himself to talk with! "

Jaikie, perceiving that she had failed, sighed.

"Jaikie will make her legs move!" cried the chief impatiently. " Lodango wants to see Lupelta and be glad. Jaikie will do quickly! "

Her appeal to his pride having failed, Jaikie endeavoured to lead the chief by working on his sense of fear.

" Lodango," said she gravely, " the warriors in Monrovia are many. They are brave and strong. If Lodango were to go into their kraal to seek Lupelta, they would seize him. They would put Lodango in sticks. Lodango would be sorry! Jaikie must not lead Lodango into —"

" Jaikie will hush! " broke in the chief impatiently. " Lodango am I! Lodango will devour them. Jaikie will do! "

" Jaikie is not —" began the girl.

" Jaikie is not cunning!" interrupted Lodango angrily. Touching the hilt of his sword suggestively and glaring fiercely at her, he added: " Jaikie will lose her head! "

Jaikie shivered and swallowed a sob.

" Lupelta would be sorry if Lodango went to her," said she.

" Jaikie lies! " cried the chief vehemently.

" Lupelta is glad because she lives in the same kraal as Dale," said Jaikie. " Lupelta has forgotten the Imbunda fetich and now worships Dale's God. Lupelta wears garments that please Dale's eyes. Lupelta is learning Dale's book,— is learning to talk his —"

While Jaikie thus described Lupelta's doings Lodango fumed and frowned and bit his lips; at length, unable to listen any longer, he interrupted her.

" Dale's witch has made Lupelta forget Lodango! " cried he. " When Lodango holds Lupelta in his arms she will remember. Lupelta will be glad! Jaikie will give no more make-sorry talk. Jaikie will guide Lodango to the Mission House quickly! "

Jaikie knew that she was skating on very thin ice, as it were, yet she persisted.

" Lodango will return to the Imbunda kraal and forget Lupelta," said she.

" Jaikie's head is getting loose too much! " cried the chief angrily, and he drew his sword.

Jaikie's black face grew greenish with terror.

" Jaikie will do," said she, apparently subdued.

She turned as though to walk away, but suddenly went speeding down the path as rapidly as her legs would carry her. And Lodango, utterly unprepared for the girl's maneuver, at first was too surprised to move. In another moment, though, he recovered his presence of mind, then gave a great shout and pursued her.

Jaikie was fleet of foot, but nothing like so swift as Lodango, who was the fastest runner of his tribe. However, doing her utmost, she discarded her cloth and ran entirely naked; still Lodango drew closer and closer to her until at last she despaired of making her escape. She was on the point of halting, but just then, hearing footsteps at the other side of a clump of prickly-cactus round which curved the path on which she was running, she was encouraged to make a desperate effort. She darted into the clump of spiked shrubbery and, though tearing her skin, forced her way through it to its other side where a small body of the Constabulary Force was marching.

When Jaikie sprang into the shrubbery, Lodango, doubtless not at all willing to turn himself into a sort of pin-cushion, halted, exclaiming angrily. Then he became aware of the presence of the constabulary and wisely decided to retreat. So he raced back to the tall tree, recovered his spear, then disappeared in the forest.

And while Lodango thus showed that his bump of discretion was properly developed, Jaikie explained the situation to the constabulary, who, immediately on her finishing her recital, began a fruitless pursuit of the Imbunda Chief. Then Jaikie retrieved her cloth, ran down the hill to the Mission House, and bursting into its parlor, presented herself,— terrified, torn, and bleeding,— to her astonished young mistress and the American cavalryman Dale.

Whenever a Monrovian lady found it necessary to renew her stock of certain trifles,— such as pins, tapes, and needles,— she would don a costume of a fashion obsolete years before in Europe, and proudly promenade to one or another of the petty shops situated in the residential section of the city. But, if any more important article were required, she would descend,— possibly bruising her toes, certainly risking ugly tumbles,— the declivity to the Waterside. And being too much of a lady to (tote,'— as she would put it,— anything herself, a half-naked native would trudge humbly at her heels to carry her purchase, even though it might be but a bodkin.

However, the waterside was a thoroughfare that ran along the whole length of the rise at its base. On one of its sides it abutted several docks and wharfs and the Mesurado River, which a few yards further on emptied itself,— between two tongues of sand and over a very shallow, shifty bar,— into the Atlantic Ocean.

On each week-day morning,— but never of a Sunday, because the Monrovians were sadly afflicted with religiousness,— shortly after sunrise until eleven o'clock (second-breakfast time) the Waterside was an open market and promenade, full of noise, color, and movement. A promiscuous multitude crowded the approaches to the custom house, the post office, and the Government Wharf, filling all the spaces before the warehouses of foreign merchants, from whom Liberia receives the larger portion of her small revenue.

Pale-faced Assyrian Jews displayed cheap shawls, rugs, jewelry, and various other commodities pleasing to the eyes and tastes of the Monrovian ladies. Accra women chaffered with probable buyers over phoo-phoo and green peppers in the pod; Kru women sold fish, hooked by their menfolk from the deep water of the bay during the night before; Vie women measured out palm-oil from great gourds, or palm-wine from stone jars; Bassa women disposed of fruit, yams, cassava, cooked-meat, and palm-nuts in the bunch.

Women were there in hundreds! Some were old, some young, some ugly, some handsome, and their complexions varied in color from coal-black to creamy-white. The young natives,— girls and lads alike,— were for the greater part almost naked, the mature and the aged wore garments strange in shape and, in many instances, as brilliant with variegated color as a peacock's tail.

But females did not monopolize the Waterside. Men, too, were there, sauntering up and down its entire length. Politicians heatedly discussed the question of which great political party would win at the next election,— the Mixed-breeds or the Pure-blacks; Government employees, anxious about their next pay-day, eagerly questioned the informed as to whether or not there was any cash in the public treasury; thirsty Government officials high in rank diplomatically maneuvered to secure free drinks of vile spirits; the amorously inclined flirted with half-naked native girls.

There was not even one park in all Monrovia, therefore the citizens had some excuse for thus assembling at the Waterside. Nor did the city contain any public libraries, (there were two or three private libraries, which, grouped together, would have contained probably two hundred books), museums, art galleries, theaters, or music halls. In fact, places for either the instruction or the amusement of the public were conspicuously absent. But there were numerous churches and chapels, from the pulpits of which cunning ignorance served out a sort of superstitious pabulum supposedly theological.

Now, on the same morning that Lodango and Jaikie had their heated interview on the eminence, the citizens were assembled at the Waterside as usual, and among them was the Honorable Pidgley Muffy, the private secretary and nephew of the President of Liberia. Mr. Muffy's complexion was yellow, and his morals and courage were of about the same color. He was somewhat under the average height and delicately made, and his countenance, usually wearing an ingratiating smile, was not at all displeasing when casually glimpsed. Carrying a cane, he languidly,— Monrovians seldom hastened,— moved along the thoroughfare exchanging remarks with this and that acquaintance, but all the time evidently searching with his one good eye (cataract had destroyed the vision of the other) for some particular person or thing. Twice he explored the whole length of the Waterside in this manner, then passed to a sort of dock, where in an obscure corner an old native woman was squatting before a small mat, upon which were temptingly displayed a number of fetiches, charms, and other mysterious things. Mr. Muffy at sight of this creature, exclaimed with satisfaction, crossed to the mat, halted, and spoke to her.

" Lobue, good-morning," said he.

Though it was an intensely hot morning, Lobue appeared. to be cold, for she shivered and drew the ragged cloth that was partly hiding her nakedness more closely about her meager shoulders.

" He, he, he! " cackled the hag. " Muffy is young and his blood is warm, so he finds the morning good. Lobue is old,— old! "

" You should sit where the sun would shine upon you," said Muffy; "not hide in this out-of-the-way place, where no one can find you. I've been tramping up and down the Waterside for the longest time, searching for you."

" Muffy has found Lobue," said she, showing her almost toothless gums in a leering grin.

" Yes, after a lot of trouble," grumbled the secretary. "I suppose you know what Pm after? "

" No, I don't."

" I've come for the medicine you promised Miss Bartle to make for her."

" Lobue now knows what Muffy is after."

" It is prepared ? "

"Yes."

" Then hand it over to me."

" Has Muffy brought money to pay Lobue for it? " asked the old woman. " Lobue wants gold! "

" Gold! " cried Muffy amazed. " Do you think the stuff grows on trees? I was told to give you fifty cents."

" Lobue wants gold! " repeated the crone vehemently.

Muffy frowned with annoyance as he answered: " I have none with me."

" Go to Hulda. She will give you a piece."

" She is not out of her bed yet. Give me the medicine, and I'll hand you the money to-morrow morning."

Lobue shook her head dissentingly.

" Lobue will give the medicine to Muffy when he hands her the gold," she returned stubbornly.

" Don't you trust me? "

" Lobue trusts Muffy, but distrusts his memory. When to-morrow morning comes, Muffy's memory may have forgotten the old woman. Muffy's one eye may not see Lobue."

Muffy was hurt in his dignity and he became incensed.

" Hag," cried he angrily, " give me the medicine 1 "

Lobue again shook her head dissentingly, then began advertising her wares.

" Who wants ? Who wants ? Who wants ? " she screamed in a cracked voice. " Lobue has fetiches! Lobue has charms! For those who hate, Lobue has revenge medicine! For those who lo—"

" Stop that yelling and give me the stuff! " interrupted the secretary. " Miss Bartle is waiting for it! "

Lobue grinned at Muffy.

" He, he, he! " she chuckled. " A little while ago Muffy said Hulda was still in bed. Now Muffy says that Hulda is waiting for the medicine! Muffy is not a good liar. Gold, gold, Muffy ! "

Muffy was insulted.

" You confounded old witch! " cried he angrily; " if you're not more careful with that tongue of yours, I'll write a lesson in good manners with my cane upon your shrivelled hide." Raising his cane over the woman threateningly, he added; " Fork over the medicine at once! "

Lobue, apparently undismayed, sneered at Muffy.

" Muffy is a pig! " cried she.

The secretary, his anger by no means decreased by this added insult, exploded.

" Beast! " he cried, as he brought his cane with much force down upon the woman's bare shoulder.

Immediately on the stick's touching her, Lobue sprang to her feet with an agility that was most remarkable in one so aged. She glared balefully at Muffy. Chattering like an enraged monkey, she advanced toward him, with hands outstretched as though to attack him.

"Stand off!" cried Muffy, springing back thoroughly alarmed.

" Dog! Slave! Rat! " cried Lobue.

" Drop it, Lobue," said Muffy in a somewhat shaky voice, " and I'll give you a dime."

Muffy's offer quieted Lobue's disturbed temper, just as oil thrown on perturbed waters smooths them. She hushed at once, resquatted beside her stock-in-trade, and smiled at the secretary very pleasantly, as if nothing disagreeable had taken place. And the storm being over, Mr. Muffy called back his courage,— such as it was,— and again approached Lobue. He halted near her, but beyond her reach, and took the promised coin from his pocket.

" Lobue," complained the secretary, " you are a perfect spitfire! "

" Lobue is sorry," whined the hag with humility.

Mr. Muffy was very much emboldened by Lobue's humility.

"You seem to forget who and what I am!" cried he, pursing his lips proudly and expanding his chest.

" Lobue is sorry," repeated the woman. " Give Lobue the dime! " she added, extending her hand eagerly to receive it.

"Will you hand over the medicine?" asked Muffy.

Lobue drew her hand back and grunted impatiently; then she said: " Lobue must not give it unless she receives gold. Were she to give it to Muffy for silver all its virtues would be lost."

" Are you speaking the truth? "

" Lobue is speaking the truth. The medicine is a love potion."

" A love potion! " cried Muffy amazed.

" Aye."

" This is interesting," thought Muffy.

" Hulda must pay Lobue gold! " added the woman.

" Do you know for whom it is intended ? " asked Muffy.

" Lobue knows."

" His name? " cried the secretary eagerly.

" Maybe it is Muffy," replied Lobue, grinning.

Mr. Muffy flushed, and his eye sparkled joyfully.

" Hulda need not drug me," thought he. " Heavens, I'm already madly in love with her! "

" Give Lobue the coin! " continued the old woman.

" Are you sure I am to be the victim ? "

" Lobue said ' Maybe.' "

" Confound it, be more explicit! " cried Muffy impatiently. " Does Miss Bartle intend to have me swallow the stuff? "

" Lobue will tell Muffy no more,'' said the woman decisively. " Give Lobue the silver! "

"Answer my question, and I'll give it to you at once," said Muffy, and he held the coin toward her temptingly.

Lobue glared greedily at the money. After a second or two, doubtless afraid that unless it were removed from her sight its tempting appearance would overcome her scruples, she suddenly dashed it from the mulatto's hand; and, while the coin went spinning through the air to fall into the river some feet away, she went on: " Muffy will tell Hulda to come to Lobue's hut tonight just after the moon begins to shine. Hulda will fetch Lobue gold! "

" If I give you gold this afternoon," asked Muffy, " will you tell me everything you know? "

" If Muffy brings Lobue gold, Lobue will tell him," promised the woman.

" All right; I'll show up," promised Muffy. " But now, Lobue, you must tell — "

" Lobue will talk to Muffy when he comes to her hut," said the old woman; then she turned away crying her wares as she had before.

Muffy was convinced that it would be impossible for him to draw anything further from Lobue just then, so he left her and returned to the thoroughfare. He slowly sauntered along until opposite the entrance to the Government Wharf, where he halted to light a cigarette. While he was thus engaged a native youth ran from the wharf and brushed against him, which caused the cigarette to fall from his hand.

The lad perceived what he had done, halted, and begged Muffy to forgive him; but the secretary, instead of accepting the apology, proceeded to cane the young fellow unmercifully. Mr. Muffy was not permitted to indulge his cruel humor for long, though, for Dale came upon the scene and stopped him.

About the same time that the mulatto left Lobue, the captain, after having convinced Lupelta that Lodango could not harm her, started from the Mission House to go to the post office at the Waterside. When half-way down the hill he perceived Muffy beating the lad, and at the sight his gorge rose. Putting on speed, in a little while he had reached Mr. Muffy, seized hold of his upraised arm, and prevented his further abuse of the lad.

The secretary, taken by surprise, at first gazed blankly at Dale; the next moment, though, he uttered an angry exclamation, wrenched his arm from the captain's grasp, and sprang back.

" Wha — what the devil do you mean?" cried he, glaring blackly at the American.

" You coward," retorted Dale, " for a cent I'd break every bone in your body!" Giving a pitying glance at the rescued lad, who was rubbing his hurts, he added: " What right have you to maltreat this youth? "

" Dale, I'll — I'll get even with you for this! " cried Muffy passionately. " You're not a Liberian, and I'll make things hot for you! "

Dale smiled down at the fuming secretary.

" My dear Mr. Muffy," said he, " I'm dead sure you'll do me a bad turn if you can, so suppose we let it rest at that."

" I'll have you fired back to America! " threatened Muffy.

" All right," responded Dale cheerfully, " have me fired. At the present time, though, keep your threats between your teeth. If you don't, you may receive a jolly good trouncing. Don't tempt me too far, but vamoose! "

Muffy was strongly inclined to make an angry reply, but perceiving something in Dale's eyes that suggested that the captain was losing his patience, he muttered an oath and slunk away.

Then Dale turned to the lad.

" Are you hurt? " asked he.

" Not much."

"What's your name?"

"Whreabo."

" And your tribe? "

" Imbunda," returned the lad proudly.

Dale smiled.

" Ah, an Imbunda! " exclaimed he.

" Whreabo is Mwamba's brother. Mwambo is a big warrior! What is your name?" asked Whreabo.

" My name is Dale."

" Good! Whreabo will not forget. Whreabo is Dale's friend. Wow!"

The captain, pleased with the young Imbunda, was willing to employ him.

" Would you like to work for me? " asked he.

" Whreabo will work for Dale," said the lad.

" Agreed! Come along! " said Dale, starting away.

Whreabo followed the captain.

The discomfited secretary, anger and hatred eating his heart, climbed from the Waterside partly up the rise to a small shop, which he entered to treat himself to a glass of trade gin, hoping that the fiery stuff would help to calm his perturbed spirits. He found its proprietress, a coal-black Negress,— who answered to the euphonious name of Mrs. Sophronia Bupp,— standing behind her deal counter, engaged in a conversation, in which she seemed to be very much interested, with one of the Constabulary Force.

" Mrs. Bupp, gin and Angostura, please," said Muffy, approaching the counter.

The hostess checked her flow of conversation, evidently with much reluctance, and proceeded to serve the secretary. Using her apron, which was more than ready for the washing-tub, she wiped a dim-looking tumbler and placed it and a stone bottle before Muffy, and while so doing made an apology.

" I'm sorry, Mr. Muffy," said she, " but I'm out of Angostura. You drank the very last drop I had when you popped in this morning on your way to the Waterside. Will you try peach? "

" Imported?" asked Muffy, as he poured a generous portion of the Butch poison from the jug into the tumbler.

" No, home-made."

"Not fit to drink!" exclaimed Muffy emphatically.

He gulped the contents of the tumbler, undiluted. It scalded his throat, brought tears into his eyes, and deprived him of breath. He gasped.

" It's from a new lot I bought this morning," explained. Mrs. Bupp. " I know that you're an excellent judge, Mr. Muffy. Do you think it's all right?" she asked somewhat anxiously.

Mr. Muffy, once more in possession of his breath, smiled and smacked his lips suggestively.

" It touches the spot, Mrs. Bupp," he responded approvingly.

Mrs. Bupp was pleased that the "new lot" (six bottles) suited the cultivated taste of Mr. Muffy, who was one of her most critical customers. She smiled contentedly and passed him five cents, in coppers, as change from an English shilling that he had handed her from which to take payment for the gin.

" Have you heard the news, Mr. Muffy? " asked Mrs. Bupp as the secretary pocketed the coppers.

" No, I haven't," he replied. " Anything interesting? "

" Mr. Boltus here," answered the woman, indicating the constable, " said that Lodango is up to some kind of mischief."

" You don't say so! " exclaimed Mr. Muffy.

" I saw him this morning on Lookout Hill," joined in the constable. " He was chasing a native girl who had refused to guide him to the Mission House."

" The Mission House! " cried Mr. Muffy amazed. "What did the savage want to go there for?"

" After Lupelta," answered the constable.

"Who is Lupelta?" asked Muffy.

The constable, who had participated in the rescue of Lupelta from the slavers, explained.

" A pretty how-de-do over a naked hussy! " cried Mrs. Bupp, shaking her Madras-kerchief-turbaned head disapprovingly.

" Do you think the captain will surrender her to the Imbunda? " asked Muffy.

"Not much!" cried the constable. "The captain is kinder gone on her."

"Has he made her his woman?" asked the secretary.

"No, sir!" replied the constable. "He treats her just as if she were a civilized lady."

Mrs. Bupp, struck with amazement, rolled up her eyes and held her hands on high.

" What next! " cried she. " The idea of that stuck-up American trying to put a heathen native wench upon a level with civilized ladies,— with a lady like vie! It's absolutely insulting to us Liberians! "

"Insulting? Why, Mrs. Bupp, it's worse!" said Muffy sympathetically; and, unseen by the lady, he winked at the constable, who responded with a grin.

"Yes, it is!" vociferated Mrs. Bupp. "But what does the man intend doing with the creature? Do you know, Mr. Boltus? "

"According to what Jaikie said, he intends to send her to America and, after she has been educated, marry her."

Mrs. Bupp was now not only amazed but shocked.

" Scandalous! " cried she vehemently. " Really, it makes me ill to hear of it! Who ever heard of such a thing! Marry her when he could — could— Well, the man has no more sense than a jackass! "

" Perhaps he loves her," remarked Mr. Muffy.

Mrs. Bupp snorted.

" Suppose he does, what's that got to do with it? " cried she somewhat heatedly. " Does a person usually, say grace before he eats something on the sly? The man's a fool! I knew that there was something wrong about him, for he's never plumped a cent down on my counter. I hope the girl will be taken from him, even though the loss of her should break his heart. He would deserve it! "

Mrs. Bupp gave another snort by way of a peroration.

" I guess the savage hasn't much of a chance," said the constable.

" If I were a man I'd help him," said the woman.

Muffy started. Mrs. Bupp's words put an idea into his head,— an idea that accelerated the beatings of his heart.

" By Jove! why not? " thought he. " It would even things up nicely between us."

While Muffy thus communed with himself the blood rushed into his face and colored it.

Mrs. Bupp perceived the flush in Mr. Muffy's face, and the good soul became very much concerned about him.

"Good gracious, Mr. Muffy!" exclaimed she;. "Your face is red as a beet. What's the matter? Are you in pain? "

" Awful! " said Mr. Muffy, his tone was lugubrious.

" Where is it — in your insides? " asked Mrs. Bupp.

" A sort of gnawing," responded the secretary, and he rubbed the place wherein gnawings usually reside.

Mrs. Bupp became very compassionate.

" Poor Mr. Muffy! " exclaimed she pityingly. Then, perhaps with one of her eyes directed toward business, she added: " Maybe, Mr. Muffy, if you swallowed another wee drop of the ' lixer,' the pain would vacate your interior."

" Perhaps it would," agreed Muffy dolefully.

He helped himself to a " wee drop " of the " lixer,"— that is, he half-filled the tumbler with gin. This time, however, having something at hand to do with which a burning throat and shortness of breath would interfere, he did not ingulp the liquor, but, controlling his impatient appetite, sipped it slowly; at the same time, with an air of indifference, he conversed with the constable.

" Do you suppose Lodango has returned to his kraal ? " asked he.

" I should say not," responded the constable. " It isn't likely that he would have gone away without having made a try at getting hold of Lupelta. I imagine that he is hiding somewhere near the city."

" Probably," said Muffy. " Do you think you could find out for a certainty where he is? The President would like to know."

" Easily, sir," answered the constable.

"Very well, do so; and let me know as soon as you can," said Muffy.

" I'll attend to it at once," said the man; and he hastened from the shop.

Mr. Muffy smiled with satisfaction and, there no longer being a reason for resisting his persuading palate, disposed of the remainder of his gin with one large swallow. He then paid Mrs. Bupp, bade her farewell, and started for the Executive Mansion.

This important structure was situated in the center of the city, on Ashmun Street, a short distance to the south of a summit where, in December, 1882, in the infancy of the Republic, the heroic Ashmun, rising from his bed of sickness, with thirty-four brave colonists repulsed' an assault made by 800 savages. As did the American Legation, the Dutch Consulate, and several private dwellings, the Mansion faced an unevensurfaced square of ground enclosed by a fence, made of rough stones loosely placed together, in the interstices of which nested lizards, scorpions, and other kinds of reptiles and insects, both harmful and harmless. This enclosure was named Government Square. Therein the Monrovians w Tere wont periodically to muster and, with much shouting and prancing, go through a sort of military drill; there newly-elected Chief Magistrates delivered their inaugural addresses and took part in other functions; and there, as had happened more than once, natives died uncared for and unpitied.

Though the Executive Mansion was not a brilliant example of architectural skill, it had the appearance of solidity, and it contained numerous spacious rooms, distributed over two extensive floors, and a large cupola. The cupola room was lighted by many wide windows, from which could be viewed the rivers, the harbor, the ocean, and a delightful-looking country, dotted with forests, and embossed with hills, and containing many other features that gave a charming diversity to the view.

The President and his stepdaughter, Miss Hulda Bartle, resided in the Executive Mansion. The cupola-room was Hulda's boudoir, and in it she idly spent many hours either watching passing ships at sea or gazing at the far-away hills, in the valleys of which were situated the kraals of the warlike Imbunda People.

Hulda was what some persons call a " love-child," but why illegitimate children should be thus named, in contra-distinction to children born of legally married mothers, it is very puzzling to understand. However, her father, a just-minded Englishman,— who, like the majority of his countrymen, was immovably convinced that only Englishmen should be permitted to reside and do business in England,— had seen fit to favor Liberia with his presence and Hulda's mother with his intimate society. During a number of years he bartered adulterated New England rum and the like for pure palm oil on week-days and, being a good Christian, attended church on Sundays.

In consequence of his honest endeavours, he eventually became rich, and his wealth made him homesick and filled him with a desire to regularize his relationship with the opposite sex. Now, nostalgia being a complaint for which there was only one curative, and Liberia offering him no opportunity to reform by connecting himself in legitimate marriage with a lady of his own race, he bade farewell to his makeshift wife and his daughter Hulda who was then an infant, boarded one of the Elder and Dempster homeward bound steamers, and passed from their ken forever. It must be placed to his credit that, contrary to the practice of the majority of his kind, he left a fair portion of his belongings behind him for his cast-offs.

The deserted mother did not clothe herself in sackcloth nor strew ashes upon her head because of the Englishman's departure. Her courage was braced up by the material benefits his exit had conferred upon her. She accepted the situation very philosophically; that is to say, she began casting her glances about in search of some person of her own race and nationality to occupy the place vacant in her affections.

So soon as it became known that the pseudo widow was willing to make a second venture in the realm of matrimony, many gentlemen from all over the Republic became rival candidates for her hand, if not her fortune. For a time she found it difficult to select one from the many deserving suitors, but at last, won by the superior attractions, mental as well as physical, of a poor but aspiring gentleman, she fixed her choice on him.

Then the wedding bells rang! No one mentioned the happy groom's predecessor, and Hulda, then in her late teens, participated in the consequent revelries, admired by all, scorned by none; for a soft sin such as the bride had committed was winked at by society in Monrovia, and illegitimacy was not exactly unfashionable.

The wife so used her wealth to promote the fortunes of her husband that he arrived at the pinnacle of his ambition,— the Presidency of Liberia. Shortly after the woman had accomplished this good work she died, leaving the greater part of her possessions, under the trusteeship of the widower, to Hulda, then over twenty-two years of age.

Two years had now passed since Hulda's mother died. This morning the girl was in her boudoir, reclining in a careless attitude on a lounge and reading a book, when Mr. Muffy entered, unannounced and without even the formality of knocking.

Hulda dropped the book, sprang from the lounge and frowned at the intruder.

" Pidgley," cried she indignantly, " what do you mean? "

"Mean?" said Muffy innocently, as he crossed toward her, " I don't understand you. What are you driving at? "

"You came in without knocking!"

Mr. Muffy appeared to be very much surprised.

" I did nothing of the kind! " cried he. " I knocked twice."

" I don't believe you! "

Mr. Muffy, apparently wounded to his very soul, looked at the girl reproachfully.

" Do you for a second suppose I would tell you a falsehood?" he asked in an aggrieved tone. " Why, Hulda, I'd much sooner have my tongue torn out by its roots! "

The man's extravagance restored the girl to good-humor, and she laughed.

" Pidgley, don't be a fraud," said she. " I've caught you fibbing any number of times."

" Well, I haven't told one this time."

" I give you the benefit of the doubt and apologize. Now tell me what brought you here? "

" Don't you know? "

" How should I know? " asked she.

" You asked me to see old Lobue."

" Oh, yes; so I did! I had forgotten all about it. Have you seen her? "

" Yes, about an hour ago."

" Did she give you the medicine? "

" Do you intend to keep me standing? "

" Certainly not," exclaimed Hulda, and placing herself upon the lounge, she motioned him to sit down beside her.

Mr. Muffy sat down close to Hulda, almost touching her. This proximity caused the blood to rush through his veins and redden his face.

Hulda perceived that her companion was flushing and remarked upon it.

" Why, Pidgley," exclaimed she, " what's the matter with you? Your face is as red as — as a peony! "

" It's the heat," was truthful Mr. Muffy's explanation.

" You'd better cool yourself," said Hulda, and she handed him a fan.

Muffy was well aware that fanning would not cool his fever. Nevertheless, for the purpose of appearing consistent, he used the instrument, and in so doing wafted the odor of gin, which was emerging from his mouth, to Hulda's nostrils.

The effluvium offended Hulda.

" Faugh, you've been drinking! " exclaimed she, disgusted, and moving back from him. " No wonder you're hot. If you don't break off the habit, Pidgley, you'll soon become a perfect sot."

" Something happened at the Waterside that upset my nerves, and I took a drop of Hollands to quiet them," said Muffy humbly.

" What an absurd excuse! " cried Hulda amused. " You poisoned yourself with the nasty stuff because you like it."

" I detest it, but —"

"Now I know you're fibbing!" broke in the girl.

" But never mind,— tell me about Lobue. Did she give you the medicine? "

"No."

" Why not? "

" The old hag said you must receive it from her yourself. She requires you to be at her hut to-night shortly after the moon shows her face."

Hulda frowned.

" I'll do nothing of the kind! " exclaimed she.

Muffy smiled. He still believed that the love potion was intended for himself.

" It won't matter," said he.

Hulda glanced quickly at Muffy out of the corners of her eyes.

" What am I to infer from that? " asked she, somewhat uneasy.

Muffy wanted to disclose what was in his mind, but wisely refrained.

" There's nothing for you to infer," said he. " I was merely thinking that Lobue's demand was rather cheeky."

Hulda was satisfied that Muffy's remark, which had somewhat startled her, meant nothing, and she was relieved.

" Cheeky is no name for it," said she. " But now, tell me what happened at the Waterside that upset you ? "

Muffy, thus reminded of his late clash with Captain Dale, scowled.

"I was assaulted," said he.

" Assaulted! " repeated Hulda, interested.

" Yes, brutally! "

" Poor Pidgley," exclaimed Hulda, her voice was sympathetic. "Was it so serious as that? Who did it? "

" That nose-in-the-air American."

" Faulkner? "

" No, Dale,— confound him! "

As has been intimated, Hulda was inclined to sympathize with Mr. Muffy, but now, learning that it was the captain who had done the assaulting, her mood changed, and it was with difficulty that she prevented herself from smiling in the secretary's face.

" The cruel man! " exclaimed the young hypocrite.

Muffy was an alumnus of the Liberian College,— wherein handicrafts and agriculture are not taught,— and a knowledge of the doing of the ancients was, as the saying goes, at the tips of his fingers.

" A perfect Caligula! " cried he.

"Did he flog you?" asked Hulda.

Muffy glared at Hulda wonderingly.

" Flog me! " cried he, with much emphasis. " Have you lost your wits? Flog me? Of course not! If he had tried to do anything like that maybe I wouldn't have given him What! No, he merely shoved me."

Hulda again suppressed a smile.

" How did you manage to offend him? " asked she.

" I didn't offend him at all; at least, I can see no reason why he should have taken offense. I was flogging a native. The beastly American had the nerve to interfere. I suppose he was moved by his confounded equal rights ideas, which we Liberians don't thank him for bringing into the country and teaching to the natives. The cad! I shall pay him out! "

" Is that so? " said Hulda somewhat coldly.

" Yes, that's so! "

Though Hulda was not acquainted with Muffy's character to its muddy depths, she knew that he was very capable of doing mean things; so his threat to practise against Dale somewhat alarmed her, and she made up her mind to act as the captain's guardian angel.

" In what manner do you propose to proceed against him ? " she asked.

" I'll persuade my uncle to have him recalled to America," answered Muffy.

" Your uncle will not be persuaded," said Hulda.

"Why not?"

" Because I will not permit him."

" You! " cried Muffy, amazed, glaring at Hulda.

"Yes, II" cried Hulda firmly.

" But Hulda," said Muffy wonderingly, " what difference would it make to you? "

" Captain Dale is doing exceedingly good work in Liberia," said Hulda. "You shan't have him sent away! "

Muffy began floating in a sea of doubts.

" Hulda, what does this mean? " said he.

" It means," said Hulda, somewhat off her guard, " that I will not allow my step-father to do anything to injure Captain Dale."

" You will not? "

"I will not!"

Mr. Muffy suspected the truth, and his jealousy was aroused. He grew pale.

"It is possible?" murmured he, half to himself.

He glared intently at Hulda. She returned his stare bravely, but was unable to prevent her face from becoming red; the man's face, on the other hand, grew black as night. Hulda's blushes had exposed her feelings to him. He felt like murdering the girl.

"You are fond of the American?" said he, vainly endeavouring to keep his voice firm.

" You the presumptuous! " cried Hulda, rising from the lounge. " You will leave the room, please! "

" Lobue told me," said Muffy, rising, " that the so-called medicine was a love-potion."

Hulda's face, which had resumed its normal color, again became red.

" Pidgley, you are unbearable! " cried she. " Go away!"

" A love potion," continued Muffy, " which you purpose giving to Dale."

The girl cast on him a look of scornful dignity.

" If you won't go, I will! " she exclaimed, and she started toward the door.

" You need not," said Muffy, and passing Hulda, who halted, he went scowling from the room.

Alone, Hulda threw herself down upon the lounge, buried her face in her hands against a cushion, and burst into gentle weeping.

Mr. Muffy proceeded from Hulda's boudoir directly to Lobue at the Waterside. He persuaded the old woman into granting him a long interview by giving her an American dollar in gold,— parting with the money with much reluctance, for, as was the case with Monrovians generally, his purse was exceedingly flabby. Later in the day he again saw the constable whom he had met in Mrs. Bupp's shop, and learned from him that Lodango was encamped somewhere in the vicinity of the Lake of Lilies. Then, about seven o'clock in the evening, he started for Lobue's hut, which was situated in a lonesome place, far away from any other habitation, a little over a mile from the city.

He arrived at the hovel just before the moon begun shining. He entered it without ceremony and found its owner squatting upon the floor close to a fire.

" He, he, he! " cackled Lobue, leering at her visitor as he entered. " Muffy has come? "

" I told you I would, didn't I?" growled the secretary, annoyed because of the long walk he had had.

" Yes, Muffy told Lobue," agreed the hag.

" Have you prepared the other medicine? " asked Muffy.

" It is ready," responded Lobue. " If Hulda gives it to Dale it will not make him love her. It will make him ill; maybe it will make him die."

" I don't want the stuff to kill him; still, if he should turn up his toes, I'll not wear any mourning. But perhaps Hulda will not show up."

" Hulda will come," said Lobue confidently.

" How do you know? Have you heard from her, or seen her? She refused, you know."

" Hulda will come," repeated the old woman. " Hulda's heart will make her come."

" I expect —"

" Sh —! " interrupted Lobue, and she listened intently, her ear bent toward the door. " Lobue hears footsteps!"

" Hulda's carriers," exclaimed the secretary.

" Yes. Muffy will hide himself quickly."

"Where?" asked Muffy excitedly.

Lobue pointed at a large wooden mortar that stood in a corner of the room.

" Behind that! " cried she.

Muffy, cautioning the old woman to be careful not to disclose his presence to Hulda, hastily crouched out of sight behind the mortar, just in time to escape being discovered by Hulda, who entered the next moment.

" Welcome, welcome, Hulda! " cried Lobue, grinning at the girl.

" Good-evening, Lobue," returned Hulda. " I am here at the time you set. Is it ready? "

" Is what ready, Hulda ? "

" You know," said Hulda, reluctant to mention the love potion.

" Maybe Lobue does know, maybe Lobue does not know. Hulda must name it."

" The — the love potion," stammered the girl, blushing.

Lobue nodded her head and grinned.

"Now Lobue knows," said she.

" Have you prepared it? "

" Lobue has."

" Then give it to me at once, so I may go," said Hulda. " I must get back to the mansion before they miss me."

" Has Hulda brought Lobue gold? "

" Yes; " said Hulda, and she offered the old woman a coin.

Lobue gazed greedily at the coin for a second or two, then turned her glance from it, evidently most unwillingly.

" No, no," said she, as she gazed away from the money, " Lobue must know more before she takes it. Hulda must tell Lobue his name."

Hulda grew impatient.

" Lobue, you are trifling with me," cried she. " Give me the potion at once! "

Lobue, unperturbed by Hulda's angry tone, grinned up into her face.

" Tell Lobue," said she, " the name of the man whose love Hulda desires to win."

Hulda flushed.

" I will not! " cried she vehemently.

Muffy, listening, showed his head from behind the mortar, and Lobue perceived him. She became possessed with a spirit of mischief and, nodding wisely at Hulda, said: " Is his name Pidgley Muffy? "

" Good gracious, Lobue! " cried Hulda, smiling, " what ever made you think of him ? "

Lobue chuckled inwardly.

" Muffy has only one eye, and he is small," said she. " If Hulda was Muffy's wife, she could do things on his blind side; if Muffy vexed Hulda, she could flog him."

" Absurd! " cried Hulda. " Why, sooner than marry him I would remain single all my life! "

Hulda laughed, and Lobue, with a broad grin on her face, glanced furtively at Muffy, who was scowling and cursing to himself.

" Now, Lobue," continued Hulda persuasively, "let me have the potion, so I may go home."

Lobue shook her head dissentingly.

" Hulda must tell Lobue the name first," said she.

" Is it really necessary that you should know? " asked Hulda.

" It is necessary."

" Do you promise never to mention it to another soul?"

" Lobue will not mention it."

Hulda, after hesitating a moment, very unwillingly surrendered.

" It is — is Captain Dale," stammered she, and, ashamed, she hung her head.

" Alas ! " exclaimed Lobue, apparently dismayed.

" Why ' alas '? " asked Hulda nervously.

Lobue groaned lugubriously.

" Answer me! " cried Hulda.

" Lobue must not tell Hulda to hope," said Lobue.

" What do you mean?" asked Hulda impatiently.

" Lobue's medicine cannot make Dale love Hulda," explained the hag.

Hulda uttered an angry exclamation.

" If that be so," said she, " your boasts to me were merely lies."

" Lobue did not lie, Hulda! " snarled the old woman. " Shall Lobue change Hulda into a rat, or a lizard, or a —"

Hulda smiled.

" Hush, Lobue, I'm not an utter fool," she interrupted. " If you could change me in that fashion, you would have transformed yourself into a pretty young girl long ago."

Lobue was confounded and, for the moment, silenced. To cover her confusion, she grunted and w Tagged her head disapprovingly.

" But why is Captain Dale immune? " continued Hulda.

" Lupelta's fetich protects Dale," said Lobue.

" Lupelta — Lupelta?" said Hulda thoughtfully. " Who is — Oh, yes! I remember. Lupelta is the native girl whom he rescued from slavers ? "

" Yes. Lupelta loves Dale." r Hulda felt a twinge of jealousy.

" A native girl love? " cried she. " Preposterous ! "

" Dale loves Lupelta," went on Lobue.

Hulda was not ignorant of the fact that the civilized Liberian men, married and single alike, were addicted to cultivating a friendship, anything but platonic, with native females, and she supposed that Lobue's statement pointed at something of the kind. It hurt her to believe that Dale in this respect was no better than her own countrymen; still, it did not cause her to love him less, nor was she inclined to quarrel with him because he followed the fashion.

"I'm sorry," said she somewhat sadly; "but I suppose he'll get over it."

" Dale will not get over it," said Lobue. " Dale will marry Lupelta in church."

Dale was reinstated in Hulda's good opinion, but she did not rejoice. She grew pale, exclaiming: " It is not true! I do not believe it! "

" It is true," said Lobue gravely. " But there is a way for Hulda to win Dale. Hulda must get rid of Lupelta."

A terrible thought entered Hulda's mind and she shivered.

"Get rid of her!" said she, almost whispering the words. "What do you mean?"

" He, he, he! Doesn't Hulda know what Lobue means? "

" Murder her? " queried Hulda in low, awed tones.

Lobue grinned into the agitated girl's face.

"Why not? Why not? " cried she.

" Heavens! " exclaimed Hulda horrified.

" Hulda would like to seize Lu? elta's throat," went on the hostess, evidently enjoying herself. "Hulda would like to squeeze and squeeze until Lupelta's face grew black! Hulda would like—"

"You wicked wretch, hush!" cried Hulda. "You deserve to be choked yourself. If I were to repeat to my step-father what you have said, he would have you hanged."

" No, no," cried Lobue, trembling with fear. " Hulda will not tell! Lobue does not want to die! Lobue is not ready."

" Then be careful what you say," warned Hulda sternly.

" Lobue will be careful," whined the old woman. " There is another way."

" State it."

" Give Lupelta to Lodango," advised Lobue.

Hulda stared amazedly at Lobue.

" Why to Lodango ? " asked she.

" Lodango will take Lupelta to his kraal and make her his wife," explained Lobue. " Hulda will give the medicine to Dale now. When Lodango has taken Lupelta away from Monrovia, Dale will love Hulda. Hulda will be happy! "

Hulda was sorely tempted.

Lobue perceived the effect her words were having and she chuckled. Then, intending to send the girl over the edge of the chasm toward which she had been urging her, she made a false step.

" Lupelta is beautiful! " cried she. " When Lodango has taken her away Dale will no longer see her beauty. Dale will see only Hulda's beauty."

Hulda was an exceedingly proud young lady, and her pride now saved her self-respect from being wrecked.

"Am I ugly?" asked she proudly.

" Hulda is beautiful! " responded Lobue, and she gazed enviously at the girl.

" Am I less beautiful than Lupelta ? "

" Lupelta's beauty is like that of the moon! Hulda's beauty is like that of the- sun! " said Lobue.

The comparison flattered Hulda's vanity, and she smiled.

" I will not practise wickedly against Lupelta," said she. " I will act toward her justly, as I hope she would toward me."

" Hulda will gave Dale the medicine ? "

"No!" said Hulda vehemently. "I will rely upon such charms I may be possessed of from Nature. If they fail me, I'll submit."

Lobue began to fear she was not to receive the gold from Hulda, and her heart sank.

" Hulda will give Lobue the gold? " said she pleadingly.

" There it is! " said Hulda, and she dropped the coin to the floor before Lobue. "Good-night!" she tersely added. And she hastened from the hut.

Lobue snatched the coin up from the floor and began kissing it. Meanwhile Muffy came from behind the mortar and approached her.

" Lobue," cried the secretary, coming toward the hag, " you've bungled everything! "

" Hulda is wise," answered the old woman.

" And you're a fool! " cried Muffy, turning on his heel and going out into the night.

" Gold! Gold! " cried Lobue, gazing ecstatically at the coin held fast within her clawlike hands.

Bushrod Island,— long, narrow and luxuriantly vegetated,— was washed on one of its lengthy sides by the Atlantic Ocean, on its other by Stockton Creek and the Mesurado River, the latter stream separating it from the city of Monrovia. The beach on this island was inviting, and Captain Dale visited it nearly every morning to bathe in the surf, though his Monrovian friends had again and again warned him against so indulging himself. They were wont to tell him that it was not only conducive to an attack of fever but also exceedingly dangerous, because of the possibility of being devoured by man-eating sharks.

All warnings, however, were wasted; for Dale persisted in the practice. Not that he was at all inclined to be foolhardy, but, being aware that his advisers invariably did their bathing in piping-hot water contained either in buckets or washing-tubs or half-casks or stew-pans, he suspected that they cautioned more to excuse their own sybaritism than because they were concerned either as to his safety or health.

Howsoever Dale viewed this matter, he crossed to the island and bathed in the surf early in the morning on the day following his little disturbance with Mr. Muffy. No voracious monster of the deep disturbed him while at his ablutions, though innumerable fiddlers peeped at him from their holes in the sand, and a screaming fishing eagle gazed down at him from its perch on a limb of a tall cocoanut tree. Indifferent to these inquisitive eyes, he swam and plunged to his heart's content, then left the water, wrapped himself in a capacious Foulah gown that covered him from neck to ankles, and ran across the width of the island to its river side, where he found his boat waiting to carry him to the city. He was about to embark, but, as courtesy required of him, paused to speak to Hulda whom he perceived coming down the path toward the landing.

" Good-morning, Miss Bartle! " said he to the young girl as she drew near. "Aren't you rather early abroad? "

Hulda returned the captain's salutation smilingly and said in reply to his question: " I've been to Booma's Town to purchase poultry for our reception on Independence Day. I thought it would be as well to do the errand early,— before it became hot. But you are early abroad, too! "

" Oh, I come here early nearly every morning," replied Dale.

" To bathe in the surf? "

" Yes."

" How nice! " cried Hulda. " I wish that swimming were one of my accomplishments. Perhaps you will teach me. Will you? I could take my first lesson this morning."

Dale's naturally healthy appetite had been so sharpened by his late duck that he was now craving his breakfast; therefore, though Hulda was charming indeed, and he himself "was not ungallant, her request did not appeal favorably to him.

" Are you accustomed to bathing in the surf? " asked he.

" I have never been in it here," responded Hulda.

" Then, if you take my advice," said Dale, " you'll not venture."

" Why not? "

" It is likely to bring on an attack of the fever," said Dale, and he glanced longingly toward his boat.

Hulda perceived Dale's glance and guessed its meaning. Smiling inwardly, she thought: " I'll tease him well for that.

" I'm not a bit afraid of the fever," said she aloud.

" But how about the sharks? "

" They don't seem to bother you, Captain," replied the girl.

" No, they don't," returned Dale, thoughtless of where his admission was leading him.

" Why don't they ? " asked Hulda demurely.

Dale was in a quandary.

" Well, they — they respect me," stammered he; then, struck by the absurdity of this remark, he paused and looked at his companion somewhat confusedly.

Hulda, though she was enjoying Dale's embarrassment, kept her face straight.

" Yes? " said she questioningly, leading him on.

"I — I mean," continued the captain, floundering in his puddle, " that I — I dodge them."

Plulda, who could swim quite as well as any Kruman, and knew more about the ways of sharks than Dale did, or ever would, wanted to scream with laughter; but, unwilling to bring the fun to a period, she refrained. Clasping her hands together and gazing admirably at Dale, she cried: " Oh, Captain Dale, how exceedingly clever you are!"

" What a fraud I am! " thought Dale ruefully.

" You must instruct me how to dodge them," continued Hulda. " Indeed, you should set up a school somewhere and teach everybody how to dodge sharks. I'm sure you'd make a fortune at it."

Hulda made this businesslike suggestion apparently in all seriousness; nevertheless it seemed so utterly nonsensical that Dale became suspicious; and he gazed into her eyes, expecting them to disclose whether or not she was playing with him. But he learned nothing; that is, nothing other than that the organs of sight were beautiful ; for Hulda was alive to his intention and defeated it by meeting his glance very innocently. His doubts were removed and he marvelled at her simplicity. Then he thought of what might happen to this " simple " creature were she in the sea endeavouring to dodge a shark, and a chill ran up and down his spine, actually causing him to shiver.

Hulda was aware of her victory and smiled.

" Yes, Captain," she went on, " I'll be your first pupil. After I have become expert, I'll give you a testimonial, which you may have published. The fact that you have taught the step-daughter of the President of Liberia how to dodge sharks will be a very catching advertisement."

" Great Scott! " thought Dale, " what will she say next? "

"You wall teach me, won't you?" added Hulda persuasively.

" I beg to be excused," said Dale.

"Aren't you mean!" exclaimed Hulda, and she pouted her lips in a way that caused her companion to think them well worthy of being kissed.

" I am very sorry," said Dale regretfully. " But, really, 'twould be altogether too risky."

" I am quite willing to run the risk," persisted Hulda, determined to drive Dale into a corner.

" I am not," said the captain firmly.

Desiring to escape from a situation that was becoming more and more embarrassing each moment, Dale was now about to bid Hulda farewell; but she perceived his intention and, having no thought of letting him go, prevented it. Before he could speak, she pointed at a flower that was showing over and from behind a mass of shrubbery some distance away, exclaiming enthusiastically : " Oh, what a beautiful flower! "

Dale, somewhat skilled in the science of botany and passably familiar with the Liberian flora, recognized the bloom.

" It is a plant of the passion-flower order,— a Smeath-mannia," said he, not displeased to air his knowledge.

" We call it lover's-gift," said Hulda.

" Quite suggestive," said Dale, smiling.

" The use we put the flower to gives it a right to the title," returned Hulda.

" Elucidate, please."

" You refused to teach me, and I ought to pay you back in your own coin," said Hulda coquettishly. " But I will not be mean. We call it lover's-gift because, when a young man is too timid to propose to his lady-love in due form, he pops the question by offering one of the flowers. If the lady accepts the gift, she accepts the giver, and soon afterward, a wedding-cake is cut."

" Somewhat poetical, Miss Bartle? "

" It is not! But, Captain, I would like to have the flower. Perhaps you will kindly pluck it for me? "

" Hullo," thought Dale, " the young lady is out for a flirtation. But I'm afraid I can't accommodate her." Though Dale was not prepared to exchange soft nothings with Hulda, he was not a prig. Ordinarily he was quite as ready to philander with a pretty girl as is any other young fellow who, as was the case with himself, has warm blood running in his veins; but at the present moment he was longing for his breakfast and was not at all disposed to play at love-making on an empty stomach. At any r&te, he hesitated to reply. Hulda perceived his hesitation, misunderstood its cause, and blushed. She proceeded to correct the mistaken idea which she erroneously supposed had entered his mind.

" If a young lady asks a gentleman to give her the flower," said she, " then it is not called lover's-gift, but simply white camellia."

Dale understood Hulda. Though he was not prepared to do any gallivanting with her just then, the thought that she was ready to indulge him was anything but displeasing; therefore, when he saw that she was not that way inclined, his feathers fell.

" If that be the case," said he, somewhat piqued, " I'll send one of my boys to gather it."

He would have summoned one of his Krumen from the boat, but Hulda stopped him.

" No, don't call him! " she cried quickly, before Dale could shout. " The Kruman is rough-handed and would crush the flower. You must pluck it yourself."

"Very well," said Dale; and he unwillingly went to procure the bloom.

Hulda watched Dale until he passed from her sight behind the shrubbery to reach the flower, then she hastened to his boat and spoke to its cockswain.

" Yellow Will," said she, " I want you to go to the Executive Mansion at once."

" Yes, Mammy," replied the Kruman.

Hulda took a small key from her reticule.

"You will give this key to my maid Moona," said Hulda, and she handed the key to the Kruman. " Go at once! " she added.

Yellow Will seemed disinclined to obey. He gave a glance toward the shrubbery behind which Dale had disappeared, then gazed at Hulda doubtfully and scratched his head.

" Captain Dale," continued Hulda, answering the Kruman's unspoken question, " will return to the city in my canoe. Make haste, Yellow Will! Come to me this evening and I will give you a dash."

The cockswain's doubts were dissipated.

" Belly good, Mammy! " cried he, and a few seconds later Dale's boat was sailing toward the city.

Dale, carrying the flower, rejoined Hulda shortly afterward. He delivered the bloom to her, then, looking for his cutter, he saw that it was missing.

"Why," cried he, amazed, "what's got into Yellow Will? Is he mad?" he asked. And glaring at the rapidly receding boat, he shouted to the cockswain fruitlessly.

" He is too far away," said Hulda, suppressing a smile.

" Evidently," returned Dale ruefully. " Did he say anything to you, Miss Bartle, before he went? "

" Yes."

" Do you mind repeating it ? " .

" Certainly not. He said: ' Yes, Mammy'."

Dale was very much at sea.

" I don't understand," said he. " Had you spoken to him? "

" I'm inclined to think so," said Hulda demurely. Dale's amazement grew.

" May I ask what you said to him ? " asked he, staring at Hulda. ' " Of course you may."

" Well? "

" Well, what? "

Dale was beginning to feel annoyed.

" Miss Bartle," said he somewhat impatiently, " will you please answer my question ? "

Hulda smiled sweetly at Dale.

" Captain Dale," said she, " after you have asked me a question I will answer it with pleasure."

Dale was amused despite the annoyance he felt.

" Oh, that's it? " said he, smiling. "Perhaps, Miss Bartle," continued he very deferentially, " you will condescend to impart to your humble petitioner what you said to Yellow Will? Will that do? "

Hulda laughed.

" I told him," said she, " to take a key to the Executive Mansion."

Dale stared at Hulda.

" Did you send my boat away? " asked he.

" I'm afraid I did," said Hulda; and there was a slight tremor in her voice; but whether it was brought there by fear or amusement may be guessed.

" What the dev —" began Dale angrily, but, remembering that be was speaking to a lady, he broke off short. " I beg your pardon, Miss Bartle," he concluded.

" You need not," returned Hulda. " If letting off a few naughty words will ease your pain, Captain Dale, by all means explode. I'll take care not to hear you." Whereupon, placing her hands at her ears and gazing mischievously at the half-incensed captain, she cried: " Now then! "

Dale was unable to retain his ill-humor in the face of the girl's pleasantry. He laughed.

" That's better," said Hulda approvingly.

" You've interned me," said Dale.

" Not for a long time. My boys will soon be here from Booma's Town, and when they have come I'll take you across in my canoe."

" Thanks."

" Meanwhile," continued Hulda, " we may as well make ourselves comfortable." Indicating a silk cotton tree which was gloriously beautiful with innumerable scarlet-purple flowers, she went on: " Shall we sit in its shade until the boys arrive? "

Dale agreed, and they crossed to the tree. Hulda sunk to the turf in the shadow cast by its overhanging foliage and gazed up at the captain.

" Aren't you going to rest yourself? " said she invitingly.

" I suppose I might as well," responded Dale; and he placed himself upon the ground beside her.

" Now, Captain," said Hulda, hugging her knees, " you must amuse me."

Dale again thought of his waiting breakfast and groaned inwardly.

" Describe some of your adventures," continued Hulda. " Tell me of hair-breadth escapes from death, — things like that."

Now, Dale had passed through a number of interesting adventures, some of them having been thrillingly dangerous; but, as is the case with the majority of courageous men, he disliked to talk about his deeds. So, though he resembled Othello in his complexion, and though, too, Hulda was eager to " devour up " his discourse, he was disinclined to imitate the boastful Moor.

" Hair-breadth escapes? " repeated Dale.

" Yes. I want you to make my blood creep! "

Dale laughed.

" I'm afraid that is a flight beyond me," said he. " Such adventures as I've had were altogether commonplace. In these matter-of-fact days scaly dragons, or other terrible monsters, exist only on screens in 'movie' shows; therefore, no matter how eager one may be to play the knight-errant, the opportunity for so doing never presents itself."

■ Hulda shook her finger at Dale, exclaiming: "Fie, fie, Captain! You are not, as a native would put it, ' making straight palaver.' "

"No?"

" If a tale that I've heard is true, then you have been doing the chivalrous quite effectively."

Dale had no idea what Hulda was referring to and was puzzled.

" Perhaps I have done something foolish," said he, " but I don't remember."

" Were you doing something foolish when you rescued a beautiful native girl from slave-raiders ? " asked Hulda, and, though smiling, she watched Dale to see how her question affected him.

"Oh!" exclaimed Dale; and his brown face became suffused with red.

Hulda perceived how Dale was stirred, and her heart grew heavy.

"You refer to Lupelta? " continued the captain.

" Yes," said Hulda, controlling her emotion.

" I effected her rescue easily," said Dale.

" Don't endeavour to belittle your deed," said Hulda. " Arab slavers are not easily forced to relinquish their prey."

" Perhaps not," said Dale.

" I have been told that Lupelta is beautiful. Is she? "

" She is indeed beautiful! " exclaimed Dale enthusiastically.

Hulda sighed to herself sadly.

" Beauty is not Lupelta's greatest charm," continued Dale. " She has many excellent qualities of both mind and heart. Undoubtedly she will develop into a very noble woman."

Dale's words hurt Hulda, and, unseen by him, she winced.

" Yes; she is one out of a thousand! " concluded the captain.

" You praise her very highly," said Hulda.

"No more highly than she deserves."

" I have been informed that she is very fair? "

" Yes, quite as fair as some white girls I've seen. Sometime I wonder if Reesha, her reputed mother, who, I have been given to understand, is a Negress pure and simple, is really her mother."

Hulda, who had a very fair complexion, straight brown hair, and hazel-colored eyes, while her mother had been almost black, thought of her own case, and had her tongue not been tied by modesty, would have referred to it as an example of how Europe frequently tries to bleach Africa; as it was, though, she merely remarked: " It is not an unusual thing for native women to have children who resemble Caucasians."

" So it appears," said Dale, understanding the girl's allusion.

" I would like to see Lupelta," said Hulda.

" I thought you Americo-Liberian ladies looked down upon na —"

" Not all of us, Captain," broke in Hulda. " Anyhow, you have interested me in Lupelta, and I would like to see her and talk with her."

In offering to meet Lupelta, evidently intending to accept her on an equality with herself, Hulda was making a great concession. Dale was aware of this. He was commensurately appreciative and smiled at his companion gratefully. But even as he was smiling, a large tarantula dropped from the tree to the girl's shoulder and bit it.

" Heavens! " cried Hulda, as she felt the bite; and she hastily brushed the venomous spider from her shoulder.

The insect fell to the ground; and Dale, who had sprung to his feet, stamped the life out of it.

It was generally believed by Liberians that the tarantula's bite meant death, and Hulda, who was no wiser than her compatriots in this respect, was very much alarmed.

" Oh, its bite is fatal! " cried she, her voice alive with agitation.

Dale, whose knowledge in this connection was about on a par with Hulda's, also was alarmed. He bent over the frightened girl and concernedly asked: " Where did it bite you ? "

" On my shoulder," cried Hulda hysterically.

Dale acted promptly. Muttering an apology, he at once tore open Hulda's sleeve and exposed her bare shoulder, on which a red spot indicated the place where she had been bitten. Thinking only of saving her life, he placed his lips against the puncture and proceeded to suck out the poison which the spider had deposited there.

Hulda submitted to the touch of Dale's lips until she could stand the sweet contact no longer.

" I think that will do," said she somewhat faintly.

Dale ceased cupping, drew back, and wiped his forehead, which was damp with perspiration.

" Perhaps you won't mind pinning my sleeve? " continued Hulda, and she handed Dale two pins.

Dale pinned the sleeve together, but, since he was a man, clumsily of course.

" Now, Miss Bartle," cried he, the pinning done, " buck up! You're right as — as a trivet! "

Hulda gazed at the captain gratefully; her eyes were moist.

" You have saved my life," said she emotionally.

Dale, thinking Hulda was about to make a scene, became uneasy. Hoping to prevent her, he proceeded to make light of what he had done.

" You exaggerate," said he. " 'Twasn't nearly so serious as that. If the poison hadn't been removed at once, probably your shoulder would have been more or less sore for a time, but your life was in no danger."

Despite Dale's disclaimer, Hulda believed that he had saved her life, and she solemnly vowed that if ever the opportunity offered itself she would reward him. She kept this vow!

" Be that as it may," replied she, " I am very, very grateful! "

" Here it comes! " thought Dale rdefully. " This is what a chap gets for turning himself into a —"

" Mammy," broke in a Kruboy, who had approached unnoticed by either Hulda or Dale, " Mammy, the canoe is ready."

The captain thanked his lucky star for the interruption, and a moment afterward he and Hulda had entered the canoe and were soon crossing the river.

It was about eight o'clock in the evening. The moon had not yet appeared, and Monrovia's dimly-burning street-lamps, of which there were no more than six or seven in the whole city, lighted the pitchy-dark thoroughfares scarcely more effectively than would have a like number of fireflies. However, Captain Dale, following a boy carrying a lighted lantern, on his way to the Mansion House, managed to avoid tumbling over stones, or falling into ditches, or stepping into the midst of driver-ants to be half devoured by them, and arrived in safety at his destination, where he found Hulda in her boudoir.

" Good-evening, Miss Bartle," said he, advancing from the door toward her, " you look fit for anything. The tarantula's bite apparently has done you no harm?"

" Thanks to you, it has not," said Hulda. Had you acted less promptly, who can say what would have happened. I'm sure, Captain Dale, I didn't thank you half enough this morning, so —"

" Don't, please! " broke in Dale. " It strikes me that I was rather — rather — That I owe you an apology."

" For saving my life? " asked Hulda laughingly.

" I was thinking of the damage I did. I hope the blouse is not damaged beyond repair."

" I wouldn't have it mended for anything,— not for the whole world! I shall keep it as a souvenir of the incident. It and the camellia are wrapped in tissue-paper and put away in my most sacred place."

" Wasted sentiment," thought Dale; and while he was so thinking, a young Negress, carrying a tray containing refreshments, entered and left the door open behind her.

" Moona," said Hulda, addressing the Negress, " place the tray upon the table."

Moona deposited her burden upon the table, and as she did so Mr. Muffy appeared in the doorway.

" Any admission? " asked the secretary.

Hulda felt like saying " No! " and so did Dale; but they remained silent, and Mr. Muffy crossed to the table and sat down near them.

" What's the liquid? " asked the secretary, glancing at the jug on the tray.

Hulda was inclined to be disagreeable.

" It's not gin," said she shortly; then, repentant, she gently added: " It's iced lemonade, made of real lemons, Pidgley."

"You don't say so!" exclaimed Muffy. "Captain Dale," he continued, smiling at the American, " real lemons are a treat."

" Undoubtedly," agreed Dale. Communing with himself, he thought, " Evidently the fellow bears no grudge. There's better stuff in him than I thought."

" Hulda," went on Muffy, while Dale was turning him over in his mind, " where did you get them from? "

" From Mr. Moreton," responded Hulda. " He purchased a box from the Spanish steamer the other day. Captain Dale, Mr. Moreton is my best sweetheart."

Dale laughed. He was aware that Hulda's Mr. Moreton was over sixty-five years of age.

"You may laugh, but he is!" said Hulda. "He is a dear old soul ! "

" I must give the old man a look up before his stock becomes exhausted," said Muffy, sipping his lemonade.

" I wonder that no one in Liberia cultivates the lemon," remarked Dale.

" Maxton made a try, but was compelled to give it up as a bad job," responded Muffy.

" Why? " asked Dale.

" He found that native labor was altogether too unreliable," explained the secretary.

" Are you not libelling the native, Mr. Muffy? " exclaimed Dale. " It seems to me that under the right kind of supervision he works quite as well as any other unskilled laborer."

" Under supervision, possibly," returned Muffy. " But it's there that the trouble lies. We Liberians have no time to do any supervising. Certainly, Max-ton hasn't. He is fully occupied with his official duties."

" Since I've never met the gentleman, I must not judge him," said Dale. " What is he? "

" It's much easier to say what Maxton isn't than what he is," answered Muffy. " He is any number of things." Checking the much employed Mr. Maxton's various positions off on his fingers as he named them, he continued : " Maxton is a Probate Judge, a Collector of Taxes, a District Superintendent, a Chief Constable, a Postmaster, and a Senator."

"No wonder the country is going to the dogs!" thought the captain.

" Pidgley," joined in Hulda, "you've forgotten to mention that Mr. Maxton is our High Admiral, too! "

" I did not forget," said Muffy, " but as we've got no navy, I thought it just as well not to mention that."

" Mr. Maxton's employments are multifarious," said Dale. " He must be an exceedingly able gentleman? "

" My step-father thinks he will be our next President," remarked Hulda.

" Did he come from America ? " asked Dale.

" Yes; from Georgia, I believe," answered Muffy.

" Has he been in Liberia a long time? " said Dale.

" About ten years," responded the secretary.

" Do you know what business Mr. Maxton followed when he lived in America? " asked Dale, much interested.

" He was a sailor," said Muffy.

" A common sailor! " exclaimed Dale amazed.

" A common sailor? " cried the secretary. " No, indeed! He was a ship's cook!"

"Oh!" exclaimed Dale, too much astonished to say more.

" Maxton isn't much of a scholar," went on Muffy, singing the praises of his prodigy, " but his eye-teeth are cut, and ke knows how to pull the strings."

" Undoubtedly," murmured Dale weakly.

Hulda thought that they had talked about the wonderful Mr. Maxton quite long enough, so she diverted the conversation into a fresh channel.

" Captain Dale," said she, " have you been to the Mission House this evening? "

" Not jet," answered Dale.

" Then you are not aware of what occurred there this afternoon? '' .went on Hulda.

Both Dale and Muffy thought of Lodango, and the former grew nervous, while the latter pricked up his ears.

" What occurred? " asked Dale somewhat anxiously.

" Your ward, Lupelta, had an unexpected visitor," was Hulda's reply.

" Lodango ? " cried Dale, plainly very much alarmed.

When Hulda saw that Dale was frightened, she was glad; the next moment, though, she felt sorry for him, and she hastened to set his mind at ease.

" Am I Lodango? " cried she.

"Were you the visitor? " asked Dale eagerly. ...

. " Yes," replied Hulda.

Dale gave a sigh of relief and his face, which had grown pale, resumed its normal color; Muffy cursed inwardly and scowled aside.

"Did you see Lupelta? " asked Dale.

" Yes, and had a nice long chat with her," responded Hulda. After a slight pause, during which she got the better of something that was urging her to hush, she added, " Lupelta is a charming creature! "

Dale gave Hulda a smile that did not make her happy, and he felt like embracing her.

" Miss Bartle, you're a brick! " cried he.

" She's a whole ton of 'em! " joined in Muffy heartily, though he was still cursing to himself.

Hulda smiled.

" I have invited Lupelta to accompany me," she went on, " to a picnic that is to be given on the Long Beach on Independence Day, after the public ceremonies. I hope, Captain, you'll not refuse to come ? "

"Yes, Captain," put in Muffy, "you shouldn't miss the fun. We'll be a jolly party! "

" There'll be lots of pretty girls to flirt with," said Hulda, smiling.

" It sounds all right, and I guess the picnic would be a failure without me," said Dale. Rising, he continued: " Now, Miss Bartle, I must tear myself away. I promised Lupelta that I would see her this evening."

" Well, if you must," said Hulda, rising.

Dale bade Hulda and Muffy good-night, and went away; and Hulda shortly afterward dismissed Muffy, who at once hastened to the President's study.

When the secretary left Hulda's boudoir Liberia's Chief Magistrate, in his sanctum, was reclining in an easy chair. His feet were resting upon a writing table, which also held, in the society of a few books and papers, a large tumbler half-full of undiluted spirits and a quart bottle labelled " BROWN'S * * * WHISKEY." His Excellency's hands were idle and his eyes were closed. He seemed in a dream, but probably was thinking of his grave and onerous duties. However, at Muffy's knock upon the door he became alert: hastily he removed his feet from the table, emptied the contents of the tumbler down his throat, placed glass and bottle out of sight underneath the table, and took an official-looking document in his hand. Then, the scene being set, he bade Muffy enter.

"Well, what now?" cried he impatiently, as his secretary came into the study.

" Are you very busy, Uncle? " asked Muffy.

" Does this look as if I were idle? " cried the President, displaying the document he had taken from the table. " Of course I'm busy! "

Muffy was not deceived by his uncle's acting, for he had viewed the play many times before.

" Is it anything of importance?" asked he, humoring the potentate.

" Do you suppose I would be so disturbed if it were not? " returned the President irritably. " But, don't stand there gawking at me like an empty codfish head. Sit-down, and I'll explain."

Mr. Muffy seated himself and became all attention.

" Perhaps you will be able to suggest some way out of the difficulty," continued His Excellency. " The natives at Mt. Chocolate are making themselves troublesome, and Grant wants me to send Dale with some of his men to quiet them. I can't spare the captain. I need him here. Lodango is lurking somewhere in the vicinity of the city, and he may mean mischief. No, I can't spare Dale! "

" I fail to see why not," said Muffy. "We certainly have officers quite as capable and brave as the American. What's the matter with Colonel John-son-Subbs ? "

The President made an undescribable noise in his throat; but the nephew knew what the noise meant and smiled. Responding to it, he said: " Well, maybe you're right."

"Of course I am! Subbs has just about as much spunk as you have, Pidgley."

Evidently Mr. Muffy was not pleased by this sneer at his courage, for he gave his uncle an ugly look.

" Thanks," said he. " Lots of people say I resemble my uncle in many ways."

" Unmannerly cub," retorted Liberia's ruler, " you'll never be half the man your uncle is! However, that's neither here nor there. How am I to straighten out the tangle? "

" Send Dale to Mt. Chocolate."

" Must I repeat that I can't spare him? "

" As for Lodango," continued Muffy, paying no attention to his uncle's interjection, "matters can be so arranged that he'll return to his kraal at once."

His Excellency was puzzled.

" What are you driving at ? " cried he. " Explain! "

Muffy disclosed why Lodango was prowling near Monrovia, then recommended that facilities should be afforded the chief to enable him to abduct Lupelta.

" When the savage has her safely in his hands," concluded Mr. Muffy, " he'll go back to his kraal like a shot."

" But what about Dale? " asked the President doubtfully. " I can't afford to offend him, you know."

" There's no reason why he should ever learn that you interfered. Send him to Mt. Chocolate and leave the rest to me."

His Excellency gazed wonderingly at Muffy.

" To you! " exclaimed he.

" Yes, Uncle, to your dutiful nephew," said Muffy, and he grinned.

" Have you a grudge against the brave captain? "

" I don't exactly love him," said Muffy, and the expression on his face endorsed his words.

" Nor do I," confessed the President. " He's altogether too cocky, pretends that the dollar problem doesn't interest him, so isn't at all amenable to reason. If it was not that I hope to persuade another loan from America, I'd bounce him,— all the other Americans as well,— back to the States in double-quick time."

" A good thing too! " muttered Muffy.

" Well, Pidgley," continued the President, " I'll think the matter over. Come to me the first thing in the morning, and I'll let you know what I've decided."

" All right, Uncle," said Muffy, rising to go.

" By the way," said His Excellency, " have you come to an understanding with Hulda ? "

" Not yet," replied the secretary, pausing on his way out.

" Delays are dangerous, Pidgley. 'Twould never do for her to marry any one but you."

" If she did, perhaps some one would find himself in a deep hole," said Muffy, and he grinned at his uncle meaningly.

" You've had a share, my boy," said the President, returning his nephew's grin. " However, you'd better stir your stumps."

" I intend to. I'm thinking of persuading her to make a trip with me to the Interior. If we are suddenly missed, you'll know what's happened."

" All right; but don't put your foot in it. Now, if you'll be off, I'll resume my work."

" Good-night," said Mr. Muffy shortly; and he left the room.

The President resumed his work; that is, he resurrected the bottle and tumbler and refreshed himself with a bumper of whiskey.

Mr. Muffy saw his uncle again on the following morning. Toward evening he and a Bassa boy,— the latter carrying a bag containing various articles,— started for the Lake of Lilies (so named because many water-lilies floated upon its placid surface), which was situated in the center of a small glade about five miles from Monrovia, toward the interior.

They arrived at their destination close upon sundown and halted beside a number of broken water-gourds, which were lying upon the ground near the edge of the lake.

" Blush," said Muffy, as he gazed about the place, " this must be the Lake of Lilies? "

" Yes, Daddy," responded the boy. " The Imbundas will soon come to get water."

" How do you know they will? "

" Those bottles belong to Imbundas," said Blush, pointing at the broken gourds.

" Are you sure of it? " asked Muffy, gazing at the vessels.

" Blush is sure," answered the lad. " The Bassa people get water when the sun comes up and when the sun goes down, and so do the Imbundas. The sun is nearly down now and the Imbundas will come quickly. If we don't want them to take our heads, more better we make a peace-witch and hide."

" We'll get to work," said Muffy, and pocketing his hands, he watched the Bassa.

Blush, thus overlooked, cleared away the grass from a small patch of ground and piled the uncovered loam into a mound. This done, he attached strips of rag to one end of a twig, from which he had peeled its bark, and stuck it, rag end up, in the center of the mound. Then from the bag he took a bolt of red cloth, several strings of beads, a few heads of leaf-tobacco, and last, but by no means the least in importance, a quart jug of gin. He placed these articles upon the mound around the twig, then moved back and gazed at the strange creation admiringly.

" Good! " cried he, grinning. " When the Imbundas see peace-witch they will be glad too much! " " I suppose it is all —"

Just then they heard a school of monkeys, out of sight in the forest, begin chattering angrily; and Blush, who was somewhat informed as to the ways of the denizens of the African wild, knew that the noises announced the presence of human creatures among the trees. He believed that the expected Imbundas were at hand; so he interrupted Muffy.

" Daddy," cried the Bassa, " the monkeys are vexed with the Imbundas. We must hide one time !"

They secreted themselves in a conveniently situated clump of shrubbery, and looking out, shortly afterward perceived five Imbunda warriors, fully armed, emerge from among the trees and cross to the lake. Four of them unslung large gourds from their shoulders, waded into the water, and proceeded to fill the vessels. The fifth, a headman, remained upon the bank gazing about. He soon discovered the peace-witch. He glared amazedly at the thing for a second or two, then shouted to the men in the water, who immediately joined him.

From where the Imbundas were standing and in the growing dusk they were unable to see clearly the mound and the things upon it, so failed to grasp their meaning. Undecided whether to approach it or run away, they remained in this mood for fully a minute. At the end of this time, though, the headman,— curiosity getting the better of his timidity,— moved forward, followed by the others,— evidently ready to retreat at the slightest alarm,— toward the puzzling object.

The Imbundas, protecting their breasts with their shields and holding their spears ready to launch, advanced cautiously. At last they recognized the peace-witch for what it was, gave a great shout, and raced pell-mell up to it. Touching none of the articles upon the mound, but gazing eagerly at them, especially the bottle of gin, they jabbered among themselves excitedly awhile, then suddenly hushed, and the headman, glancing searchingly here and there about the place, loudly shouted: " Stranger, Poofah has looked at peace-witch! Poofah's ears are open! "

" Daddy will make cunning talk to the headman," whispered Blush to Muffy in the shrubbery.

When the headman shouted, Muffy, who was watching the Imbundas with fear tugging at his heart, sighed with relief. And now he started a parley as Blush had suggested.

" Is it peace? " cried he.

The Imbundas fixed their gaze expectantly on the secretary's hiding-place.

" It is peace! " responded the headman.

Muffy was satisfied by the headman's assurance that the Imbundas would do him no harm, so he and Blush emerged from the shrubbery and approached the mound.

" Poofah, I salute you! " exclaimed Muffy as he advanced.

"Good!" returned the headman. " Poofah's ears are open to hear the stranger's name? "

" I am the great Mr. Muffy of Monrovia! " boasted the secretary. " I am the President's mouth and ears! "

The savages were very much impressed with Mr. Muffy's importance.

"Wow!" they exclaimed; and they saluted "the President's mouth and ears " with their spears.

" Muffy is & big chief! " added Poofah.

" Big chief too much! " cried Blush.

"Good!" ejaculated the headman. "Poofah is Muffy's friend."

" And I am Poofah's," said Muffy. " I make Poofah and his warriors a dash! " Pointing at each article on the mound as he mentioned it, he went on: " There is cloth!"

Poofah and his warriors grunted.

" There are beads! " continued the secretary.

Again the savages grunted.

" There is tobacco! " added Muffy.

The Imbundas grunted once more, this time with some enthusiasm.

Mr. Muffy now pointed at the jug of gin, and, with a just appreciation of the great consequence of the stuff, paused a few seconds before completing his list.

Then, strongly accenting the noun, he cried impressively: " There is gin! "

The Imbundas shouted joyfully; then Poofah, after his warriors hushed, smiled' at Muffy very benignantly and remarked: " Muffy's heart is big! Muffy's hands are open ! "

Mr. Muffy did not deny this flattering allegation, but accepted it smilingly.

" Why is Muffy at the Lake of Lilies ? " asked the headman.

" I would speak to Lodango," explained the secretary.

"Is Muffy brave?" asked Poofah.

"Brave?" exclaimed Muffy. "Of course I am! Do I look like a coward? "

The headman studied Muffy's face a moment then shook his head as if he were uncertain.

" Maybe Muffy is brave," said he doubtfully. " Poofah will know by and by. Lodango is vexed. Lodango sits alone by the fire and broods. Lodango is sorry about Lupelta."

" I shall speak about Lupelta to Lodango," said Muffy.

" Lodango will be glad," said Poofah. " Muffy will pluck peace-witch from the little hill so the Imbundas may take up the dash. Muffy will do quickly. It will soon be dark."

" Blush, remove it," said Muffy.

The Bassa pulled the rag-decorated twig from the mound and threw it aside. Then Poofah snatched up the jug, knocked its head off, placed the ragged neck to his mouth and gurgled the gin down his throat.

After he had partly allayed his unquenchable thirst for the civilizing agent he reluctantly passed the bottle to one of his warriors, who, with his companions, afraid that he would be defrauded of a share of the liquor, had been watching the headman anxiously. The vessel was soon emptied and thrown into the lake; then the other things were taken from the mound, the gourds were filled with water, and all hands, Blush carrying the bag that still contained presents, marched from the glade into the forest toward Lodango's camp. After a little while night came, and though the moon shone in the heavens, underneath the overhanging limbs of the thickly-foliated trees it was exceedingly dark; so they advanced slowly. However, in about fifteen minutes they came to a small shed. Here Poofah called a halt, and pointing at the structure, said: " Muffy will rest there until Poofah returns. The Bassa will go with Poofah."

" Do you expect me to remain here all alone in the dark?" exclaimed Muffy nervously.

" Is Muffy afraid? " asked the headman.

" Of course I'm not afraid! " cried Mr. Muffy valor-ously; but a tremor in his voice belied the brave words.

"Good!" exclaimed Poofah, and he walked off, followed by his warriors and Blush.

As the savages disappeared in the darkness Muffy entered the shed. He sat down upon a log, and in a little while his imagination,— which at all times was sufficiently lively, but now was exceedingly so,— began playing him fantastic tricks. The rustlings of dry leaves, the hummings of insects, the voice of the breeze sighing among the trees, in short, each and all of the innumerable creepy noises peculiar to an African forest in the night-time alarmed him. Soon he felt like calling loudly for some one to come; but, except that his teeth would chatter, and his body would tremble and jump, he remained silent and perspiring. At length, though, when a bat flapped its wings close to his head, he surrendered. He gave an unearthly yell, jumped up from the log, rushed out of the shed, and, to his great joy, almost collided with Poof ah.

" Wow! " exclaimed the headman, as he avoided Muffv. " What's the matter? "

If Muffy's courage was weak his wits were quick. "I — I heard you coming," stammered he.

" Muffy came quickly too much !" exclaimed Poof ah.

" I didn't want to keep you waiting," explained the secretary; and then, to prevent further embarrassing questioning, he hastily asked: " Have you spoken to Lodango? "

" Muffy will hold forth his hand," said Poofah.

The mulatto held his hand out and the headman placed a grain of corn in it.

" What is this for? " asked Muffy, referring to the corn.

" It is Lodango's token that he will do you no harm." explained the headman. " Lodango is hungry to hear Muffy talk about Lupelta. Muffy will go with Poofah to Lodango quickly! "

Saying nothing further, Poofah walked away, and Muffy followed him. A few minutes later they arrived at the edge of a small, grassy, open place, in the center of which were Lodango, Blush, and a number of the chief's warriors. The Imbunda prince was squatting by himself near a fire, gazing moodily at its flickering flame; Blush was upon his haunches close to a skin which was spread upon the ground before the chief; the warriors were near their ruler and silently watching him.

Poofah and Muffy halted, and the former blew a resounding note from an ivory horn, which he was privileged to use because of his superior rank. And when the horn sounded Lodango straightened up and glanced expectantly toward the point from which the sound had come, as did Blush and the warriors. The headman then escorted the secretary across to the skin and bade him sit down upon it; and, as Muffy obeyed, Poofah dropped to the ground himself and rubbed his forehead in the dust before the chief. This act of homage performed, the headman arose to his knees and pointed at the mulatto.

" Lodango," cried he, " Poofah has brought Muffy ! "

" Good! " cried Lodango, and he fixed his eyes on the secretary so fiercely that that gentleman felt quite queer.

The headman crawled away; meanwhile Lodango clapped his hands together at Muffy, and shouted: " Lodango salutes Muffy! "

The fearless Mr. Muffy brought a sickly smile to his face and returned the chief's salute.

" Muffy is the President's mouth and ears?" asked Lodango.

" Yes," said Muffy.

" Good! " cried the savage. " Lodango is his own mouth and ears. Why has Muffy come to Lodango? "

" Because I am your friend," replied the secretary.

Lodango frowned.

" Sometimes the friendship of men who come from Monrovia makes the Imbunda people sorry too much," said he. " How is Lodango to know that Muffy is not trying to throw pepper into the eyes of the Imbunda? "

" I have brought you a big dash," said Muffy.

The chief now smiled all over his face.

" The Imbunda Lion's eyes are open to see Muffy's dash," said he.

Lodango and his warriors gazed at the bag eagerly, and Muffy, inwardly praying that the gifts would please, commanded Blush to place them before the chief. The Bassa obeyed. And as he brought cloth, tobacco, and beads out of the bag the Imbundas grunted approvingly; but when he took out several jugs of gin they shouted joyfully,— Lodango the loudest of all.

"We will drink! We will drink!" cried they excitedly.

Lodango's desire to taste the intoxicant apparently was keen, for he snatched up one of the bottles, and displaying a dexterity which suggested that he had done the like many a time before, knocked off its head with a small stone. He raised the vessel toward his lips, but before it reached his mouth he paused. After hesitating a moment, he returned the jug to the ground, then glared at his warriors angrily and reproached them.

" How now, Imbundas," cried he, " would you make glad when Lodango is sorry? Wait! Muffy has brought Lodango a message from Lupelta. When Muffy has spoken, Lodango will be glad. Then Lodango will drink. Then Lodango's warriors will drink. Lodango has spoken! "

The warriors, evidently very much disappointed, grunted, and the chief, after giving another glance at the jug, which was tempting him sorely, resumed his conversation with Muffy.

" Muffy's dash is good! " cried he. " What message has Muffy brought to Lodango from Lupelta? Muffy must not lie. If Muffy lies, he will die the death! Lodango's ears are open ! "

The chief glared at the secretary expectantly, and the latter, saying to himself: " When the savage learns that I've brought no message I wonder what he'll do," shivered with apprehension.

" Lodango's ears are open! " repeated the chief sternly.

" Lo — Lodango," said Muffy haltingly, " I have brought you no message from Lupelta. But there is —"

" Wow! " broke in the chief, and he sprang to his feet. Towering over the shaking secretary, he fiercely continued: " Muffy has lied to Lodango! Muffy shall die the death! "

"Muffy shall die the death!" echoed the warriors ominously, and they struck their spears against their shields. Meanwhile Mr. Muffy was feeling very weak, and was cursing himself for having ventured to introduce his precious self into the Imbunda camp.

" Muffy's head is coming off! " added Lodango, and he raised his sword as though to decapitate the secretary right then and there.

When the chief raised his weapon Blush gave a yell, rolled over backward, sprang to his feet and disappeared into the forest; and as the Bassa gave voice, Muffy did the same.

" Stop! Stop ! " screamed he wildly, gazing up at the angry chief. Holding up the grain of corn which Poof ah had handed him, he quickly went on, " Your token! Your token! Lodango, the law says you must respect it! "

Lodango gazed at the token a moment, then, evidently with much reluctance, lowered his sword; and the surrounding savages, deprived of a blood-feast, groaned with dissatisfaction.

" I have not lied to you," added Muffy.

Lodango grunted and resumed his squatting attitude; and Mr. Muffy gave a sigh of relief.

" I do not know how to lie," concluded the secretary.

" Poof ah told Lodango that Muffy was bringing a message from Lupelta," said the chief.

" I told Poofah nothing of the kind! " cried Muffy.

Lodango muttered something and gazed darkly at the headman, who shivered with dread, while the other warriors moaned.

Muffy perceived that Poofah's life hung, as it were, by a very slender thread, which, under the slightest added strain, would surely snap; nevertheless, indifferent as to who might lose his head, provided his own were left upon his neck, he applied the fatal weight.

" Poofah lied to Lodango! " cried he.

" Poofah will lie no more! " exclaimed Lodango, and he nodded to the headman.

The warriors again moaned.

Poofah again approached the chief and laid his weapons and the ivory horn upon the ground before him.

" Lodango is Poofah's chief! " said he humbly.

"Good!" ejaculated the prince, and he waved his hand.

" Poofah will clear the path for Lodango!" said the headman; then he walked away with his head bowed and passed out of sight among the trees.

Two warriors unsheathed their swords and followed Poofah, and shortly afterward returned without him.

" Muffy," said Lodango as Poofah started to go away, " Lodango's ears are open! "

"Lodango," rejoined the secretary, "the President wants you to remove Lupelta from Monrovia." Lodango nodded his head and smiled.

" The President is cunning," said he. " Muffy will tell him to send Lupelta to Lodango."

" He cannot send her to you," returned Muffy. " But I have a plan which, if you will carry it out, will put the girl into your hands."

" Lodango's ears are open to hear Muffy's plan," said the chief eagerly.

" You must first agree to do something for me," said Muffy.

" Lodango will do! " responded the chief.

" You must give me some sort of a pledge that you will keep your promise," said Muffy.

" Muffy is cunning! " said Lodango.

He got upon his feet, and holding in the air the pouch from his breast addressed it thus: " O fetich! O witch! O charm! Lodango the great warrior, Lodango the slayer of men, Lodango the Imbunda lion, gives Muffy a pledge —"

The savage paused and gazed at his warriors, and they, holding their spears on high, solemnly cried: " O fetich, open your ears! "

" O fetich," continued the chief, " open your ears! Should Lodango break his pledge, may his arm wither! "

" May Lodango's arm wither 1 " echoed the warriors.

" May Lodango's blood in his veins turn to water! " went on the chief. " May brave men scorn Lodango! May old men and old women laugh at Lodango. May children mock Lodango! "

The warriors moaned.

" May Lodango eat dirt! " added the chief.

" May Lodango eat dirt! " cried the savages.

" Lodango has spoken! " concluded the prince, and he again squatted himself. Then he turned to Muffy and asked him if he were content.

" Quite," said the secretary.

" Muffy will now tell his plan to Lodango," said the chief.

" Very well," said Muffy, and he disclosed his plan.

When the secretary had finished, Lodango shook his head doubtfully, and said: " If Lodango does as Muffy desires, the President will send his fighting men to make war on the Imbundas."

" Are you afraid of war? " asked Muffy. ^ " Lodango will do! " exclaimed the chief tersely; then, springing to his feet, he shouted: " Imbundas, Lodango will devour them! "

" Lodango will devour them! " chorused the warriors.

The chief now pranced up and down, brandishing his sword, and boasted.

" Lodango am I! " yelled he.

" Lodango! Lodango! " screamed the warriors, and they clashed their spears and shields together.

" Imbunda Lion am I! " shouted the chief, still prancing. " Beloved of fetich am I; Lodango mil take the President's head! "

" Lodango! Lodango! " chorused the warriors, wild with excitement.

"Wow!" ejaculated Lodango, and he halted. "Wow! Wow! Wow!" vociferated the savages. Then they hushed and pointed at the jug of gin.

" Good! " ejaculated the chief. " Lodango is glad! Lodango will become drunk! " he added.

Then, snatching the jug up from the ground, the Imbunda Lion drank deeply.

The cuckoo-clock on the mantelpiece of the bedroom in which Mrs. Colonel Johnson-Subbs and her gallant spouse were slumbering began cuckooing. The matron opened her eyes, gaped, sat up, and proceeded to arouse her bedfellow.

" Colonel Johnson-Subbs, it's five o'clock! " exclaimed she.

The colonel snored on.

" Sleepy-head, open your eyes! " cried the lady. " You're not dead. Wake up! Wake up! "

The colonel still snored.

" Don't you hear me? continued the woman somewhat impatiently. " You're worse than the seven sleepers. Wake up! "

The slumberer grunted, opened and closed his eyes, one at a time, rolled over to his other side and resumed snoring.

" Drat the man, he sleeps like a log! " muttered the wife. She punched her husband; crying at the same time: " Wake up, wake up, I tell you! If you don't hurry up, you'll never get to the fort in time. Wake up!"

The sleeper slept on.

Mrs. Johnson-Subbs now became convinced that more drastic measures were required; accordingly, she got out of the bed, took up a jug of water, and carried it to the bedside.

"Wake up, I tell you!" she shouted, sprinkling her husband's face.

Evidently cold water did not agree with the colonel's constitution, for he spluttered and sat up at once.

" Good Lord, woman! " cried he sufferingly. " What are you trying to do ? Are you after giving me my death of cold? "

" If you don't jump out of that nest just as quickly as the good Lord will let you," cried the wife, " I'll give you more than your death of cold,— I'll drown you!" And she raised the jug as though to douse him.

The colonel, holding the bed-covering up to protect himself from the threatened shower, cried: "Stop it,— stop it, Sisserretta! Do you think I'm a fish? "

Sisserretta, unmoved by her husband's appeal, still held the jug on high.

" If you don't get a move on yourself," cried she, "I'll make you wish you had fins! You haven't got the sleepy-disease. It soon will be sunrise! Have you forgotten what day this is? Should you fail to fire the gun off this morning, the President will have you court-martialed,— your commission will be taken from you and I'll no longer be Mrs. Colonel Sisserretta John-son-Subbs. Get up! This is Independence Day! "

" Gehosophat, so it is! " cried the colonel, now wide awake; and he jumped from bed and proceeded to dress himself.

" Colonel Johnson-Subbs," said madam, as she returned the jug to the washstand, "if you'd only work as hard as you sleep, we'd soon be rich." Covering her coiffure de nuit with a loose headdress, she went on: " You must have been born in the Land of Nod."

" Sisserretta," growled the colonel, dressing, " you rattle away just like an empty barrel rolling down a hill." ' " When you shoot the gun off look out it doesn't explode and blow you all to smithereens," said the lady, and laughing, she started for her kitchen to scold her native servants into wakefulness.

The colonel soon afterward strutted from the house in full-dress military uniform. He climbed the hill and arrived at the fort just as the sun began pushing its big red face over the edge of the Atlantic; and at once hauled the " Lone Star " State's flag to the flag-staff's peak and discharged a cannon.

Thus it was announced to Monrovia that the Sun of Liberia's — th Independence Day had risen!

Soon after this announcement, busy hands began decorating the city: flags were raised over the Executive Mansion, the College, the several Consulates, as well as many private dwellings; and while these things were being done, the housewives started pots to boiling, and pans to baking, perfuming the atmosphere with appetite-provoking odours. Then, in a little while, visitors from " Up the River " and natives from the hinterland, all in holiday attire and curious to see the sights, began promenading through the streets. Groups of Kru-folk, of all ages and both sexes,— some fantastically dressed, others practically naked,— capering, shouting and singing, moved from house to house soliciting copper coin and rum. Several gaudily uniformed militia companies paraded, as did civic organizations badged and scarfed and wearing top-hats and long-tailed coats. They dancingly quick-stepped to the lively music of fifes and drums, or to the wonderful noises made by the city's only brass band.

This changing scene continued until about eleven o'clock. Then the citizens adjourned with their guests to breakfast tables and partook of the good things which, as has been intimated, had been titillating their olfactory organs during the entire morning. They did not linger over the sumptuous meals a long time, however, for the most important function of the day soon drew them to Government Square.

They assembled in the enclosure around a beflagged platform, which had been erected underneath the spreading limbs of a mammoth mango-plum tree. Upon the floor of the platform were seated civil, naval, and military officials, representatives of foreign countries, all, except the American Minister-Resident, wearing uniforms decorated with ribbons and stars; and scattered among these were a few ladies belonging to Monrovia's real aristocracy. Hulda was amongst the elite upon the platform, but Lupelta, Miss Pattie, and Whreabo, stood upon the ground among the common folk, as became their more humble rank.

Shortly after the people had thus gathered, the President of Liberia, the Vice-President, the Orator of the Day, the Chief Justice of the Supreme Court and his two Associate Justices, the Cabinet Ministers, Mr. Muffy and the Chaplain of the Senate emerged from the Executive Mansion. Escorted by a militia company and preceded by the brass band striving to play Coleridge Taylor's " Ethiopia Saluting the Colors," they marched into the enclosure and ascended to the floor of the platform. A Master of Ceremonies read the Program of the Day, then the Chaplain, his audience all standing and the men's heads reverentially bared, invoked Providence to shower blessings upon the Republic. Next the President read the Declaration of Independence, after which the Orator of the Day orated. When the forensic business was finished, the guns of the fort fired a National Salute, and the multitude, their tuneful voices harmonizing, sang Liberia's National Hymn with most pleasing effect, the brass band playing a respectable accompaniment.

The next and last number on the Official Program was the Presidential Reception, which was to be held in the Executive Mansion; but as this function, for which all the ladies in Monrovia had procured new costumes, was not to begin until eight o'clock in the evening,— hours hence,—- the assemblage dispersed.

Lupelta, Miss Pattie, and Whreabo returned to the Mission House, and all the time they were going there and after they had arrived the young folk chatted about the various things they had witnessed. Lupelta, who had been both astonished and amused, and was still in the " Seventh Heaven of Delight," was so voluble that at last Whreabo remarked upon it.

" Lupelta talks fast too much! " said he.

"Why shouldn't IP" exclaimed Lupelta. "Everything was so splendid! And Hulda was —"

"Lupelta!" broke in Miss Pattie gently.

"Yes, Miss Pattie? " said the girl questioningly.

" You should not call Miss Bartle by her first name," explained the spinster.

Lupelt gazed wonderingly at Miss Pattie.

" Why not? " asked she.

" Because it is impolite," replied Miss Pattie. " Miss Bartle is the President's stepdaughter and is entitled to be treated with great respect. You should use her surname."

" Surname " was a flight above the understanding of Miss Pattie's companions, and they were puzzled.

"Mammy, what is surname?" asked Whreabo.

Miss Pattie did her best to make the young folk comprehend the meaning of the word, but it cannot be truthfully stated that either of them became much enlightened. Native-like, though, in the interest of politeness, they pretended that they were, and the missionary was satisfied that her lesson had been read to attentive ears and would bear good fruit.

" Yes, my dear," she added after finishing her short lecture, " that's the reason you should not use her Christian name."

" But she told me to call her 'Hulda,' " objected Lupelta.

" Oh," exclaimed Miss Pattie, the wind taken out of her sails, " if she gave you permission, then it's all right. But what were you about to say regarding her? "

" I was on the point of saying she was charmingly dressed," said Lupelta.

Miss Pattie's countenance assumed an expression that suggested that the good lady's opinion was scarcely in agreement with Lupelta's.

" Well, I'm not sure," said she doubtfully. " While I do not pretend to be a judge as to what a young lady of Miss Bartle's rank should wear, I suppose it will hurt no one if I express my opinion under my own roof. It struck me that her dress was altogether too loud." .

The young folk were again mystified, and they discussed together in whispers, speaking in Imbunda, the matter of Hulda's dress being loud.

" Whreabo," said Lupelta, " how could Hulda's dress be too loud? Clothes can't talk." " Whreabo's head is empty of know," replied the lad.

" Lupelta wants to know," said the girl somewhat petulantly.

" Whreabo has found it! " responded the lad, grinning. "Dale gave Lupelta a box with a big horn?"

" Yes," whispered Lupelta.

" The box sings, talks, and makes music? " continued Whreabo.

" Yes," said the girl.

" Hulda's dress is like the box,— it talks! " said the young Imbunda, and he gazed at Lupelta triumphantly.

" Whreabo talks wind! " returned Lupelta. " Hulda's dress has no horn."

" Maybe the horn is underneath the dress," suggested Whreabo.

" Whreabo talks wind! " repeated Lupelta.

The lad's feelings were slightly hurt.

" Whreabo was trying to know," said he, reproachfully, " so Lupelta would be glad."

Lupelta perceived that she had wounded Whreabo and became repentant.

" Lupelta is very sorry too much," said she contritely.

Whreabo forgave the girl and smiled at her.

" Good! " said he. " Lupelta shall know. Whreabo will ask Miss Pattie." Then, speaking in English (as he spoke it) and more loudly, he went on: " Miss Pattie, you said Miss Bartle's clothes were too loud. Lupelta and Whreabo do not understand,— their ears are not open to that kind of talk. Plow can clothes make palaver? "

" I used a figure of speech," responded Miss Pattie. This explanation did not help the inquirers after knowledge, to the contrary, it rather increased their perplexity.

" Wow! " cried Whreabo, and he scratched his head. The lad's ejaculation evidently expressed what was in Lupelta's mind, for she smiled at him and nodded assentingly; then, addressing the missionary, she said: " Funny English words make Lupelta's ears tired. Miss Pattie will speak Imbunda, and then —"

" Certainly not! " broke in Miss Pattie with emphasis. " Captain Dale is very anxious for you to learn to speak English properly, and if I talk to you in Imbunda, you'll never learn."

" I am sorry," murmured Lupelta.

" English talk isn't so good as Imbunda," grumbled Whreabo, standing up for his own.

" You know nothing about it," retorted Miss Pattie. " Yes, Lupelta, when Captain Dale returns from Mt. Chocolate he will be very much pleased to find that you've improved."

" Dale was not kind," said Lupelta.

" Not kind? " exclaimed the spinster. "Why, Captain Dale is one of the kindest men I've ever met! "

" He should not have gone, away on Independence Day," said Lupelta.

" My dear," said Miss Pattie, " he was compelled to go. The President ordered him. Captain Dale is a soldier, and all soldiers have to obey the orders of their superiors. But it's growing late. At what time did Miss Bartle say she would come to take you to the picnic? "

" At four o'clock," replied Lupelta.

" It's close upon that now," remarked Miss Pattie, " so you had better go to your room and get ready. 'Twould never do to keep Miss Bartle waiting."

" I've only to put on my bonnet," said Lupelta, and she went from the room.

Miss Pattie took a Christian Herald from the table and proceeded to read it. Whreabo crossed to the window and looked out into the street just in time to perceive Hulda, reclining in a double-hammock carried by two strong natives, approaching the front door of the Mission House.

" Mammy coming! " cried the lad.

" Good gracious, and Lupelta not ready! " exclaimed the missionary, as she dropped the paper and arose. " Tell her to hurry up, Whreabo," she added, then hastened from the room and the house and joined Hulda in the street.

" Good-afternoon, Miss Pattie," exclaimed Hulda, greeting the spinster with a smile. " Is Lupelta ready? "

" She is putting on her bonnet, Miss Bartle. I'm sure you are exceedingly kind to trouble yourself so much."

" Not at all. I promised Captain Dale that I would take Lupelta with me to the picnic, and I must not break my promise."

"Yes, a promise is a promise—" began Miss Pattie, evidently intending to deliver a lecture; but Hulda, perceiving Lupelta emerge from the house, interrupted her.

" Ah, she is here! " cried Hulda.

Lupelta drew near the hammock, saluted Hulda bashfully and apologized for having kept her waiting.

" It's all right, my dear," said Hulda. " Jump in! "

The carriers lowered the hammock. Lupelta essayed to climb into it, but never having boarded a swinging vehicle before, failed; and had Whreabo, who was standing near, not caught her, she would have fallen to the ground. She persevered, however, and after several fruitless attempts, productive of many exclamations and much laughter, finally succeeded.

" I hope you will enjoy yourselves," said Miss Pattie, as Lupelta settled herself beside Hulda in the hammock.

"We intend to ! " said Hulda brightly. " All right, boys! "

" Good-bye, Miss Pattie! " cried Lupelta over her shoulder, as the carriers started.

The missionary bade the girls farewell, then she and Whreabo wratched the hammock until it disappeared down the incline on the wide road that ran to the " Long Beach." They then returned to the house, and shortly afterward the young Imbunda, with a hamper of provisions upon his head, also started for the picnic ground.

In the meantime Hulda and Lupelta, borne by the carriers, jog-trotting, passed the cemetery (an unsightly place containing uncared-for graves, rank grass, ant hills, and puddles of stagnant green water) and crossed a rivulet. They alighted here, and proceeded to gather wildflowers, while the carriers went on ahead with the hammock and passed out of sight.

As the girls, laughing and shouting, were thus employed, Lodango and a number of his warriors darted from the bush and seized them. Lupelta screamed and fainted, Hulda fought to release herself, but the savages overpowered her, raised her from the ground, and, bearing her off, followed Lodango, who, carrying Lupelta, had already disappeared in the bush.

When Lodango and his warriors sprang from the bush Whreabo was coming down the road more than a hundred yards away. The lad perceived what was happening. He cried out in alarm, dropped the hamper and, shouting loudly and angrily, raced at top-speed towards the rivulet. Before he had run half the distance, though, the abductions were accomplished. Convinced that it would not only be useless, but a waste of valuable time for him to pursue the abductors, he halted and, after having made up his mind how to act, turned into the cemetery, whence he passed, running, to a path that extended in the direction of Mt. Chocolate.

About a quarter of an hour later, Lodango, carrying the still unconscious Lupelta, reached an open place in the forest and here halted to await the arrival of his warriors, who were bringing Hulda.

" Now," he remarked, as he halted, "Lupelta will walk," and, unaware of her condition, he lowered her from his shoulder, expecting her to stand. But the girl slipped from his hands to the ground.

" Wow! " cried he as Lupelta fell. He gazed amazedly at her for a moment, then cried: " Lupelta will get up! "

Of course she did not move.

Lodango gave vent to an angry exclamation. Then he bent over the girl and perceived that her eyes were closed. He thought that she was sleeping.

" Lupelta will wake up! " cried he, shaking her gently. But when she did not move, he gazed at her more closely, and perceiving that her face was pale as death itself, he became alarmed. He placed his ear over her heart, but its pulsations were so weak that he failed to hear them; he laid his hand over her mouth, but he could not feel her breathe. He concluded that she was dead,— that some witch had killed her.

" Wow! " exclaimed he, rising, " witch has killed Lupelta."

Apparently Lodango was more angry than grieved.

He began cudgelling his brain, hoping thus to discover the guilty witch, and while so employed, his warriors brought Hulda into his presence.

When Hulda saw the chief she wrenched herself free from the hands of her captors and crossed to him.

" Lodango," began she angrily, " how dare —"

" Hulda will hush! " interrupted Lodango. Pointing at unconscious Lupelta, he added, 6i Hulda must not make big talk in the presence of the dead! "

When Hulda saw Lupelta stretched upon the ground she became filled with apprehension and, for the moment forgetting her own trouble, angrily exclaimed: " Cruel savage, what have you done to her? "

Then crossing to the recumbent girl, she noticed that Lupelta was merely in a faint. She murmured thankfully, snatched a water-gourd from one of the savages and proceeded to bathe Lupelta's face.

Lodango, seeing Hulda thus employed, became convinced that she was the witch who, as he now believed, had killed Lupelta, and that now, not satisfied with the mischief she had already done, was disfiguring the supposed remains.

" Hulda will stop! " cried he angrily, and he snatched Hulda away from Lupelta and thrust her to one side.

With difficulty Hulda saved herself from falling, then she faced the enraged chief.

" Lodango," cried she, " what do you —"

" Hulda killed Lupelta! " broke in the chief.

The surrounding warriors glanced at Hulda and murmured angrily.

" I killed her! " exclaimed Hulda wonderingly.

" Hulda was making dead Lupelta's face ugly! " continued Lodango.

"What do you mean?" asked Hulda, thoroughly at sea.

" Hulda is a wicked witch! " said the chief. " Hulda was vexed because Lupelta wanted to go to Lodango's kraal. Hulda killed Lupelta ! "

His warriors again murmured angrily.

Hulda perceived the error that Lodango was laboring under and felt like laughing in his face; but, an idea flashing into her mind that the situation might be utilized to benefit Lupelta and herself, she refrained.

" Hulda shall drink sassa-wood! " continued Lodango.

Hulda, acting upon the thought that had come into her head, brought a strange expression into her face and advanced toward the savages, waving her hands mysteriously and moaning.

Lodango and his warriors were not easily frightened by things mundane, but here -was something that smacked of the supernatural, and it alarmed them; anyhow, when Hulda advanced in the manner described, they murmured with dismay and retreated from her.

Hulda, remarking that Lupelta was regaining consciousness, halted close to her, and, still waving her hands at the Imbundas, cried: " Hulda is a terrible witch! Hulda will resuscitate the dead! "

The savages glared at Hulda and uttered awed mur-murings.

Lupelta sighed.

" Lupelta breathes! " cried Hulda, and she pointed at the recovering girl.

The savages, their eyes bulging, broke into cries of amazement.

Lupelta sighed again, opened her eyes, and endeavoured to rise; and Hulda, still pointing at her, exclaimed : "Behold! Lupelta once more is alive!"

When the Imbunda Lion and his warriors saw Lupelta start to rise they gave a terrific yell, and ran, higgledy-piggledy, each doing his very best, until' they had put several yards between themselves and the two girls. Then they halted and jabbered excitedly among themselves, while Hulda assisted Lupelta to her feet.

" Why, Hulda," said Lupelta, gazing about dazedly, " what has happened? Where are we? What does —" Then, catching sight of Lodango, she remembered and broke off. Uttering an exclamation of distress she clung to Hulda a moment, then crossed to the chief and knelt at his feet.

" Oh, Lodango," cried she plaintively, " why are you so cruel? Why have you stolen Lupelta from Monrovia? "

" Lodango is taking Lupelta back to her home," said the chief.

" Lupelta does not want to go back to —" began the girl.

" Lupelta talks wind! " broke in Lodango. Turning to one of his warriors, he said: " Moofa will take Lupelta away quickly before witch kills her again."

" Moofa will do! " cried the warrior, and he seized Lupelta.

Hulda, incensed by this treatment of her companion, advanced toward the savages angrily, crying: "Stop! Stop!"

" Witch will not come too close! " cried Lodango to Hulda, and he raised his spear against her.

Hulda halted, wondering what she should do. She was almost sobbing.

Moofa raised Lupelta to his shoulder and bore her from the place just as Mr. Muffy and two Imbundas entered at its other side.

When Hulda perceived Muffy she uttered a cry of joy as well as surprise, and ran toward him.

Lodango grunted and lowered his spear.

" Pidgley, you here! " cried Hulda to the mulatto as she joined him.

" As you see," returned Muffy.

" Are you a prisoner, too ? " asked the girl.

" It rather looks that way," said the secretary.

" How strange! " exclaimed Hulda. " How did it happen ? "

" It happened because I thought more of you than of myself," said the self-sacrificing Mr. Muffy.

Hulda gazed amazedly at the gentleman.

" Because you thought more of me than of yourself?" said she wonderingly.

" Yes, exactly," said Muffy. " When Lodango carried you off I was coming down the road and saw everything. I was distracted with alarm, of course. Careless of what might happen to myself, I followed the savages into the bush." Indicating the two Imbundas who were with him, he added: "These beasts pounced upon me, and here I am."

Hulda felt very grateful to the heroic Mr. Muffy and gazed into his one eye in a way that made his heart flutter joyfully.

" Dear Pidgley," said she tenderly, " I'll never forget — But now you must speak to Lodango. You must persuade him to let us go. We must get back to Monrovia at once, so that I may have troops sent to rescue poor Lupelta. You'll not find it difficult to induce him to release us, for he is afraid of me. He thinks I'm a witch." Taking hold of his arm, she pleaded: " Come, Pidgley," and endeavoured to draw him toward the chief.

Mr. Muffy, pretending to be much disquieted, stood fast.

" Wait a moment," said he. " Before I speak to the savage you must tell me all that's happened. Why does he think you are a witch? "

Hilda explained; and when she had finished Muffy seemed to be thoroughly upset.

" I'm afraid, Hulda," said he gravely, " that you've made a very serious mistake. If the Imbunda really believes that you are a witch, he'll be unwilling to let you go."

" Surely the savage durst not keep me!" exclaimed Hulda.

" I imagine he has nerve enough to do almost anything," said Muffy.

" I'll frighten the life out of him! " cried Hulda. " I'll threaten to bewitch him and all his tribe! If he —"

" Hush, Hulda," broke in Muffy. " If these savages who have me in their charge were to hear you and report to Lodango, we would be dragged to the Imbunda kraal as sure as fate. You stay here while I speak to the chief."

" Very well," agreed Hulda, " bring him to his senses."

" If I can," responded Muffy, and he left her.

" Good! " cried Lodango, as the secretary approached him. " Muffy is welcome! Muffy must take the witch away at once."

"Witch! What witch?" cried Muffy, apparently very much puzzled.

" Hulda," answered the chief, pointing his spear at her.

The warriors grunted and glared nervously across the open at Hulda.

" Hulda a witch! "' cried Muffy amazedly. " Why, Lodango, have you got a screw loose? "

" Hulda killed Lupelta! " returned the chief. " Hulda brought Lupelta to life again! Hulda has a big fetich! "

Muffy laughed loudly, he was seemingly very much amused.

" Muffy will take Hulda away quickly! " the chief insisted, scowling at the mulatto.

" She fooled you," said Muffy, sobered by the chief's black look.

" Lodango saw," retorted the chief stubbornly.

" Lupelta was merely in a faint," said the secretary.

" No! " cried Lodango vehemently. " An Imbunda woman would not faint unless she was hurt too much. Lodango did not hurt Lupelta. Lupelta was dead! "

" Lupelta was dead! " echoed the warriors.

" Absurd ! " cried Muffy. " Come, Lodango, let's start for your kraal."

" Hulda must not go to the Imbunda kraal," said the chief firmly.

"What about the pledge you gave me?" asked Muffy.

Lodango and his warriors burst into exclamations of dismay and gazed at each other, evidently in great perturbation.

"The pledge must not be broken, you know," added Muffy.

The chief had no choice but to keep his pledge, so he reluctantly gave way.

" Lodango will do," said he surlily. " Muffy will bring Hulda to the Imbunda kraal. Muffy will walk with Hulda behind Lodango,— a long way behind."

The warriors groaned lugubriously.

" A long way behind! " repeated the chief, and he, followed by his warriors, who grunted and shook their heads doubtfully, hastened from the place.

Muffy walked slowly toward Hulda, endeavouring to invent some sort of a tale plausible enough to deceive her; but, before he could build up a figment that suited him, Hulda, too impatient to await his coming, ran forward and met him. However, as the event proved, he was excellent at improvisation.

" Well, Pidgley," said Hulda eagerly, as she raced up to him, " has Lodango consented? "

Mr. Muffy, apparently very much dejected, gazed at Hulda pityingly.

" No," said he sadly.

Hulda's face became pale.

" He refused? " asked she anxiously.

" Absolutely."

" The wretch! " cried the girl angrily. " But why ? "

" You acted the part of witch altogether too well," replied Muffy. " He said your services were required in his kraal."

" Why didn't you undeceive him? "

" I tried to, but he wouldn't have it."

" Did you tell him that my stepfather would make him pay dearly for his folly? "

" Yes; but it didn't seem to disturb him a little bit."

"You might have bribed him."

" I tried to, but I might as well have been offering parched locust to a white man. The savage was not to be moved by threats nor promises."

" Well," said Hulda vehemently, " I for one won't go to his horrid kraal! "

" You will be compelled," said Muffy, and he pointed at the two Imbundas who were standing near.

" Pidgley, there are only two of them, and we are two," said Hulda suggestively.

This suggestion evidently did not agree with Mr. Muffy's temperament, for he shivered, and his yellow face grew more yellow.

" They are big and strong, and I am no giant, you know," said he somewhat weakly.

Hulda glanced pityingly,— contemptuously,— at Muffy.

" No, you are not," agreed she. Then, unaware that Muffy had motioned to the warriors, and that they were approaching her, she went on: " One of us could escape, I'm sure. If you were to run in one direction while I —"

" Hulda will come ! " growled the voice of one of the savages, and he laid his hand heavily upon the girl's shoulder; then, when she drew back, he and his companion raised her bodily and carried her from the open.

And Muffy, laughing inwardly, followed.

About thirty hours later Lodango and his warriors led their prisoners and Mr. Muffy into the Imbunda kraal. Lupelta was delivered into the care of Reesha, who was much rejoiced at the girl's return, and Hulda was placed in the guest-hut, with a young girl named Saafa as her attendant.

Lupelta and Hulda arrived thoroughly exhausted, hence, despite their sad situation, they soon slumbered. Muffy also was fatigued. But, too elated and excited to sleep, he passed the remainder of the night at the palaver-ground watching the townsfolk rejoicing, with singing and dancing, over the successful issue of their chief's expedition and his safe return to the kraal.

On the following morning Reesha and Lupelta were in the former's hut. The old woman was squatting before a native loom, and weaving country-cloth, and every now and then she would glance at Lupelta, sleeping upon a pile of skins spread upon the floor.

After a while Lupelta awoke. At first she thought herself dreaming; the next moment, though, the truth dawned upon her, then she sighed so sadly that Reesha became concerned, stopped her labor, and crossed to the young girl's side.

" Lupelta," said Reesha, as she drew near, " what's the matter? " Squatting herself upon the skins beside the girl, she went on: " Lupelta sighed big. Is Lupelta sorry? "

Lupelta really loved Reesha, was fond of her playmates, and of the simple life from which the slavers had torn her; yet she was longing to return to Monrovia. She wreathed her arms around the old woman's neck and wept softly against her bosom.

Reesha caressed the weeping girl tenderly.

"Why does Lupelta shed tears?" asked she anxiously.

" Oh, Mother," murmured the girl, " I am afraid! "

" Afraid, my child? "

" Yes, Mother."

" Is Lupelta afraid of the cruel men who stole her from Reesha? "

" I am not afraid of them, Mother. They are imprisoned in Monrovia."

" Is Lupelta afraid of — of — Ah, yes, his name is Dale. Is Lupelta afraid of Dale? "

" Yes, Mother," replied Lupelta mendaciously, blushing at her fault.

" Lupelta need not be afraid," said Reesha reassuringly. " If Dale comes to the Imbunda kraal after Lupelta, Lodango will take his head. Lodango will devour Dale! "

Lupelta was certain that Dale would attempt to rescue her and Reesha's words set her all a-shiver with dread. She must stop his coming. But how? In the briefest time possible any number of plans entered her head, only to be dismissed as being infeasible. However, she continued the thinking process and at last got hold of a project which seemed workable,— and upon this plan she fixed. Pleased by her success, she exclaimed joyfully.

Reesha, supposing from the girl's exclamation, that her direful remark had reassured Lupelta, smiled.

" Yes, Lupelta," said she, " if Dale comes to the Imbunda kraal, Lodango will make him sorry too much! "

Lupelto took the old woman's bands in her own and held them.

" Mother," said she, gazing pleadingly into the other's eyes, " do you love me? "

" Yes, Reesha loves Lupelta," was the tenderly voiced answer. " Reesha loves Lupelta more than she loves her own life."

" If I were unhappy, would you grieve? "

" Reesha would grieve too much! " said the old woman. " But why does Lupelta ask? "

" If Dale were harmed, my heart would break," replied the girl.

" Why would Lupelta be sorry ? "

" He has been very kind to me," said Lupelta, reluctant to speak of her love.

" Good! Is Dale cunning? "

" He is wise indeed! " cried the girl.

" If Dale is cunning, he will not come to the Imbunda kraal."

" He is also brave," said Lupelta.

She was still wearing the garments of civilization, rings were on her fingers, a necklace encircled her neck. Directing Reesha's attention to the ornaments, she went on: " These jewels belong to Dale. He will come to recover them. I would prevent him from coming."

" Lodango will prevent Dale," said Reesha shortly. " Mother, Lodango would not be able to stand before Dale. Dale has too many fighting men."

" Then Lodango would run away," responded Reesha. " He would take Lupelta with him,— the jewels, too." " No, Mother," said Lupelta, " Lodango would not run away. He would fight Dale. One or the other of them would die."

Reesha had shot her last bolt, and she confessed as much.

" Reesha has no more cunning," said she. " Lupelta must ask fetich to help her."

Lupelta smiled scornfully.

As well ask help from the winds! " cried she.

Reesha started with alarm and glanced nervously toward the open door. And Lupelta, not perceiving the old woman's agitation, continued throwing mud, as it were, at the faith of the Imbundas.

" Yes, Mother," she said, " I now know that fetich is but a myth. I know there is a God! I worship —" " Lupelta will hush," whispered Reesha, her face livid. " Lupelta and Reesha will be given to the torment-women!"

" No one heard," said Lupelta, lowering her voice. Reesha, perspiring with fear, arose and closed the door; then, returning to Lupelta, said: " Lupelta must be more cunning."

" I was careless," admitted Lupelta contritely.

" Lupelta," said Reesha after a brief pause, " when Reesha was young she lived with a white man and his wife in their people's kraal near the big water. They told Reesha about their God, but acted contrary to the way they preached. They were cruel to Reesha too much! Reesha could not believe in their God. Reesha's face smiled, but her heart hated! Reesha made the white man and his wife sorry too much! "

" Why, what did you do to them, Mother? " asked Lupelta, interested.

"Yes, made them sorry! " repeated Reesha reflectively.

Had the pictures from Reesha's past, which were floating before the eyes of the mind of the old woman, been visible to Lupelta, the girl would have been astounded. As it was, though, she merely thought of Dale and of how to prevent him from risking his life.

" Very well, Mother," said she, " you must tell me at some other time. We now have to carry out a plan that I've thought of to keep Dale from coming. I must send him the jewels and a message."

Reesha had some idea of the value of the gewgaws, and was amazed that Lupelta was willing to part with them.

" Will Lupelta give them to Dale? " asked she.

" Yes," returned the girl, though it hurt her to say so, " I will give them to Dale. Lodango must send them to him at once."

" Lodango will not send an Imbunda to Monrovia," said Reesha. " Lodango has stolen Hulda from Monrovia and the President must be much vexed."

" He could send Muffy," suggested Lupelta.

" Perhaps Muffy would refuse to go," said Reesha.

" Lodango could compel Muffy."

" Lodango could; but would he? " said Reesha doubtfully.

Lupelta saw that unless Lodango could be persuaded, her plan must fail. She was nonplused. After a moment, though, she thought of a way whereby, provided she had the strength to pursue it, the chief could be bribed. The method was repugnant to her, but the thought that, if she held back, Dale might lose his life was infinitely more repugnant. She decided to act upon the idea.

" Mother," said she, " if Lodango does this thing for me, I will marry him at once."

Reesha smiled all over her face.

" Lupelta will? " exclaimed she eagerly.

The girl abhorred the great sacrifice she was committing herself to make; but, holding her tottering courage up, requested Reesha to summon the chief.

" Tell him," she concluded, " that Lupelta will consent to become his wife. Only that, Mother."

" Good! " cried Reesha, and she hastened from the hut to seek Lodango.

"Alas! Alas!" murmured Lupelta; then she wept.

After a few moments she dried her eyes, arose from the skins, and prepared herself to receive Lodango, who, with Reesha, soon entered.

Lodango, smiling happily, halted near the door and gazed hungrily at Lupelta, who stood with her hands clasped, her head bowed, and her heart beating wildly.

" Lodango is glad! " cried the chief.

" Lupelta welcomes Lodango! " returned the girl.

"Good!" ejaculated the prince, and he advanced, his arms open to embrace her.

" Lodango must not! " cried Lupelta, avoiding him.

Lodango halted, lowered his arms, and glanced darkly at Reesha.

" Reesha has lied to Lodango! " cried he fiercely. " Reesha shall be sorry too."

"No, no!" cried the old woman alarmed, " Reesha has not lied to Lodango. Lupelta will do! "

" Lodango's ears are open! " exclaimed the chief, frowning at Lupelta.

" Reesha has not lied to Lodango," said the girl somewhat weakly.

The chief smiled.

" The vex has gone from Lodango," said he.

" Does Lodango desire me to talk the truth? " asked Lupelta.

Lodango thought a moment, then he said: " 'Tis better to be made a little while sorry by truth than to be made a little while glad by bad lies."

"Lodango is cunning!" joined in Reesha, flattering the chief.

" Lodango is cunning too much! " agreed the prince. " Lupelta, Lodango's ears are open! "

" Lodango, I do not love you," said the girl tersely. "Truth is making Lodango sorry too much!" said the chief ruefully.

" Only for a little while," cried Reesha encouragingly.

Lodango grunted.

" I have left my heart in Monrovia," went on Lupelta.

Lodango was not a sentimentalist.

"Lupelta's heart may be in Monrovia," said he grinning, " but her body is in the Imbunda kraal."

"I — I — love Dale," confessed the girl.

" Good! " cried the chief, not at all upset. " Dale will keep Lupelta's heart, Lodango will keep Lupelta's body. If Dale comes to the Imbunda kraal after Lupelta's body, Lodango will make Dale sorry. Wow!"

" Lodango will take Dale's head! " cried Reesha.

" Lodango will devour Dale! " cried the chief. " Dale is a coward! "

The chief's disparagement of the captain's courage so incensed Lupelta that she became indiscreet.

" Dale is not a coward! " cried she angrily. " He is a brave warrior! He is —"

" Lupelta talks like wind! " broke in the chief. " Lodango will send for Dale to come to the Imbunda kraal. Lodango will fight Dale! Lupelta will see who is the braver,— Lodango or Dale. Wow!"

" Dale shall not come! " cried Lupelta heatedly. " If he does, Lodango, I will not marry you! "

The chief scowled.

" If Lodango commands," said he, " what can Lupelta do but obey ? "

" I can die! " cried the girl proudly.

Lodango chuckled.

" Lupelta died once, and Hulda brought Lupelta to life," said he. " If Lupelta dies again, Hulda will bring Lupelta to life again."

Lupelta, quite as much in the dark regarding swooning as was Lodango, hushed, confounded. But Reesha, better informed, became alarmed.

" Lupelta must not die! " cried the old woman. " Lodango," she continued, appealing to the chief, " it is but a simple thing that Lupelta asks, and —"

" Reesha will hush! " interrupted the prince sternly. " Lupelta knows how to talk."

" Lodango, Lupelta is young," said Reesha. " Lupelta has not lived long enough yet to have learned cunning."

" Lupelta is young," agreed the chief; and smiling at the girl and moderating his tone into gentleness, he went on: " Lupelta need not be afraid. Lupelta will tell Lodango all that is in her mouth. Lodango's ears are open big for Lupelta's talk! "

Lupelta sighed sadly, drew the rings from her fingers, and removed the necklace from her neck. She gazed wistfully at the ornaments for a moment or two, then, swallowing a sob, pushed them hastily into Lodango's hand.

The chief took the jewels eagerly and examined them admiringly.

" Lodango will send them to Dale," said Lupelta.

The chief, his attention still fixed upon the gems, shook his head in negation.

" Lodango must not send an Imbunda to Monrovia," said he.

" Lodango could send Muffy," suggested Reesha.

The chief, having fallen in love with the trinkets, made a bid for them.

" They please Lodango," said he. " Lodango will keep them. Lodango will send Dale oil and ivory."

He looked at Lupelta appealingly, as though begging her to consent; and it entered her mind that probably she could bribe him with them to release her.

" Yes, Lodango, they are beautiful! " cried she.

" Beautiful too much! " agreed the chief. " Lodango is hungry for them! "

" If they belonged to Lodango," went on the girl, " he would be the best decorated chief in all the world! "

"Wow!" cried the chief, much moved.

" If they are sent to Monrovia, Lodango will never see them again," continued the girl.

" Lupelta's words hit Lodango hard," said the chief dismally.

" Dale's God help me! " thought Lupelta, and, turning pale, she shot her arrow.

" Lodango," said she appealingly, " send me to Monrovia and keep the jewels."

The chief's countenance grew stern, and he dropped the jewels to the floor.

" Lodango prefers Lupelta to gems and jewels," said he.

" O Lodango," cried Lupelta, unwilling to surrender all hope; " be merciful! Do not be —"

"Lupelta will hush!" interrupted the chief. "Is the Imbunda Chief so poor that he must barter away the woman he would make his wife? No! When the banana fruit ripens Lupelta will be glad she is in the Imbunda kraal. Muffy will take the jewels to Dale. Lodango has spoken! "

Lodango's dictum was not to be opposed, so Lupelta, though most unwillingly, submitted.

" You will send Muffy at once? " said she sadly.

" Muffy is in the guest-hut with Hulda," said the chief. " Lupelta will tell Muffy the message and give him the jewels. Come!"

He strode from the hut.

" Lupelta will go quickly," cried Reesha.

" Bring the jewels, Mother," said Lupelta.

And she followed Lodango.

Saafa's costume consisted of a beaded belt, a small horn, and a thin layer of chalk. She was squatting upon her haunches and gazing thoughtfully at Hulda.

" Hulda's face is beautiful," said the young native.

Hulda, having slept well and breakfasted heartily, for the moment was feeling quite comfortable. Her vanity was pleasantly stirred by Saafa's naive remark, and she smiled cheerfully.

" Do you think so? " said she.

" Saafa thinks so," replied the native. After a brief pause she said: " Is Hulda ugly underneath? "

Hulda laughed.

" What a funny question! " cried she. " Of course I am not."

" If Hulda's arms and legs are proper," said Saafa gravely, " they should not be covered up." Touching her horn, she added: " No one can see whether or not Hulda still wears the horn."

Hulda blushed and diverted the conversation into a fresh channel.

" How old are you, Saafa," asked she.

" Saafa has not counted the days, but she has lived many," was the reply.

Though Saafa was fully developed, she certainly was not more than thirteen or fourteen years of age.

Hulda perceived this, and was amused by the girl's claim to many days.

" You are quite a Methuselah," said Hulda.

Saafa frowned.

" Is Hulda calling Saafa bad names? " she asked.

" Bad names ? Why, no! "

" What is Methuselah? "

" It means a very old person,— one who has lived many years," explained Hulda.

" Hulda's words are misfits," said Saafa. " Saafa is not old. Saafa has lived many days, not many years."

Hulda laughingly admitted her error.

" Is Hulda a witch? " said Saafa suddenly, after a pause.

" Good gracious, Saafa! " cried Hulda impatiently. " Have you, too, got that silly idea into your head. Do I look like a witch? "

Saafa studied Hulda's face critically.

" Hulda's eyes are kind," said she, " and her lips smile tenderly. If Hulda is a witch, she is not a wicked one."

" I'm not a witch of any kind! " exclaimed Hulda.

" If not, then why did Lodango say Hulda must not come to the Imbunda kraal? "

Hulda gazed amazedly at Saafa.

"Saafa," cried she, " what are you talking about? Lodango compelled me to come."

" Saafa's father said Lodango was afraid of Hulda," answered the girl. " Lodango did not want Hulda to come."

Hulda was incredulous.

" Your father must have been mistaken," said she.

" Saafa's father does not talk lies! Saafa's father heard Lodango tell Muffy to take Hulda back to Monrovia."

" What does this mean ? " thought Hulda.

" Are you sure? " said she to the girl.

"Yes; Saafa's father heard!" repeated the young native emphatically.

Hulda, suspecting that she was on the eve of making a strange discovery, became pale.

" And what else did your father hear? " asked she.

" Saafa's father heard Lodango and Muffy talk too much!"

" You must tell me,— tell me quickly! " cried Hulda, somewhat agitated.

" Saafa's father heard Lodango tell Muffy that Hulda was a witch —"

She paused and struck at a mosquito that was buzzing near her head.

" Yes,— yes? " cried Hulda impatiently.

Saafa killed the insect.

" Weenee-weenee won't make sing any more! " cried she triumphantly.

" Never mind the mosquito; tell me what else your father heard."

" Saafa's father heard Muffy tell Lodango that Hulda was not a witch. Muffy forced Lodango to bring Hulda to the Imbunda kraal."

Hulda was beginning to see the part Muffy had played in her abduction, and she felt like murdering him.

" Did your father hear Muffy say why he had Lodango bring me here? " asked she.

" Muffy wants to make Hulda his wife."

Abominable! " cried Hulda, aflame with anger.

Saafa shrunk back and gazed somewhat alarmedly at Hulda.

"Wow!" cried she. "Hulda is vexed too much! Is Hulda vexed with Saafa? "

" Not with you, Saafa," returned Hulda. " You have done me an important service and deserve to be rewarded. What shall I give you ? "

Saafa glanced at Hulda's finger-rings and earrings, but none of them exactly pleased her fancy; she fixed her choice upon a bright glass button that was attached to Hulda's blouse.

" Saafa wants that," said she, pointing at the button.

" You must bring me a knife so I can cut it off," said Hulda.

"♦Saafa will bring Hulda a knife. Is Hulda vexed with Muffy? "

" Yes, very angry! "

" Good! If Hulda is, vexed with Muffy, Saafa is vexed with Muffy! " She placed her mouth close to Hulda's ear and whispered: " Saafa will put witch in Muffy's food. Muffy will die quickly. Muffy won't vex Hulda any more. Saafa will do! Muffy will go into a hole and —"

Hulda was far from being one of the angelic kind of her sex, still Saafa's Borgia-like suggestion staggered her. So, pushing the innocent-minded would-be poisoner back, she interrupted her hurrying plans for Muffy's annihilation.

"Hush! Hush!" cried she. "You shouldn't be so wicked! "

Saafa was amazed.

" Saafa is not wicked," said she. " Saafa is good! Hulda is Saafa's friend! Saafa wants to help Hulda."

" 'Twould be murder, Saafa; and to do murder is very, very wicked," said Hulda.

" Hulda saw Saafa just now kill weenee-weenee? "

" Yes."

" Weenee-weenee wanted to bite Saafa, so Saafa killed Aveenee-weenee. Wow!"

Perhaps Hulda in her heart did not altogether disagree with Saafa's Mosaical tenet, but she kept her opinon, whatever it was, to herself.

" You must not give any medicine to Muffy," said she firmly.

" If I do not, will Hulda make him trouble too much?"

" I will indeed! " said Hulda with emphasis.

"Good!" ejaculated Saafa; and then, evidently impatient to see Hulda at work on Muffy, she added: " When will Hulda make Muffy trouble? "

" At once," said Hulda. " Go, Saafa, and tell him to come to me. Go quickly! "

" Saafa will do!" cried the girl much pleased; and she hastened from the hut.

Mr. Muffy entered a few minutes later. He bade Hulda good-morning, and, uninvited, placed himself down upon the skins beside her.

" I trust you slept well? " he added, with an air of great concern.

Hulda, though she wds full of wrath, smiled at Muffy very pleasantly.

" I was very tired, so slept like a top," said she. With a disdainful glance around the room, she went on: " I wonder that I did, though; for, as you must admit, Pidgley, this place is not exactly what I'm used to."

"I should say not," responded Mr. Muffy; his air was sympathetic. " The Imbundas seem to have very primitive ideas as to furniture and things. But, patience, Hulda, there shall be an improvement! "

" What an untruthful wretch he is! " thought Hulda.

" Yes," continued the secretary, " I'll see that you are made comfortable. I noticed some things in Lodango's compound which you'll find useful. I'll have them brought here."

While Muffy was speaking, Saafa entered, carrying a long, four-edged native dagger. She now crossed to the skins and placed the weapon upon them beside Hulda, at the same time saying: " Saafa has brought Hulda a knife."

Muffy gazed amazedly at the dagger, at Saafa, and at Hulda,— each in turn.

Hulda smiled at Saafa and thanked her.

" What are you going to do with that murderous-looking thing? " asked Muffy.

" Possibly I'll kill a rat with it," said Hulda.

"Wow!" cried Saafa, much interested.

Muffv scowled at Saafa and ordered her to leave the hut.

" Saafa will stay," said the girl contumaciously.

" Yes, Saafa, you will remain, please," said Hulda.

" Good! " cried the young Imbunda, and she made a face at Muffy, crossed to a corner of the room, and squatted herself.

Hulda took up the dagger and felt its point with her finger.

" Pidgley," cried she, " it is as keen as a needle! " Then, placing the point of the weapon against his breast, she cried: " Couldn't I? " and pushed it through his shirt-front until it actually punctured his precious skin.

Evidently Mr. Muffy did not like the feel of the cold steel, for he turned pale and started back.

" Great Scott! Are you mad! " cried he, as he flinched. " It was almost in me! Put down the beastly thing."

Hulda laughed and dropped the dagger; and Saafa, who had been hoping for quite a different and more tragic denouement, grunted with disgust.

"Returning to our subject, Pidgley," said Hulda; " do you think that Lodango will let me have the things ? "

" If I make the request, yes," responded the secretary.

" You seem to have considerable influence over the savage? "

" He has taken quite a liking to me."

" If that be so," said Hulda, " why don't you persuade him to release us? "

" He is willing to let me go, but not you. He still insists that you are a witch."

" Hulda is not a —" broke out Saafa.

" Hush, Saafa," interrupted Hulda quickly, afraid that the girl would say too much.

" Send her away! " cried Muffy, again scowling at Saafa.

" The savage is absurd! " cried Hulda. " My stepfather shall make him pay dearly for his folly."

" After the event," said Muffy gloomily.

" Surely, if I pay him his price he will release me. Don't you think so? "

" I've already offered him everything thinkable, but uselessly."

" I've never before heard of a savage who couldn't be bought over," said Hulda.

" Lodango seems to be one out of the ordinary," returned Muffy.

" Is there nothing we can do? " asked Hulda hopelessly.

" There's one thing, but, of course, it's not to be thought of," said Muffy; and he looked at Hulda out of the corners of his eyes.

Hulda suspected that she knew what the " one thing " was and she felt like strangling Mr. Muffy. Instead of doing that, though, she innocently said: " What is that, Pidgley? "

" If you were to get married," said the secretary, " the charge of witchcraft against you would fall to the ground. Lodango would release you at once."

Hulda smiled sweetly at Muffy, but behind her smile was the fiercest kind of anger.

" If Mr. Right were to offer himself," said she, " I might not object."

Muffy, though apparently calm, was much perturbed. He moistened his lips with his tongue and, after hesitating a moment, endeavoured to net his fish.

" We — well, Hulda," stammered he, " to get yourself out of the mess you might — might marry me."

" You? " cried Hulda, encouraging him with a charming smile.

Mr. Muffy was deceived by Hulda's manner and he became more bold.

" You might do much worse, you know," said he confidently, inflating his chest.

" Am I to understand, Pidgley," said Hulda sweetly, " that you are offering me your heart and hand? "

" Exactly," replied Muffy, flushing.

" Repeat it when we are again in Monrovia," said Hulda softly, with an air such as young ladies usually assume under like circumstances.

" And if I do,— what then ? "

" Perhaps my answer won't break your heart," returned Hulda, her voice a soft whisper.

" Do you mean it? " cried Muffy eagerly.

" Why shouldn't I? " said Hulda evasively.

For a moment Mr. Muffy was elated beyond description ; then doubts visited him, and his face clouded.

" But what about Dale? " he suspiciously asked.

"Well, what about him?" returned Hulda lightly.

" And the love-potion? " continued Muffy.

" Pidgley, what a silly chap you are! " cried Hulda petulantly.

"Silly?"

" Yes, silly. Did I ever tell you it was for Captain Dale? "

" But you did tell Lobue."

Hulda flushed.

" How do you know I did? " asked she.

" I overheard you."

Mr. Muffy now disclosed how he had listened to the conversation between Hulda and Lobue in the latter's hut; and while he confessed, Hulda, though she was boiling inwardly with rage, smiled and smiled.

" Is it likely," said she, " that I was going to bare my real feelings to the old witch? Of course not! "

" Then for whom did you intend the stuff? " asked Muffy, his doubts almost removed. " Tell me, Hulda! "

" I will tell you nothing more until we are in Monrovia," said Hulda. " But, Pidgley dear, in the meantime you may wear your thinking-cap."

Mr. Muffy was convinced that he was the elect, and his eye sparkled joyfully.

" Hulda, do you love me? " asked he.

" Do you have to ask? " responded the girl softly.

" Oh, what a fool I've been! " cried Muffy.

Hulda displayed an amazement that she did not feel.

" A fool? " cried she.

"Yes, a scheming, plotting idiot!" said Muffy, rising. " And all unnecessarily."

" Why, what have you done? Something terrible? "

" Since you love me, it's nothing," said Muffy.

"You must tell me," persisted Hulda; and, perceiving that the crisis was at hand, she arose to meet it.

" I'll tell you when we are homeward bound," promised Muffy.

" When will that be? "

Astute Mr. Muffy, thoroughly befooled, exposed himself utterly.

" As soon as I have spoken to Lodango," said he. " I'll go to him at once; but first, darling, you must bribe me."

Saying this, he advanced to embrace Hulda, and the girl's anger broke forth, " Keep off! " cried she, avoiding him.

Mr. Muffy was flabbergasted! He glared wonderingly at Hulda, and his yellow face grew sallow.

" Wh — wh — why! what the devil do you mean?" cried the mulatto, recovering his speech.

" I mean, Pidgley Muffy," returned Hulda heatedly, " that you're about the lowest, most contemptible thing I've ever seen! "

Mr. Muffy perceived that he had been overreached, and the very worst in his nature was aroused.

" So,'' said he sneeri'ngly, " you've been pulling the wool over my eyes? "

" I have fooled you into telling me the truth," said Hulda.

. " Well, I hope you like it," said Muffy, with an ugly look in his face. " You are in my power and will have to dance to any tune I may choose to play. To convince you of the fact won't be difficult."

" Coward! " cried the girl defiantly.

"Yes, you are mine!" cried Muffy, and he sprang toward her.

Hulda snatched the dagger from the skins and stopped Muffy with its point.

" Stand off, or I'll kill you! " cried the angry girl, threatening him with the weapon.

Muffy stood a second or so and gazed blackly at Hulda; then he sprang forward suddenly and struck her wrist.

Hulda uttered a cry as the dagger dropped from her hand to the skins and stood upon its haft point up.

" You vixen! " cried Muffy, and, seizing her, he tried to reach her lips with his.

" Scoundrel! " cried Hulda, and she threw him off.

Mr. Muffy staggered back, caught his foot in the skin, and fell down upon the upstanding dagger.

The sharp instrument penetrated the secretary's chest,— right up to its iron hilt.

" My God! " cried Hulda, filled with consternation.

" Wow! " yelled Saafa, filled with joy.

Hulda was terribly shocked. Trembling and wringing her hands, she screamed loudly; and just then Lo-dango and Lupelta entered the hut.

When the chief and Lupelta saw what had occurred they were too much amazed to either move or speak.

Unfortunately, Mr. Muffy raised himself to his elbow.

" Lodango," gasped he, " the witch has killed me! "

Then Muffy lost consciousness.

"Wow!" cried Lodango; and he dragged Lupelta hurriedly from the hut.

At noon on Independence Day Captain Dale, with his second in command, Lieutenant Brown, and a body of the Constabulary Force, marched from Monrovia for Mt. Chocolate, in pursuance of an order that the President had issued earlier in the morning. They worked their way through the mangrove and swamp, which rather widely margined the city, until about two o'clock, when they entered a park-like district.

The sun "was then high in the heavens, and the heat, intense; and Dale, aware that it would be very unwise to march his men for any length of time exposed to the rays of the fierce luminary, placed them in a shady place,— protected by trees and where there was running water, and allowed them to rest.

Toward sundown Lieutenant Brown, who with Dale was reclining upon the turf, ordered a sergeant to parade the men preparatory to resuming the march. He then turned again to the captain, and, continuing the conversation, which he had interrupted to speak to the non-commissioned officer, remarked: " And you think that it's possible for the country to be made prosperous ? "

" Undoubtedly," replied Dale with conviction.

" They've had lots of assistance and abused it," said Brown.

" ' Abused ' is hardly the correct word. Because of their ignorance, they have failed to use opportunity wisely. One should not expect children to perform duties such as experienced persons would have found it exceedingly difficult to accomplish. Liberia's present misfortunes are the outcome of the false training of a ruling class lacking in mental and moral virility. The infusion of new life into the country would set things right."

" You mean that a people fresh from a condition of enforced servitude, uneducated, inexperienced and without pecuniary capital, were not likely to succeed in building up a successful republic ? "

" Exactly," said Dale.

" And what's the remedy? "

"As I just now said: 'Infusion of new life.' If a few hundreds of our people, skilled in farming and other industries, would come over, the country would be bucked up."

" Well," returned Brown doubtfully, " I imagine it would take some doing. I think —"

He paused, and gazing toward the distant mangroves, listened intently.

" What is it? " asked Dale.

" I thought I heard some one shout."

" 'Twas one of the men," suggested the captain.

" No, the voice came from the man —"

He again heard the voice, and this time very plainly; Dale heard it too.

" Dale ! Dale! " it shouted.

"By Jove!" cried the captain, "he's calling me."

They sprang to their feet and the next moment saw Whreabo dart out from the mangroves and run toward them.

" It's Whreabo! " exclaimed the captain as the lad appeared.

" I wonder what's up? " said Brown.

" I hope nothing's happened to Lupelta," said Dale anxiously; and he advanced to meet the Imbunda.

The lieutenant followed Dale.

" Whreabo," cried Dale as he drew near to the lad, " what's the matter? Has anything gone wrong? "

Whreabo, panting and all wet with perspiration, halted in front of Dale. The lad was too breathless to reply; but Dale, filled with anxiety, failed to observe his condition and shouted at him.

" Out with it," cried the captain impatiently.

" He is winded," said the lieutenant.

" True," said Dale, and he waited; the next moment, though, Whreabo recovered his breath and spoke.

" Dale," cried the lad, " Lodango has stolen Lupelta ! "

The captain's brown face grew pale.

" My God!" exclaimed he.

" By George! " cried Brown.

" Whreabo, is it true? " asked Dale agitatedly.

" Dale, it is true," responded the lad. " Whreabo would not lie to Dale. Lupelta and Hulda were going to the Long Beach. Lodango came from the bush near the graveyard and carried both of them away."

" Miss Bartle too I " cried Brown in amazement.

"Curse him!" cried Dale.

" Ditto! " exclaimed Brown.

" I'll make the savage wish he had never been born! " added the captain.

"Good!" ejaculated Whreabo. "Dale must do quickly! "

Dale was willing enough to act, and that at once, but his duty as a soldier stood in the way.

"But, how can I? " cried he in distress. "I must not desert my command."

Whreabo shook his head with displeasure.

" Dale is chewing wind! " cried he.

" Perhaps I am," said Dale doubtfully. " Brown, what do you think? "

" Under the circumstances," replied the lieutenant, " I am firmly of the opinion that you should return to Monrovia at once. I can fill the bill at Mt. Chocolate all right. Undoubtedly the President will be glad to have you back. He will want to send you in pursuit of the savage."

" I don't know," said Dale doubtfully.

" I'm dead sure of it! " said Brown with emphasis.

" If Dale doesn't go, Lupelta will be sorry too much! " said Whreabo.

"And Miss Bartle will have a rough time of it!" joined in the lieutenant.

Dale was persuaded.

" Very well, I'll return," said he.

" Good! " again cried Whreabo, evidently delighted.

Dale turned the command of the expedition over to the lieutenant; then he and Whreabo started for Monrovia. They reached the city late in the evening and hurried to the Executive Mansion, wherein the Presidential Reception was in full swing. Dale entered the building, and Whreabo went to the Mission House, and thence, after telling Miss Pattie all that had happened, to the captain's quarters.

Dale passed the band, which was stationed upon the verandah making discordant sounds, and approached the parlor. He stood in the doorway and gazed in at the elite of Monrovia. He searched the animated scene for the President, and soon discovered that gentleman chatting and laughing with a certain lady, who, so rumor said, was not unwilling to step into the conjugal vacuum caused by the death of Hulda's mother.

When the captain perceived the Chief Magistrate thus employed, evidently without a single care on his mind, he correctly concluded that His Excellency was uninformed as yet of what had happened to his stepdaughter.

" I guess," thought Dale, as he pushed his way through the crowd, " when I enlighten him he won't feel quite so jolly."

He halted before the President, saluted him, and was about to speak; but " The People's Choice," scowling blackly, forestalled him.

"You here, Captain Dale?" cried the Head of the State as if much surprised.

" Yes, Mr. President," began the captain, " I have to —"

"Well!" interrupted the great man. "You were ordered to proceed to Mt. Chocolate?"

"Yes, sir, but—"

" But me no buts, Captain Dale," cried the President irascibly. " Why have you not gone? "

" I started," answered Dale, " but —"

The President had not the slightest reason,— unless his guilty conscience provided one,— for supposing that Dale had become aware of his duplicity; nevertheless, he feared that the captain had learned of it and was about to charge him with it.

" If he blurts it out here before everybody," said he to himself, " there'll be no end of a row. I must gag him and, in a sense, gag Dale he did.

" Captain Dale," cried he, interrupting the American, " what have you done with your command? "

" Lieutenant Brown is leading the men to Mt. Chocolate," said Dale somewhat snappishly. He was beginning to lose his patience.

" Control your temper, please! " said the President sternly. " Sir, you are a deserter! "

Dale keenly felt the President's charge; but it was true, and he had no defense.

" I'm sorry, sir," said he, " but I returned because —"

" Silence! " broke in the Potentate. " I don't want to hear your becauses! As I stated, you are a deserter!"

Dale, now rather angry, became indiscreet.

" Confound it! this is in —" he began; but, hearing the surrounding listeners murmuring indignantly, he perceived his error and hushed.

''Well!" cried Mrs. Colonel Sisserretta Johnson-Subbs, who was standing near His Excellency. " The idea of his daring to speak that way to our President! " Mrs. Bupp, who was prominently present, wearing a costume which Miss Pattie, had she seen it, doubtless would have considered ' loud ' indeed, whispered into the ear of her escort, the Honorable Eden Swiller, Secretary of State: " Mr. Swiller, these Americans treat us as though we were mud! " Glancing disdainfully at Dale, she added: " He's a miserly lot, he is ! "

" Yes, yes, Mrs. Bupp," agreed Mr. Swiller. " If our negotiations "— oh, with what an air did he utter the phrase! —" with Germany are successful, maybe we won't send all of them,— lock, stock, and barrel, back to Yankee Land."

"A good job, too!" said Mrs. Bupp; and she snorted.

And while the rum-shop keeper and the cabinet minister were exchanging confidences, His Excellency, somewhat heated by the several " nips " he had taken during the evening, denounced the unpopular American.

" Captain Dale, you are impertinent! " shouted he angrily. " Sir, I am the President of Liberia! You've been drinking! You will consider yourself under arrest ! Proceed to your quarters at once and remain there until further orders! Go, sir! "

" But, your —" began Dale protestingly.

" Silence! " screamed the autocrat. " Go to your quarters! "

" You idiot, I'd like to punch your head! " thought Dale; but wisely kept this mutinous desire to himself.

He saluted the President, and, feeling somewhat small, went from the parlor, leaving His Excellency very much relieved, and the guests talking to each other about his " American effrontery."

Dale proceeded, in very low spirits, to his quarters. On arriving there he found that Whreabo had thoughtfully prepared something for him to eat; but, almost ill with worry, he refused to go to the table.

" Dale must chop," said Whreabo.

" I'm not at all hungry," said the captain despondently.

" If Dale doesn't eat he will become too weak to chase after Lodango."

" Oh, don't bother me! " cried Dale impatiently.

"Is Dale sick?" Anxiety marked the question.

" Yes, sick at heart. The President has turned me down."

Whreabo was puzzled.

" Dale," said he, " Whreabo's ears do not hear. Speak words that Whreabo's head knows."

" He refused to listen to me, and placed me under arrest."

" Shall Whreabo take the President's head? " asked the lad solemnly.

Dale gazed thoughtfully at Whreabo.

" By George! " cried he, " I do believe you would go for the old man."

" Whreabo would go for the old man! " repeated the lad with conviction.

The stern solemnity with which the lad announced his readiness to do for the President so amused Dale that, despite his misery, he smiled.

" Whreabo would do anything for Dale! " added the lad firmly.

Dale was touched.

" My lad," said he kindly, " I believe you. But, I don't think you need murder the gentleman. To-morrow, after he has recovered from the strain of to-day's high-jinks business, probably he'll be ready to act sensibly. Now, you must run away. You worry me."

" Whreabo will not run away," said the young Imbunda stubbornly. " Dale will eat then start to chase Lodango."

Dale groaned impatiently.

" What's the use of talking," said he. " The President will not listen to me to-night so I can do nothing until to-morrow."

" Dale will do to-night! " persisted the lad.

" Single-handed ? "

" If the President will not give Dale fighting men, then we must go to Mwamba. Mwamba will help Dale."

"Who is Mwamba ?" asked Dale, somewhat interested.

" Mwamba is Whreabo's brother."

" Where is he to be found? "

" Mwamba is in the Soolah kraal."

" Is he a brave warrior? "

" Mwamba is a favorite of the Imbunda fetich! " exclaimed Whreabo proudly.

" He may be a favorite of fetich," said Dale, " and yet quite unable to assist me. The question is, has he many warriors? Is he brave himself? "

" Mwamba is an Imbunda! " cried the lad emphatically.

" Which means, I suppose, that, being an Imbunda, he is necessarily brave. Is that it? "

" That is it," agreed Whreabo. " In many battles has Mwamba fought! Seven lions [leopards] has Mwamba slain! Mwamba has many warriors! Lo-dango has thrown pepper into Mwamba's eyes. Mwamba is vexed with Lodango too much! The Imbunda law says: ' Injure those who injure you!' Mwamba wants to obey the law. Wow! "

" Now you're talking business ! " cried Dale, his hopes rising. The next moment, though, he again became doubtful, and went on: " But, if Mwamba is a powerful chief, why is he residing in the Soolah kraal? "

" M'wamba is doing service for Pootie, the Soolah chief's daughter. When Mwamba has earned Pootie, he will go to his own kraal. Whreabo and Dale will go to the Soolah kraal. Mwamba will do! Whreabo has spoken ! "

" Are you certain of your brother? " asked Dale.

" Whreabo has spoken! " repeated the lad, with an air of finality.

" Very well," said Dale, " we'll go."

" Good! " cried Whreabo joyfully.

" Yes, Whreabo," said Dale, now eager, " I will speak to the American Minister, then we'll start at once."

" Dale will eat first," said the lad.

" As I said," remarked Dale impatiently, " I am not hungry."

" Dale will eat," repeated Whreabo firmly.

Dale perceived that Whreabo would not let him off, so he gave way.

" All right," said he resignedly.

And seating himself at the table, he began to eat; and, after the first few mouthfuls, ate with a will.

It was well on in the afternoon when, about forty-eight hours later, Dale and Whreabo halted near a shallow stream that flowed, winding and twisting, through the forest in which they were travelling.

" Dale," said Whreabo, pointing at the stream, " the Soolahs take water from this river."

" Then we are close to their kraal? " said Dale.

" From here 'tis but an infant's march."

" I'm glad it's not a giant's," remarked the captain thankfully. " I'm a bit done up."

" Dale will soon rest. We will go! "

" Right you are," cried Dale, and he followed Whreabo, who had started ahead.

They soon emerged from the forest into an expansive plateau and came to a broad path that ran through cultivated fields of corn and rice, and groves of banana, bread-fruit, and palms. They advanced along this path, and in a little while reached a large clearing, in the center of which was an important-looking barricaded kraal. At the edge of this they halted.

" The Soolah kraal," announced Whreabo.

" It's a much larger place than I thought," was the comment of Dale as he gazed upon the town.

" Obomo is a big chief," said Whreabo.

" Apparently."

" Dale, the Soolahs will soon see us and come. Whreabo will talk to them. Dale must not speak. Does Dale understand? "

" All right. If necessary, I'll be deaf, dumb, and blind."

" Good! We will go ! "

They moved across the clearing toward the kraal, at every step expecting to see a number of its people come through the gateway to meet them. But, to their great surprise, no one appeared, and they reached the gates of the barricade without being challenged. Finding the entrance open and unguarded, they went into the kraal.

It wras near the hour when natives usually ate their evening meals. Women should have been beating rice and pounding cassava near fires burning before the open doors of their huts. But no women were present, no fires were burning, the mortars were empty, the pestles were lying unemployed upon the ground. And other features of native domestic life, which the captain and Whreabo had confidently expected to see, were absent.

There were no young maids plaiting each other's hair; no lads were chalking themselves decoratively for the dance around the fire at night; no little black babies were lying on mats and basking in the hot rays of the sun; no anxious mothers were stuffing rice-porridge, hot with red pepper, down the throats of their ailing little ones. There was not a single person in sight. A deep silence rested over the place.

Dale and Whreabo were amazed.

"Wow!" cried the lad, gazing about wonderingly.

"What does it mean?" said Dale. "The huts are empty, the streets deserted! Have the Soolahs gone away ? "

The young Imbunda shook his head dissentingly.

" Dale," said he, ££ the Soolahs are not grasshoppers."

"Then what's become of them? "

"Perhaps they have been devoured by some of their enemies," suggested the lad.

"If that's the case, I've tramped here for nothing," returned Dale in disgust.

"Dale has tramped here for nothing," agreed Whreabo ruefully. "Dale must not be vexed, for we— "

He heard the sound of many voices coming from the center of the kraal and broke off. He listened intently. After a moment or two he grinned, and said: "Does Dale hear them? "

"Yes."

"The Soolahs are alive too much! "

"Judging from the noise they are making I should say so," returned the relieved captain. "But where are they? "

"They are in the palaver-ground. Perhaps they are making a big play."

"We'll find out," said Dale; and he started to hurry off.

"Dale will not go! " cried Whreabo quickly.

"And why not? " asked the captain, as he paused.

"The Soolahs may be making secret palaver," answered the lad. Indicating a hut near which they were standing, he went on: "Dale will rest in that hut until Whreabo finds out what the Soolahs are doing."

"But why should I not go too? " asked the captain somewhat impatiently.

"If Dale were to hear the Soolahs making secret palaver Obomo would be vexed too much," explained Whreabo. " Obomo would make Dale sorry! "

Dale was skeptical.

" Absurd! " cried he. " The savage would not dare! "

" Dale will not go! " persisted Whreabo.

" I'm not afraid."

"Whreabo has spoken!" cried the lad with finality.

Dale, perceiving that it would be useless to contend further, gave way.

" I'll stay," said he shortly. " But you must not keep me waiting a long time, for I'm tired and beastly hungry."

" Good! " cried Whreabo; and he hastened away.

Dale entered the hut. It contained a rudely-made couch, an iron pot, a wooden stool that was usable either as a seat or as a pillow for the head, a delft basin, and nothing else. It entered his mind to throw himself upon the couch and rest; but, before he could come to a decision, Whireabo, his eyes sparkling and his face working with excitement, rejoined him.

" Dale will come quickly! " cried the lad excitedly, as he rushed into the hut. " Mwamba is gambling! Mwamba is champion for Obomo! Dale will come quickly! "

The captain did not see any reason why he should race to the palaver-ground merely to witness Mwamba gamble; and, aside from that, the couch was now appealing to his tired frame almost irresistibly.

" I have no desire to watch your brother gamble," said he. " I'll remain here. When Mwamba's finished, you may bring him to me."

Whreabo grinned.

" If Dale waits here until Mwamba comes," said he, " maybe Dale will wait a long time."

" A long time! " cried Dale. " What do you mean? "

" Mwamba may not come quickly^"

" Does your brother spend all of his time gambling? "

" Sometimes Mwamba eats, sometimes he sleeps," returned the lad.

Dale smiled.

" Probably he does," said he.

" Dale's head is empty of know," continued Whreabo. " Mwamba may finish gambling in a few minutes, or in a few hours, or not until many days have passed. Mwamba's opponent is Tongha the Bakota. Tongha is champion for Waupau the Bakota Chief. Mwamba and Tongha must gamble,— pausing only to eat, drink, and sleep,— until one or the other has lost everything."

Dale became filled with anxiety, and his countenance clouded.

" This is not encouraging," said he.

" Whreabo must not speak to Mwamba until after the gamble," added the young Imbunda.

" I'll speak to him at once," cried Dale.

"Dale must not break the law!" said Whreabo gravely.

" Confound the law! " cried the captain vehemently. " Come what may of it, I'll speak to your brother right away."

" Dale may lose his head," warned the lad.

" I'll chance it."

Whreabo shook his head disapprovingly.

" Dale is not cunning," said he.

" If you are afraid, keep out of it," was the retort.

Whreabo smiled.

" Whreabo is an Imbunda ! " cried he. " Whreabo will go with Dale. Wow! "

"Come along, then," cried the captain, and, followed by Whreabo, he hastened from the hut.

The palaver-ground was very spacious in its area. It contained no structures other than a canopied square platform that stood in its center. The floor of this platforrp, raised about three feet from the surface of the ground, was made of clay smoothed and hardened over interlacing mats. A large post, decorated with strange-looking devices, was standing upright at each of the platform's four corners.

Close to each of the posts a fetichman was squatting. These savages were made up alike in a very grotesque fashion: their hair was arranged in long thin plaits that stood straight up from their heads, and the end of each plait was ornamented with tiny feathers and tufts of fine grass; their bodies were nude and painted with red and white stripes, and wide necklaces made of leopards' teeth were around their necks; attached to their arms, from shoulders to wrists,— resembling the pinions of birds,— were long feathers, and their legs, from the knees down, were confined in close-fitting brass, iron, and bone rings.

Each of the fetichmen held in his hand a long wand from one end of which dangled fetiches and charms. The two who were squatting at the right side of the platform were Soolahs, and near them, toward the center of the floor, Obomo their chief, was squatting. The two at the left side were Bakotas; and Waupau the Bakota Chief was squatting in front of them.

The center of the floor was occupied by Mwamba and Tongha, the Champions. They were gambling with cowries, in a manner somewhat as dice are cast.

When Dale and Whreabo entered the kraal the game had been running during several hours, and Fortune had been treating Mwamba very unkindly. He had lost the Soolah's grain, their swine, their cattle, and their domestic fowl; and then, while the captain and the lad were hurrying through the streets toward the palaver-ground, he wagered the Soolah's slaves.

He cast the cowries and lost.

The Soolahs were almost bankrupt. For a little while they yelled and howled despairingly; then, seized with rage, they began shaking their fists at Mwamba, abusing him.

Mwamba glared at the shouting Soolahs angrily a moment, but said nothing; for it was contrary to the rule of the game for either of the champions to speak to any one other than his opponent, and to him only about the game. However, he grunted, turned scornfully from the mob, and motioned to Obomo.

The Soolah Chief acknowledged the champion's motion with a nod; he then arose and, gazing sternly at the clamoring people, raised his spear.

The Soolahs hushed.

" Soolahs," cried the chief, " you make Obomo's ears tired too much! Mwamba is not yet empty of power to gamble. The wind does not always blow from one direction. Wait!"

The Soolahs' confidence in their champion was restored.

" Mwamba! Mwamba! " they shouted with enthusiasm ; then they became silent.

" Good! " cried Obomo, and, lowering his spear, he again squatted himself.

Mwamba glanced threateningly at Waupau, who was grinning triumphantly; then he turned to Tongha and addressed him.

" Dog of a Bakota," cried he, " Mwamba is an Im-bunda! The game is not finished! Mwamba has not lost everything! "

" Mwamba is an old woman! " returned the Bakota champion. " Mwamba will lose everything! "

While the champions thus discoursed, the chiefs glared angrily at each other. They now exchanged compliments.

" Waupau's champion talks wind!" cried Obomo to the Bakota chief.

" Obomo's champion talks wind!" retorted Waupau.

The fetichmen waved their wands, and the chiefs hushed.

" Is Tongha ready? " asked Mwamba, speaking to his opponent.

" Tongha is ready," was the Bakota's reply.

Mwamba smiled grimly at Waupau's champion.

" Good! " cried he. " Mwamba wagers his right leg. Bakota, play on ! "

" No," ejaculated Tongha, shaking his head dissentingly.

" Bakota," cried Mwamba sternly, " the shells are in your hand. Cast them! "

" No," repeated Tongha." " Waupau does not want Mwamba's right leg. Tongha will not play! "

" Tongha will play! " cried Mwamba. " 'Tis the law! Let the fetichmen declare! "

The fetichmen nodded their decorated heads and waved their wands; and they solemnly cried: " 'Tis the law! 'Tis the law! Tongha will obey the law!"

The fetichmen's reading of the law was not to be questioned, so the Bakota gave way.

" Tongha will play," said he surlily.

The champions resumed playing. Fortune still frowned upon the Imbunda. He lost his right leg and his left, then limb after limb, until at length his head was the only part of himself that he could call his own.

There was a pause in the game.

The Soolahs moaned and groaned sadly; the Bakotas murmured triumphantly.

The sun had disappeared from the heavens some minutes before. Now night descended and the place became suddenly dark, and the people hushed. Then many torches were lighted, their flare giving a very wierd effect to the scene.

Mwamba broke the silence.

" Tongha," cried he, " you have won Mwamba's body. Mwamba will now gamble for his head! "

The crowd murmured with amazement.

"Wow! " cried the Tongha.

"Mwamba's head," continued the Imbunda, "is worth not only all Mwamba has lost, but, also, all that Waupau possesses,— and more! Mwamba wagers his head ! Bakota, play on! "

" Tongha will not play for Mwamba's head," said the Bakota.

" It is the law! It is the law! " cried the fetichmen, waving their wands.

And while the fetichmen were exclaiming, Dale and Whreabo pushed through the crowd and halted close to the platform.

Tongha, awed by the law, again gave way.

" Tongha will play for Mwamba's head! " cried he, and he threw the cowries to the floor.

Obomo and Waupau examined the cowries, and the former, evidently disheartened by what he had seen, sank back, and groaned lugubriously.

The Soolahs chorused their chief.

" Tongha's throw is big!" cried Waupau triumphantly ; and he grinned at Obomo.

" Tongha's throw is big," agreed Obomo dejectedly.

Mwamba gathered the cowries from the floor to throw them in his turn. Then he sat erect and his whole body was wet with perspiration, his eyes were bulging, his lips were trembling; meanwhile he rattled the cowries in his outstretched hand and frowned at Waupau and Tongha.

And as Mwamba thus hesitated, the fetichmen waved their wands and appealed loudly to their respective fetiches for victory; the musicians played upon their respective instruments furiously; the crowd, wild with excitement, jumped up and down and screamed. The Bakota and Soolah warriors clashed their spears against their shields and yelled defiantly, each tribe at the other. For a few minutes the place was a pandemonium ; then Mwamba drew his hand back preparatory to casting the cowries. Suddenly every sound was hushed, every movement ceased.

" Mwamba plays! " cried the Imbunda chief; but instead of launching the cowries, he rattled them in his hand, apparently afraid to throw them.

" Mwamba! Mwamba! " cried Whreabo, carried by excitement into an indiscretion.

" Mwamba will win! " cried Dale impulsively. Mwamba gave a quick glance at Dale and Whreabo. He smiled at them. Then his countenance became set and stern. Shouting loudly, he cast the cowries from his hand.

And almost before the shells became stationary Obomo and Waupau were eagerly examining them to learn who was the victor,— Mwamba or Tongha? They soon learned. And Waupau, filled with dismay, groaned grievously; but Obomo, his face now all smiles, sprung to his feet, shouting joyfully: " Mwamba won! "

" Wow! " yelled Whreabo.

" Bravo ! " cried Dale.

Mwamba loudly praised his witch for having given him the victory. After performing this necessary rite, he sprang from the platform, snatched a torch from a slave who was acting the part of a candlestick, and approached Dale and Whreabo. He held the flambeau up so that its light disclosed the captain's face plainly, and thus he addressed him: " Stranger, your shout frightened the Bakota fetich, and it ran away. Then Mwamba won the game. Mwamba is glad! Mwamba calls you friend! Stranger, is there aught that Mwamba may do to please you ? Mwamba's ears are open big! "

If Dale had performed his duty as a civilized man, not to say as a Christian, he would have endeavoured to show the superstitious savage the error into which he had fallen. But he did nothing of the kind. To the contrary, he unscrupulously made use of Mwamba's mistake to further his own ends.

" Mwamba is a great chief! " said he, by way of a beginning.

" Mwamba is a great chief! " repeated the champion.

" I am Dale," continued the captain.

" Dale's name is fastened in Mwamba's head," returned the chief.

" Yes," said Dale, " I frightened the Bakota fetich, so that Mwamba would win the game."

While Dale was speaking and unnoticed by him and the Imbundas, Waupau and Tongha passed close to them in the dark. The Bakotas overheard the captain's remark. They scowled malevolently at him and went on their way, whispering to each other earnestly.

"Good!" ejaculated Mwamba, answering Dale.

" Wh Teabo is Mwamba's brother? " said the captain questioningly.

" Whreabo is Mwamba's mother's son," said the chief.

" Whreabo will talk to Mwamba," said Dale.

The chief nodded to Whreabo and said: " Whreabo, Mwamba's ears are open! "

" Whreabo will not lie to Mwamba," said the lad, smiling at his brother.

Mwamba grunted in a way that said, " You had better not! " quite as plainly as words would have.

" Whreabo," continued the lad, " has brought Dale to the Soolah kraal to make Mwamba's heart glad."

Mwamba smiled at the captain, and speaking to him, he said: " Dale has already made Mwamba glad. If Dale makes Mwamba any more glad, Mwamba will be glad too much! "

" I want to fill you chock full of glad," said the American, laughing inwardly.

"Wow! " exclaimed the chief much pleased.

" Dale is rich! " exclaimed Whreabo, and his tone was so convincing that the captain felt as though he were a millionaire.

Mwamba favored the captain with a smile that was more than friendly.

" Mwamba is Dale's friend! " said he.

" Dale is generous! " went on the artful Whreabo.

" Good! " ejaculated Mwamba.

" Dale will give Mwamba a big dash! " added the lad.

"Good!" again ejaculated the chief, this time very emphatically.

" Dale wants Mwamba to do a great deed! " said Whreabo.

" Mwamba is cunning! " cried the chief boastingly.

" Mwamba is cunning too much! " agreed Whreabo.

" Has Dale," said the chief, speaking to the captain, " brought the dash for Mwamba? "

The captain was on the point of saying he had not; but, feeling Whreabo slyly pinch his arm, he refrained.

" Dale's dash for Mwamba," said Whreabo quickly, " is on the heads of many boys who are coming on the path. The things are many and heavy, and the boys walk slowly."

Mwamba grunted as though disappointed.

" Dale's dash," said he, slightly frowning, " should have been placed upon the heads of boys who know how to walk quickly. But, Mwamba will talk with Dale. First, though, Mwamba must dance the Joy-dance with Obomo and the fetichmen. Dale will go to the guest-hut and rest until Mwamba joins him."

He beckoned to an almost naked girl, about sixteen years of age, who, with other youngsters, was standing near and gaping at Dale; and when in obedience to his summons she had approached him, he said to her; " Mingwee will guide Dale to the guest-hut. Ming-wee will give Dale water to bathe in and food to eat.

Mwamba has spoken! " he sternly added; and he handed the girl his torch.

" Mingwee will do ! " cried the young lady, smiling at Whreabo, who returned the smile with interest.

" Good! " cried the chief; and he strode away toward a fire around which were assembled Obomo and a number of fetichmen, impatient to begin the Joy-dance.

" Well, Whreabo," said Dale after Mwamba had departed, " do you think your brother will aid me? "

" Mwamba will do! " replied the lad with confidence.

Mingwee, who had never seen a civilized person before and was examining Dale very curiously, laughed aloud.

" Why does Mingwee laugh? " asked Whreabo, questioning the girl.

Mingwee held up the torch and pointed at the captain.

" Dale is funny! " cried she.

" Get along with you! " exclaimed Dale to Mingwee, and he raised his hand pretending that he intended to strike her.

Mingwee shrieked and ran, brandishing the torch, across the palaver-ground toward the huts, followed by Dale and Whreabo. They soon reached the guest-hut. The captain bathed, then made a hearty meal of palaver-sauce and rice, supplied by the girl. His hunger appeased, he stretched himself upon a pile of soft skins and, after a few seconds, went fast asleep.

When Whreabo perceived that Dale was sleeping, he squatted himself upon the floor and, to kill time while awaiting the arrival of his brother, began playing upon his fingers a native game called " Lonesome."

While the lad was thus amusing himself, Mingwee, who had gone from the hut a short time before with the remains from Dale's meal, returned decked out in beads, feathers, and other ornaments.

Whreabo gazed admiringly at the girl.

" Mingwee makes Whreabo's eyes glad too much! " said he gallantly.

Mingwee blushed. Of course her face did not become red, it was altogether too black. But the whites of her eyes showed color.

" Mingwee is good to look at," added Whreabo.

The maiden displayed an embarrassment that said much for her modesty. She squirmed a little.

"Won't Mingwee squat down," said Whreabo; his tone was very persuasive.

" Ow! " exclaimed the sensitive girl bashfully, yet she squatted herself down upon the floor close to Whreabo.

Whreabo grinned at Mingwee.

Mingwee grinned at Whreabo.

The quality of a kiss was unknown to Mingwee, but not to Whreabo. He had learned how to osculate during his travels. He now bent toward Mingwee to practice his acquired art upon her, but she thought he was about to bite her and would not have it.

"Wow!" cried she, shrinking back. "Does Whreabo want to chew Mingwee? "

" No," said the lad. " Mingwee is sweet too much, but Whreabo does not want to eat her. Whreabo wants to show Mingwee something nice. Mingwee will not move? "

" Mingwee will not move," repeated the girl, and she sat still, though evidently somewhat in doubt.

" Good! " exclaimed Whreabo.

Whereupon Whreabo kissed the passive Mingwee.

Mingwee felt a new sensation. She liked it.

" Whreabo," said Mingwee after the impact of lips, " what you call it? "

" Kiss," explained the lad.

" Good I " cried the girl, and she fixed the word, as well as the sensation she had enjoyed, well into her mind.

Eventually kissing became quite fashionable among the Soolahs.

" When Whreabo becomes a warrior," said the lad, " he will make Mingwee his wife."

Mingwee grinned.

" Mingwee's father," said she, " will want two cows, one goat, cloth, tobacco, beads, and gin too much."

" Whreabo will give them to Mingwee's father."

" Mingwee will be glad! " replied the young lady. She appeared to be very much pleased.

There was a pause in the conversation, during which doubtless all kinds of tender thoughts ran through the heads of Mingwee and Whreabo.

" Whreabo is Mwamba's brother," said the girl, breaking the silence.

"Yes."

" Dale frightened the Bakota fetich, so that Mwamba would win the game? "

" Yes."

" Waupau is vexed with Dale too much."

" How does Mingwee know? " asked Whreabo.

" Waupau's wife told Mingwee," said the girl.

" The Bakota is a rat! " said Whreabo scornfully.

Mingwee, displaying a small pouch that was hanging from her neck, said: " Waupau's wife gave Mingwee this fetich."

If the girl had mentioned what she had done to earn the pouch, Whreabo might have suspected that some kind of mischief was afoot and might have taken steps to prevent it. As it was, though, he suspected nothing; so he merely glanced at the fetich and grunted.

" Mingwee is going to the palaver-ground to dance," said the maiden. " Will Whreabo go and dance with Mingwee? "

" Whreabo must not leave Dale," said the lad somewhat weakly.

Mingwee pouted.

" Whreabo does not want to dance with Mingwee? " asked she.

" Whreabo wants to dance with Mingwee."

Mingwee pointed at Dale, who was beginning to breathe stertorously, and said: " Dale is sleeping hard. Dale will not know if Whreabo goes."

" Dale may wake up," returned Whreabo, evidently yielding.

" Dale will not wake up before Whreabo returns. Come! " persuaded Mingwee.

" Whreabo would like to, but —"

" Whreabo will come," broke in the temptress. " If Whreabo does not come, Mingwee will be sorry too much."

" Whreabo will be sorry," said the lad ruefully.

" Whreabo will come with Mingwee," said the girl sweetly; and, gazing alluringly into his eyes, she touched his cheeks with her fingers.

Whreabo was fully persuaded.

" Whreabo will dance with Mingwee," said he.

" Mingwee will go to the palaver-ground. After Whreabo has made the lamp so it will not go out, he will come."

" Good !" cried Mingwee triumphantly.

Smiling at Whreabo, she again touched her fingers to his cheek. Then she arose and went from the hut, beckoning to him as she passed through the doorway.

Whreabo placed a fresh rag in the bowl of palm oil and set it alight, gave a last look at sleeping Dale, and left the hut. The lad was a dandy. He desired to decorate himself with chalk before joining in the dance, so, instead of proceeding directly to the palaver-ground, he began a search for the white stuff. He visited several huts fruitlessly and was about to give up the quest, when, perceiving two men standing near a hut that was under construction, he started toward them in the hope that they would tell him where to find the decorative material.

Whreabo was barefooted, of course. Drawing close to the men, without their becoming aware of his presence, he identified them. They were Waupau and Tongha. And as he drew near them he heard the chief say: " Yes, Tongha, Waupau will throw pepper into Obomo's eyes! "

Whreabo, on hearing the chief's remark, conceived that the Bakotas were plotting to play some kind of trick upon the Soolah Chief. He determined to learn, if he could, what they purposed attempting. So he sneaked up to the unfinished hut, crouched underneath its eaves, and listened intently to the Bakotas. He overheard them converse as follows: " No, Waupau," said the champion, " Tongha will go away! "

" Where will Tongha go to? " asked the chief.

" To the Pessi people," answered Tongha.

" The Pessi people are not strong, said Waupau. " They would be afraid to let Tongha live in their kraal. The Bokatas would devour them! "

" Tongha will become a Nynnegie," returned the champion.

"Tongha talks wind!" exclaimed Waupau. " Tongha would never get to the Bad River. Witch would chase Tongha! Fetich would take Tongha's head! "

" Tongha is not afraid to die," said the other sullenly.

" If Tongha were to die," said Waupau, " he would be put into a hole in the ground. Tongha could not drink any more gin."

The champion apparently had not thought of this possible deprivation, and now that it was brought to his notice, death assumed an aspect that dismayed him.

" Waller — waller — waller — waller! " [untranslatable] cried he distressedly,— almost tearfully.

" It is better to be alive than dead," continued the chief.

" Tongha will stay alive," said the champion.

" Good! " said Waupau. " Tongha will open his ears! Obomo is not yet in possession of the things Tongha lost at the gamble. Waupau will act cunningly and not pay Obomo."

" Tongha lost, and Waupau must pay," said the champion.

" Waupau will not pay! " cried the chief vehemently.

" Waupau talks wind!" said Tongha impatiently.

" Waupau talks cunning," said the chief. " Tongha's head is an empty pot! "

Tongha grinned.

" Maybe Waupau will fill Tongha's empty pot? " said he.

"Good!" exclaimed the chief. "Waupau will fill it full. Dale frightened the Bakota fetich."

" Devil-man catch Dale! " cried Tongha angrily.

"Waupau will make Dale—" began the chief.

Whreabo just then moved and, being in darkness, accidentally shoved against a stack of unseen bamboo poles that were resting against the hut. The poles fell to the earth with a great clatter, causing the chief to break off short.

Waupau was very much startled, and so was Tongha, and both of them exclaimed and jumped back. Whreabo sprang up, and inwardly praying to his fetich to help him, went racing down the street.

The Bakotas, catching sight of the lad, shouted angrily and darted after him. But they tumbled over the poles head-over-heels to the ground. And when they arose, Whreabo was out of sight; so, it being useless for them to pursue him, they made no further attempt. Then convinced by what had happened that a public thoroughfare was scarcely a safe place for them to talk over Waupau's plans, they silently proceeded to the chief's hut.

The Bakotas soon reached and entered Waupau's hut, the only room of which was entirely without furniture or decoration of any kind, but in the center of which a dull fire lay smouldering on the floor.

Waupau, apparently indifferent to the bare appearance of the place, crossed to the fire, and, squatting himself, out of the corners of his eyes watched Tongha, who, having halted near the door, was glaring about the room wonderingly.

" Wow I " at length exclaimed the champion amazedly, still staring about.

Waupau was amused at the champion's look of bewilderment, and he chuckled to himself. He kept his countenance straight, though, as he gravely said: " Why is Tongha disturbed inside? "

" Waupau," replied the champion, " the hut is empty! A little while ago it contained many fetiches and charms. They are not here now! What has become of them? " " Waupau has sent them away."

Tongha's amazement was by no means removed, but he now glared wide-eyed at the chief.

" Waupau has sent them away! " repeated he slowly, as though doubting that he had heard the other correctly.

" Waupau has. Is Tongha vexed? "

" Tongha is not vexed," said the champion. " Tongha is sorry."

Waupau grinned.

" If Tongha's sorry doesn't make water come out of his eyes it's all right," said he.

The champion grunted and shook his head disapprovingly.

" Waupau has broken the law! " said he.

" Waupau has."

" Waupau is a big chief," continued Tongha. " but he is not in the Bakota kraal. He is in the Soolah kraal. When Obomo asks why the fetiches and charms have been sent away, what will Waupau say? "

" Obomo will not ask."

Tongha could not believe that Obomo would not inquire into the infraction of the law, and, for the moment forgetting the respect that was due from him to his chief, he expressed his opinion with uncourtierlike frankness.

" Waupau talks lies too much! " cried he.

Now, for a Bakota Chief to be called a liar to his very face by one of his followers was something absolutely unheard of! Tongha had committed lèse majesté of the very worst kind. Certainly, Waupau was struck all of a heap with astonishment, and all he could do was to glare blankly at Tongha. After a second or so, though, when he had fully measured the gravity of the offense, his black face turned green with rage and he sprang quickly to his feet. He raised his spear, as if about to impale the champion.

" Will Tongha die the death ? " cried he fiercely.

Tongha was a good, loyal, obedient subject. As yet he was untouched by the democratic spirit, which is beginning to make rulers by Divine Right (?) somewhat uncomfortable. He bowed his head submissively, — surrendered himself, as it were, to his royal master's august will.

" Tongha's life belongs to Waupau! " said he humbly.

However, the champion stood in no danger of losing his valuable life just then, for the chief had very important work for him to do, so could not spare him. And this being the case, Waupau dismissed his anger.

" Tongha is a fool! " growled the chief, lowering his spear.

" Tongha is a fool," echoed the champion in humble agreement.

" Good ! " exclaimed the chief; and he resumed his squatting attitude.

" Waupau is cunning too much! " cried Tongha.

The chief was pleased by his warrior's flattering remark, so he grinned at him most pleasantly.

"Good!" he repeated. "Waupau is head with know in it, Tongha is body with guts in it. Wow! "

" Body's legs want to rest," said Tongha, and he squatted himself upon the floor close to the chief.

" Dale shouted at the gamble and broke the law," said Waupau.

" Tongha will devour Dale! " cried the henchman fiercely.

" Tongha will do no harm to Dale! " commanded the chief. The champion scowled.

" Tongha is vexed with Dale! " said he.

" Waupau has spoken! " cried the chief sternly. " Tongha will obey Waupau! "

The champion remembered the danger he had just escaped, and submitted.

" Tongha will obey Waupau!" said he. " Tongha has fastened tight into his head all Waupau's words! "

" Good! " exclaimed the chief. " Tongha will not let his head leak! "

He paused. Snatching a live coal out of the fire with his naked fingers, he pressed it into the bowl of a short-stemmed clay pipe that was black from much use. He puffed away at the pipe until he got the tobacco that was caked tight in it burning well. He then resumed his conversation.

" Dale shall pay to Obomo all that Waupau lost," said he.

"Waupau talks like wind! Dale will not pay Obomo! "

"Waupau will compel Dale to pay."

" Dale is in the Soolah guest-hut, and Obomo will not allow Waupau to trouble him."

" Obomo is an old woman! " returned Waupau scornfully.

Tongha grunted in a fashion that disclosed the fact that he did not agree with the chief, who, evidently understanding the meaning of the champion's grunt, frowned blackly at him.

" Obomo is an old woman! " he vehemently repeated, and he glared at Tongha as though saying: " Contradict me, if you dare! "

The champion, duly impressed by the threat in his ruler's eyes, acquiesced to his chief's opinion.

" Oh, yes; Obomo is an old woman! " cried he hastily.

Waupau was satisfied and he nodded accordingly.

But he nodded too soon; for Tongha, who, unlike Afri-can natives generally, was unable to refrain from giving utterance to his thoughts, again became indiscreet. f " But," cried he, " Obomo is a brave warrior! "

" Obomo is a chicken! " retorted the chief. " Wau-pau is a lion! "

Tongha grinned.

" Chicken will keep lion in the Soolah kraal," said he, " until lion has paid his bill."

" Waupau will not pay Obomo!" said the chief firmly. " Waupau will leave the Soolah kraal early,— maybe to-night! "

i Tongha shook his head sceptically.

" Obomo," continued the chief, " will be glad for Waupau to chase Tongha."

The champion was flabbergasted. He wondered if the chief had gone suddenly mad.

" Cha — chase Tongha! " stammered he, gazing nervously at Waupau.

" Yes," cried Waupau, " chase Tongha! Tongha has stolen Waupau's wife! Tongha has stolen Waupau's fetiches and charms! "

Tongha, now absolutely certain that the chief had lost his senses, shivered with fear. He began edging himself away from Waupau with the intention of springing up, as soon as he could get beyond his rea,ch, and bolting from the hut.

Waupau perceived his follower's purpose, and seizing him by his shoulder, restrained him.

" Would Tongha run away? " cried he.

"Waupau's head is full of crooked things too much! " exclaimed the champion, shrinking under the chief's hand. " Tongha will bring the witch-doctor! "

" Tongha will not move!" said Waupau sternly. " Waupau does not need the witch-doctor."

"Is — is Waupau sure?" asked Tongha doubtfully.

"Waupau is sure! Waupau's head is full of cunning too much. Waupau's head is making softly catch monkey! * Tongha is a fool! "

Tongha saw his error and was reassurred.

" Good!" cried he. " Tongha is a fool! "

Waupau grinned and removed his hand from the champion's shoulder.

" Tongha," said he, " is not cunning enough to steal! But Waupau will tell Obomo that Tongha has stolen, then the Soolah's eyes will be full of pepper."

The champion gazed admiringly at his chief.

" Waupau is cunning too much! " cried he. "Waupau is cunning too much!" agreed the chief. " Tongha will open his ears big! "

" Tongha's ears are open big as — as his mouth! " said the champion; and, illustrating his words, he opened his mouth to its full extent and disclosed a cavern, which, for its width and depth, was wonderful to behold.

Waupau gazed somewhat awesomely at Tongha's open mouth, wherein large filed teeth gleamed white.

" Wow! " cried he. " Tongha's mouth is like a big hole in Hack mud. If Waupau talks, his words will all go into Tongha's belly! Shut it up! "

The champion brought his jaws together with a snap. " Waupau's words will now go into Tongha's head," said he.

"Good!" returned the chief. "Listen! Waupau's wife gave Mingwee a fetich to persuade her to put sleep-witch into Dale's food. Mingwee has done so and Dale is now sleeping hard. Tongha will steal Dale from the guest-hut and carry him to the Bakota kraal. When Dale is in the Bakota kraal Waupau will compel him to pay Obomo. Waupau has spoken!"

"Wow!" cried the champion excitedly.

"Tongha will be cunning too much!" added the chief.

" Tongha will do! " cried the champion, and he sprang to his feet to go.

" Wait!" cried Waupau, as Tongha started toward the door.

Tongha halted and gazed inquiringly at the chief.

" A big thing must be done here first," said Waupau.

He removed his loin-cloth and tore it into strips, then he tied the ends of the strips together and thus made a strong, long cord. He handed the cord to the wondering Tongha, asking him if it were strong.

" It is strong too much! " cried the champion, testing the cord.

" Bind Waupau! " commanded the chief.

Tongha supposed that Waupau had made a slip of the tongue; and, as usually is the case with little men in their dealings with the great, he was exceedingly pleased to correct his superior.

" Waupau means bind Dale," said he, grinning pleasantly.

"Waupau meant just what Waupau said!" exclaimed the chief impatiently.

Tongha's feathers fell.

"Bind Waupau! " repeated the chief imperatively.

Tongha, with his eyes bulging, glared amazedly at Waupau.

" G-r-r-r-r! " (By Gosh!) cried he.

" Is Tongha, the big Bakota warrior, afraid? " asked Waupau.

"To — Tongha is afraid!" stammered the champion. " Tongha must not break the law."

" The law says that Tongha must obey his chief. Bind Waupau!"

" If Tongha binds Waupau," said the champion much distressed, " fetich will kill Tongha."

" If Tongha does not bind Waupau quickly," said the chief angrily, " fetich will not hava a chance at Tongha. Waupau will take Tongha's head now! "

The champion was in a serious dilemma, from which he saw no way of escape.

"Tongha is full of don't know," said he ruefully; and he scratched his head, evidently seeking an inspiration.

" Waupau will send the don't know out of Tongha," said the chief.

"Good!" cried Tongha hopefully.

" Tongha's arms and legs are alive," said Waupau, " but his head is dead. Waupau will put some alive into Tongha's head " Tongha's head is ready."

Waupau knocked the tobacco-ash from his pipe and placed the latter into his wooly topknot for safe-keeping ; at the same time he said: " When Obomo finds Waupau tied and gagged he will believe Waupau's lies. The law says: 'If it be necessary that your chief should eat mud for his own good, make him eat it.' Waupau will eat mud! Bind Waupau! "

Tongha was convinced by this point of law that by obeying the chief he would be performing his duty most loyally, so he no longer objected.

" Tongha will do! " cried he; and he proceeded to the work.

The champion soon had his chief well trussed and was ready to apply the gag. " Waupau," said he, " suppose Dale is not asleep, what must Tongha do ? "

" Knock Dale's head hard and make him sleep," answered Waupau. " Gag Waupau! "

" Good! " cried Tongha.

He thrust a wad of cloth, not at all gently, into Wau-pau's mouth and fastened it there firmly. This done, he arose to his feet and laughed at the chief.

" Go to your work! " commanded Waupau's eyes.

Tongha was awed by the chief's fierce look and hushed. He hastened from the hut, and, soon afterward, with four Bakota warriors, started for the guest-hut to remove Dale.

When Whreabo saw that the Bakotas were not pursuing him he changed his course and ran directly toward the palaver-ground,— now not drawn there by a desire to dance with the fascinating Miss Mingwee, but solely that he might converse with his brother.

On arriving at the place, he discovered that Mwamba was still taking part in the Joy-dance. As it was unlawful to interrupt this dance, he squatted himself close to the platform to wait until it was over. His patience was tried somewhat severely. For a longer time than an hour the dancers gyrated and jumped about in a very lively manner, until an aged fetich-man, despite the kola nut he was chewing to keep himself going, suddenly collapsed and fell breathless to the turf, and thus brought the dance to its final period.

Mwamba was now at liberty to do anything he pleased. He climbed to the floor of the platform, intending to rest a few minutes before going to the guest-hut to talk with Dale. Before he could stretch himself out upon the hardened clay, however, he saw Whreabo approaching and, failing to identify his brother, was annoyed at being disturbed.

He scowled angrily at the youth and ordered him to go away.

" Mwamba! " exclaimed the lad, still advancing.

The scowl in Mwamba's face turned into a smile.

" It is Whreabo ? " asked he.

" It is Whreabo," replied the lad.

" Whreabo will rest! " said the chief.

The youth squatted himself down beside his brother.

" Is the Imbunda Chief glad to see Whreabo ? " asked he.

" Mwamba is glad! "

"Good!"

The brothers grasped each other's hands and snapped fingers, and, at the same time, made with their mouths purring noises that sounded quite catty. After thus saluting each other, they became silent and motionless, and so remained for fully a minute. Then, it being the correct thing that the elder should take the initiative, Mwamba spoke up.

" Whreabo has been absent from Mwamba's kraal many moons? " said he questioningly.

" Whreabo has been across the big bitter water," replied the lad very proudly.

" Wow! " cried the chief, amazed.

" Whreabo has seen many strange things! " continued the young Imbunda.

Mwamba, very much interested, was eager to hear Whreabo's story.

" Mwamba's ears are open too much! " he exclaimed.

Whreabo had made a trip, as a stoker on a liner, to the Island of Teneriffe. He had climbed the peak to its summit, and had seen other sights that to him seemed most wonderful. Describing his experiences, he said: " A big canoe carried Whreabo to a land that runs up and up to a topknot above the clouds. The land is full of kraals. One of the kraals is big too much! It contains great huts, shops filled with many things that made Whreabo hungry for them. The people are more numerous than the fish in the Imbunda rivers,— than the leaves on the Imbunda trees ! "

Mwamba was very much impressed.

"Wow!" cried he. "Did Whreabo see any big chiefs?"

"Many!"

" Any bigger than Mwamba ? " asked the chief somewhat anxiously.

Though Whreabo had seen many persons whom he believed to be immeasurably greater than Mwamba, he thought it would be unwise to puncture his brother's vanity,— and possibly displease him,— by admitting as much; so, magnificently mendacious, he cried: " Bigger than Mwamba? No ! "

Mwamba chuckled with pleasure.

" Good! " cried he. " Mwamba is a big warrior! Mwamba is a great gambler. Wow!"

" Mwamba is a lion! " cried Whreabo, boosting his brother's pride.

" Mwamba is a lion! " agreed the chief. Then, after a brief pause, he went on: " Why has Whreabo left Dale alone in the guest-hut? "

" Dale was sleeping, so Whreabo started for the palaver-ground to dance with Mingwee. Whreabo wanted to make glad because Mwamba won the gamble."

" Good! Has Whreabo danced? "

" Whreabo has not danced," said the lad; and then, it being contrary to Imbunda etiquette for a callow youth, as he was, to discuss matters of serious import with experienced tried men like Mwamba, he timidly remarked that he desired to talk about something of much importance.

Ordinarily Mwamba would have refused to grant Whreabo's request; but, being still under the influence of the flattery that the lad had poured upon him, he was in a very complaisant mood. Furthermore, his curiosity was aroused.

" Mwamba's ears are open! " said he.

Whreabo thanked the chief. He then related how Dale had stopped Mr. Muffy from beating him; described the abduction of Hulda and Lupelta; explained why he had persuaded the captain to come to the Soolah kraal. And this portion of his narrative being finished, he started to repeat the conversation between Waupau and Tongha, just as he had overheard it. But he was stopped by Mwamba. The chief objected to packing his brains, though they were capacious enough, with more than one thing at a time.

" Whreabo mustn't mix up his talk," said he. " Mwamba's ears are open to hear about Dale, not about the Bakotas. Dale is rich? "

" Dale is rich too much! " cried the lad vehemently.

" What will Dale give Mwamba?"

" Dale will make Mwamba's heart glad! " responded Whreabo earnestly. " Dale will make Mwamba rich! Dale will help Mwamba to take Lodango's head! "

" Good! " cried Mwamba much pleased. " Mwamba will do! "

Whreabo gave a joyous shout.

" Mwamba's ears are now open to hear about the Bakotas," added the chief. " Whreabo will talk straight! "

" Whreabo will talk straight," said the lad; and he then disclosed all he had heard the Bakotas say.

Mwamba listened very attentively to Whreabo's story; and when it was finished he exclaimed: " Wow! The Bakota dogs make trouble for Dale! "

" Bad witch catch them! " cried Whreabo.

" Mwamba and Whreabo will go to Dale," said the chief.

The brothers arose, sprang from the platform, and shortly afterward they were standing before the door of the guest-hut.

" Mwamba will go in first," said Whreabo, and he moved to one side so that his brother might enter the hut.

" No! " said the chief. " The guest-hut now belongs to Dale. Mwamba must not enter the hut unless Dale invites him."

" Whreabo will call Dale," said the lad.

" Good!"

Whreabo opened the door and peered into the hut, but could see nothing; for the lamp was not burning, and the room was dark as pitch. He shouted for Dale, and there was no answer; he again shouted, and again there was no reply.

" Dale sleeps too strong! " said Mwamba.

" Whreabo will shake Dale," exclaimed the lad, and he started to enter the hut.

" Whreabo must not enter! " cried Mwamba quickly, as the youth started.

Whreabo halted and gazed wonderingly at his brother.

"Why must Whreabo not enter? " asked he.

" The hut is full of darkness," said the chief.

"Mwamba does not like dark places." He added, " Mwamba will open his ears ! " and pushed his head into the room. He listened thus intently for a few seconds. Then he withdrew his head, saying: " Dale is not there! "

Whreabo exclaimed incredulously.

" If Dale was there, Mwamba would have heard him breathe," continued the chief. " Maybe Dale is dead."

Whreabo, fond of the captain, felt his heart jump into his throat.

" Mwamba talks wind! " cried he, agitated.

The chief, displeased by the young fellow's outburst, frowned at him.

" Whreabo's mouth talks big! " said he sternly. " Whreabo has never been in a battle! Mwamba never talks wind! Mwamba is a brave warrior! Wow!"

Whreabo perceived that he was in fault; and, being a perfect gentleman, he apologized at once.

" Whreabo spoke like a boy," said he humbly.

The chief was placated. , , " Good! " cried he.

" Dale was kind to Whreabo," said the lad sadly. Then, compelled to give fuller vent to his feelings, he added: " Oh, Mwamba, Whreabo is sorry too much! " And tears came into his eyes.

Mwambo was touched by his young brother's emotion.

" If Dale is dead," said he, " then for Whreabo's sake Mwamba will be sorry too. But maybe Mwamba and Whreabo are chewing wind. Dale may not be dead. Whreabo will fetch fire from the palaver-ground. Whreabo will run quickly! "

" Whreabo will fly! " cried the lad, and he raced away, leaving Mwamba standing sentinel-like before the open door.

Whreabo soon reached the palaver-ground where a number of lads and lassies were dancing around a large fire. Pie burst through the dancers,— accidentally knocking Miss Mingwee down and thereby spoiling his matrimonial chances in that direction,— snatched a blazing brand from the fire, and started on his return race, pursued by the abuse of the now irate miss. A few minutes later he arrived, almost breathless, at the guest-hut and delivered the flaming brand to Mwamba.

The chief held the torch into the hut, and he and Whreabo gazed inside. Dale was not there! The brothers cried out with amazement and entered the hut.

Whreabo relighted the lamp; then, turning to Mwamba, who was gazing thoughtfully at the skins, he said: " Dale has gone to walk."

"No!" ejaculated the chief, with strong emphasis.

" Then where is Dale? " said Whreabo.

" Dale has been stolen! " answered Mwamba gravely, Whreabo was filled with consternation, and his eyes grew big and wild-looking.

" Wow! " cried he.

" A little while ago," added Mwamba.

" How does Mwamba know? "

" Mwamba is cunning! " said the chief proudly.

" Will Mwamba make Whreabo see? "

" Whreabo will open his ears," responded Mwamba. He pointed at the skins, and went on: " The sleeping-skins are not untidy. Did Dale take the trouble to smooth them? No! If Dale did not, who did? "

" Mingwee did," suggested Whreabo reflectively.

" No! " cried the chief. " Mingwee has not been in the gree-gree bush, so she would not dare to smooth a man's sleeping-skins. Mwamba will see! "

He sank to his hands and knees and proceeded to study the sand that covered the floor. He examined it carefully, inch by inch, from the skins to the door. He paused here and, as he sprung to his feet, exultantly cried: " Mwamba knows! "

" Whreabo's ears are open! " exclaimed Whreabo, eager for information.

" The Bakotas have stolen Dale! " cried the chief.

" Wow! " cried Whreabo, very much amazed.

" Mwambo will teach Whreabo cunning," said the chief. Indicating certain conditions that he had discovered in the sand, he went on: " The sand contains no foot-marks other than those made by us since we entered. Where are those that Dale and Mingwee must have made? Where are those that Whreabo made before he ran to the palaver-ground to dance with Ming-wee? All of them have been smoothed away! Did Dale do it? "

Whreabo was much impressed by his brother's cleverness, and he exclaimed admiringly.

" Whreabo wants to know where are the marks which were made by the persons who stole Dale? "

" Whreabo wants to know," acknowledged the lad.

" The same hands that smoothed the skins," said Mwamba, " smoothed away the marks in the sand. A Bakota's hands! The Bakota tried to be cunning, but threw pepper into his own eyes. He wrote the story of the steal in the sand! Mwamba the Imbunda Chief,— Mwamba the great gambler,— has read the story in the sand. Mwamba is cunning too much! Wow!"

" Mwamba is cunning too much! " echoed Whreabo. " Mwamba knows how to catch monkeys! Whreabo has spoken! "

The chief, very much flattered, smiled expansively.

" Good! " cried he; and then, doubtless desiring to reward his brother, he said: " By-and-by Whreabo will be cunning too! "

This was high praise indeed to receive from a warrior of Mwamba's rank, and Whreabo valued it accordingly.

" Wow! " cried he.

" Mwamba's mouth is not empty," resumed the chief. He again pointed at the floor and went on: " The Soolahs make lines in the sand in their guest-hut so that the lines cross each other; the Bakotas make circles in the sand in their guest-hut. The lines between the skins and the door form circles. Who made them? "

" The Bakotas! " shouted the lad.

" Whreabo's eyes are open ! "

" We will devour them! " cried the young Imbunda fiercely.

" Dale is rich," said Mwamba. " Dale will pay Wau-pau then the Bakota will set him free."

Whreabo did not approve of Mwamba's suggestion, and to induce him to see the situation in the same light as he himself saw it, he brought some of his own cunning into play.

" If Dale pays Waupau," said he, " Dale will have nothing left to give to Mwamba."

Mwamba felt the force of Whreabo's remark very much indeed.

" Wow! " cried he; and he paused reflectively.

Whreabo perceived that he had taken hold of the right string, so he continued pulling it.

" If Mwamba steals Dale from Waupau," said he, " Dale will be glad. Dale will give enough gin to Mwamba to keep him drunk for many nights! "

Mwamba's eyes glistened.

"Does Whreabo think so?" asked he eagerly.

" Whreabo is certain," said the lad convincingly.

Mwamba grinned.

" Mwamba will steal Dale from the Bakota! " said he.

"Good!" exclaimed Whreabo joyfully.

" Dale frightened the Bakota fetich, and Mwamba won the gamble," cried the chief. " Mwamba does not forget! Mwamba will do! Mwamba will talk to Obomo, then Mwamba and Whreabo will start for the Bakota kraal. Whreabo will rest on the skins until Mwamba returns. Whreabo will rest and grow strong, for Mwamba will arm him. Whreabo will be a warrior!"

" Wow! Wow! " cried the delighted lad.

" Good! " exclaimed the chief, and he hastened from the hut.

Mwamba hurried to the compound and there found Obomo. He disclosed his news to the Soolah Chief, then hastened with him to Waupau's hut, where they discovered the Bakota bound and gagged. And Wau-pau, just as he had assured Tongha would be the case, succeeded in deceiving Obomo. But Mwamba was very incredulous; in fact, had the Soolah Chief been guided by his advice, Waupau would not have been allowed to leave the kraal. As it was, though, the Bakota Chief took his departure, ostensibly in pursuit of Tongha; and, soon afterward, Mwamba and Whreabo, the latter armed to the teeth, also left the kraal.

The Imbunda brothers travelled during all the rest of the night. Early on the following morning they arrived at the beginning of a wide, well-trodden path that ran through cultivated grounds, and Mwamba, remarking that they were close to the Bakota kraal, called a halt.

" If we walk there," continued the chief, as he pointed up the path, " some of the Bakotas may see us."

Whreabo suggested that they should cut a path for themselves through the brush. Mwamba agreed, and they set to work.

They hewed and hacked away at the dense shrubbery with all their might, yet advanced but slowly. At length, however, they came to the edge of an open place entirely free of trees and shrubs, but thickly covered with tall, rank grass. They ceased their laborious manual labor here, and Whreabo, with youthful impetuosity, started to leave the bush,— in which he and his brother were screened,— to advance upon the glade.

" Whreabo will wait! " said Mwamba quickly, in a low tone; and then, when the lad stood fast, he added: " Mwamba hears something! "

" Whreabo will open his ears! " whispered the lad.

The Imbundas stood perfectly still and listened, and, after a second or two, heard a man, his voice cracked and enfeebled by age, chanting a sort of incantation.

" The Bakota fetichman! " whispered the chief.

"Wow!" exclaimed Whreabo. "If Mwamba's ears had not been open big he would have —"

" Whreabo will hush! " broke in Mwamba, and he pushed aside several branches of the shrubbery.

They peered through the hole that Mwamba had made, and at the opposite side of the open, near its edge, saw a small hut, extravagantly decorated with feathers and streamers made of rags, whence came the chanting.

" The secret hut of fetich," said Mwamba cautiously.

" The fetichman is inside," said Whreabo.

" Mwamba will steal across to the hut and seize the fetichman," said Mwamba.

Whreabo gazed wide-eyed with amazement at his brother.

" Does Mwamba want to die? " asked he awesomely. " The fetichman will witch Mwamba."

The chief shrugged his shoulders, made a peculiar click with his tongue and smiled contemptuously.

" The Bakota fetichman has no teeth," exclaimed he. " When Dale shouted at the gamble the Bakota witch was afraid and ran away! The Bakota witch will run away from Mwamba! Mwamba is a big warrior! Wow!"

" Mwamba is a big warrior too much! " cried Whreabo.

" Whreabo will watch while Mwamba steals through the grass," continued the chief. " When Mwamba is across, he will stand at the side of the door of the hut and make a sign, then Whreabo will shout loudly. When Whreabo shouts, the fetichman will come out of the hut to see, and Mwamba will catch him and tie him fast."

" Mwamba has no rope."

" Mwamba will make a rope," responded the chief.

He cut a length of thin, pliable vine from a creeper and wound it around his waist. This done, he bade Whreabo to be watchful, and then, sinking to his hands and knees, he crawled from the shrubbery into the tall grass, and soon disappeared from his brother's view.

When Whreabo could no longer see Mwamba creeping, he directed his gaze toward the opposite side of the glade, and shortly afterward perceived the chief emerge from the grass, sneak up to the hut and make the signal that had been agreed upon. Instantly the lad shouted at the top of his voice.

As soon as the lad began shouting, the chanting ceased, and the next moment an aged fetichman, exclaiming angrily, came hastily out of the hut.

" Wow! " cried Mwamba; and he seized the fetich-man.

The old man yelled and struggled to escape, but it was in vain; for the Imbunda was too strong, and easily threw him to the ground and bound his wrists firmly together with the vine.

The chief arose from binding the Bakota and grunted. He then turned toward Whreabo, who had come from the other side of the glade, and triumphantly cried: " Mwamba has done! "

" Good! " exclaimed Whreabo, gazing admiringly at the chief. " Mwamba played spider nicely! "

Mwamba's eyes sparkled, and he grinned.

"Wow!" cried he joyfully, "Whreabo has given Mwamba a new name! A splendid name! Big spider ami!"

" Big spider is Mwamba! " exclaimed Whreabo, humoring his brother's conceit.

Mwamba thanked Whreabo for having endowed him with such a glorious title; and then, wishing to make some sort of suitable return, he said: " Whreabo opened his mouth wide! Whreabo's voice is big too much! "

Whreabo, much pleased that his shouting had earned him this praise, clashed his spear against his shield and boasted: " Whreabo shouted loudly! Whreabo has a big — "

" Whreabo will hush! " interrupted Mwamba sternly.

The lad was abashed and hung his head.

" Whreabo's weapons," continued the chief, " are still clean of blood. Only warriors like Big Spider should talk big."

" Good! " said the lad humbly.

Mwamba grunted; then he turned from the humiliated young man to the fetichman.

" Bakota," said he, " Mwamba the great Imbunda warrior am I! Great gambler am I! Big Spider am I! Bakota, open your ears! Waupau has stolen Dale from the Soolah guest-hut. Mwamba and Whreabo have come to steal Dale from Waupau. Bakota, you will tell the Imbundas how to do. Mwamba has spoken! "

The fetichman gazed defiantly at Mwamba; otherwise he made no reply.

" Will the Bakota die the death? " cried Mwamba, gazing fiercely at the fetichman.

The old man remained dumb and defiant.

Then Whreabo, now recovered from his late abasement and bearing no grudge against his brother, desiring to assist in loosing the stubborn man's tongue, and believing that cold steel would probably persuade him much more effectively than would words, placed the needle-like point of his spear against the fetich-man's scarred breast.

" The Bakota will open his mouth! " cried the lad.

The fetichman spoke not, nor did he shrink from the spear. He smiled disdainfully and began singing, in a monotone, the Bakota's Death Song.

Whreabo became incensed. Uttering an angry exclamation, he advanced his spear to prick the old man.

" Whreabo will stop! " commanded the chief, pushing the lad's spear aside. " He would die silent and mocking at us with his eyes. Mwamba and Whreabo will carry him inside the hut. Perhaps we will find a way to make him talk."

Whreabo became uneasy.

' "For any person other than a fetichman to enter a secret hut," said he, " is against the law."

" The Bakota fetich is a chicken! " exclaimed the chief. Pointing at the pinioned Bakota, who was still singing his lugubrious aria, he continued: " Mwamba has tied the Bakota fetichman. If the Bakota witch was strong, it would kill Mwamba. Mwamba is alive and will stay alive! We will carry him into the hut! " Whreabo, convinced that there was nothing to fear, consented, and assisted his brother to carry the Bakota into the hut. They deposited him upon the floor before a fire, then, curious to see their surroundings, they gazed about the room.

An almost countless number of fetiches, in small pouches and in clay vessels, were hanging against the mud walls, and dangling from the smoke-blackened beams that supported the palm-leaf roof. Displayed upon the floor of a low platform, as if for exhibition, were cowries in heaps, elephant's tusks, leopard's teeth, anklets and armlets, bolts of cloth, and numerous other articles of more or less value.

When the Imbundas saw this wealth, they gasped with wonderment.

"Wow!" cried they.

The fetichman watched them and sang on.

" The Bakota is rich too much! " cried Whreabo.

" Unless the Bakota makes do, he will soon be poor too much! " responded Mwamba, and he smiled grimly at the old man.

" Good! " cried the lad.

The fetichman, continuing his song, appeared to be unconcerned.

The chief now threatened the Bakota that, unless he condescended to speak, his collection would be taken from him. He might as well have addressed a corpse; for the fetichman, apparently indifferent to the threat, sang on.

Mwamba, at a loss as to what step he should take next, gazed somewhat ruefully, as though asking for help, at Whreabo; and the lad, who had been thinking hard, responding to the appeal, made a brilliant suggestion.

" Burn the fetiches! " cried the youth.

When Whreabo offered this cruel advice the unfortunate fetichman started as though, something had stung him. He then began shivering as though with ague; his singing became even more dolorous than before, and his eyes, following the movements of the Im-bundas, rolled wildly in their sockets.

" Good! " cried Mwamba joyfully. " We will do! "

Whreabo snatched several of the most importantlooking fetiches from the wall and handed them to Mwamba, who carred them to the fire.

Before any of the sacred things could be fed to the flames, however, the fetichman, his face yellowish, and perspiration rolling in great beads down his beardless cheeks, quickly capitulated.

" Stop! Stop! " screamed the old man, as if distracted.

"Wow!" cried the brothers; and in their elation they laughed loudly.

" The Imbundas are glad," snarled the fetichman, " but Toomah is sorry! "

"Will Toomah talk?" asked Mwamba.

" Toomah will talk," replied the old man surlily.

" Good! " cried the chief; and he passed the fetiches to Whreabo, who restored them to their places against the wall.

Toomah anxiously watched his phylacteries being replaced, and, when they were again hanging safely from their hooks, grunted with satisfaction. Then he held up his fastened hands and exclaimed: "The cord makes Toomah tired!"

" Whreabo will untie Toomah," commanded the chief.

The lad removed the vine from the fetichman's wrists, and, this done, Mwamba remarked: " Whreabo is young and wants to learn to be cunning. Toomah will talk! "

Toomah, rubbing his wrists where they had been bound, glanced inquiringly at the young Imbunda.

" Does Whreabo," said he, " want to learn cunning from the Bakota fetichman? "

" Whreabo's ears are open," replied the lad. "Good!" ejaculated Tomah.

He paused and lighted his pipe, and the Imbundas, tempted by the odour of Toomah's tobacco smoke, set fire to theirs. The three puffed away awhile, then the fetichman, having gathered his thoughts together, proceeded to instruct Whreabo.

" Whreabo will listen," said he. " If the Imbundas were to rob Toomah of his cowries and other things, Toomah could replace them; if the Imbundas should kill Toomah, then Toomah's son, Mffy, would become fetichman; but if the Imbundas were to burn Toomah's fetiches, then Toomah, and Mffy, and all Toomah's relatives, even the infants at their mother's breasts, would be given to the sacrifice."

He broke off to puff at his pipe, and Mwamba, glancing at Whreabo, remarked: " Is Whreabo's head catching Toomah's cunning? "

" Whreabo's head," responded the lad, " is getting full!"

Mwamba grunted and went on with his smoking.

" To-day," continued the fetichman, "Toomah is to fetich the Bakota farm. If Toomah's fetiches were burnt, he would be unable to perform the rite. The Bakotas would be vexed too much, and Waupau would take Toomah's head! If Toomah must die, what matters it whether the Imbundas kill him here and now or the Bakota executioner kills him a few hours later in the palaver-ground? It matters nothing! Toomah has spoken! "

" Good! " cried Whreabo much impressed, and he gazed admiringly at the fetichman.

" Toomah," said the chief, " will now tell Mwamba how the Imbundas may steal Dale from Waupau."

" Why should Toomah interfere? " asked the Bakota.

Mwamba grinned.

" Because," said he dryly, " if Toomah does not interfere, Mwamba will burn the fetiches."

The fetichman growled.

" If Toomah points out a way," said Whreabo, " Dale will give him a dash to the value of twenty cows."

As has been disclosed, Toomah was already exceed-ingly wealthy; but, as is usually the case with financial magnates, he was greedy for more. Anyhow, when Whreabo mentioned in what degree Dale would reward him, his dull eyes brightened, a grin spread widely over his face.

" Toomah will do! " cried he eagerly.

" When night comes," said Mwamba, " we will creep over the secret path to the Bakota kraal and steal Dale from the guest-hut."

Toomah shook his head disapprovingly.

" The Imbunda's plan is not cunning," said he. " Mwamba must think of some better way."

The chief tried to think out ah improvement on his plan, but failing, he gave up the effort.

" Mwamba's head is empty," said he despairingly.

"Wow!" cried Whreabo dismayed.

The brothers gazed sadly at each other and wondered what they should do.

Toomah perceived that the Imbundas were distressed. It pleased him, and he chuckled inwardly; but his avariciousness soon got the better of the spirit of revenge that possessed him, and he came to the brothers assistance.

" Toomah has a plan," said he.

" Good! " cried the Imbundas hopefully.

The Bakota leered cunningly into Whreabo's face and said: " Whreabo, will Dale pay Toomah to the value of five-and-twenty cows ? "

Mwamba suspected that he himself would suffer if Dale were to reward Toomah in this lavish manner, and he became alarmed; and quickly, before Whreabo could reply, he said: " Whreabo will not forget! "

" Whreabo will not forget," answered the lad.

" Good! " exclaimed the chief, reassured.

Whreabo smiled at his brother; then he turned to the fetichman and said: " Toomah, Dale will pay!"

The Bakota rubbed his hands together, nodded his head vigorously, and grunted with satisfaction. He then disclosed his plan.

" Imbundas," cried he, " open your ears! When the sun has passed the middle of the sky the Bakota people will assemble in the palaver-ground to watch Toomah invoke the elements. Old men and old women will be sacrificed; then Toomah and the Bakotas will march to the farm to plant the Protecting Witch. When Toomah and the people are at the farm Mwamba and Whreabo will enter the kraal and steal Dale from the guest-hut."

He paused long enough, as he supposed, to allow all he had said to get well into the Imbundas' heads; and then, evidently expecting their approval, he went on: " Toomah's plan is cunning? "

The brothers glanced questioningly at each other; then each of them, moved by what he had read in the other's eyes, gazed suspiciously at the fetichman, and Mwamba said: "Toomah's plan is cunning too much! Toomah would open Waupau's eyes! Waupau would make the Imbundas sorry. Toomah must make a cleaner plan! "

The fetichman's self-conceit was hurt.

" Waupau will keep Dale," said he surlily.

Whreabo was struck by a happy inspiration.

" No," cried he vehemently, " Whreabo will do! "

The lad's companions gazed at him amazedly.

"Whreabo will fetich the Bakota farm!" exclaimed the youth.

"Wow!" ejaculated the chief, and he stared won-deringly at his brother.

" Whreab'o," continued the lad, " will make believe that he is the Bakota fetichman! Whreabo will throw pepper into Waupau's eyes! "

" If Whreabo knew the fetichman's play," began Mwamba somewhat doubtfully, " he might be — "

" Toomah will teach Whreabo," broke in the Bakota. " Whreabo will dance hard! Whreabo will shout loud ! Then Waupau and the people will think that Whreabo is Toomah."

" Whreabo will do! " cried the lad, his voice ringing with enthusiasm.

Waupau left the Soolah kraal, applauding himself because he had overreached Obomo. He entered his own kraal early the next morning and was received by Tongha, who had arrived some hours before with Dale, now in the guest-hut sleeping off the effects of the drug that had kept him slumbering while he travelled. The chief gave the champion the praise that was due him, then retired to his compound to enjoy a short spell of well-earned rest.

The captain woke up about noon. Perceiving that the day was well advanced, he blamed himself for having slept so long, and wondered why Whreabo had not aroused him. Believing himself still in the Soolah kraal, he arose and went outside to call the lad, but found that he was in the midst of a number of savages who prevented him from either proceeding on his way or returning to the hut.

Dale was unarmed. But even if his weapons, which he erroneously supposed were in the hut, had been in his hands, he scarcely would have used them to compel the savages to give way, for he imagined that they detained him only because of some mistake. Still, he was much annoyed. Hoping, however, to bring the incident to a speedy close, he called loudly for Whreabo.

When Dale shouted, the savages opened their rank; and the captain, supposing they had done so in order that he might pass, started forward. He came face to face with Waupau.

" Why is Dale," cried the chief, barring the American's way, " shouting in the Bakota kraal for the Im-bunda dog? Does Dale think his voice is big enough to travel on the winds to the Soolah kraal? "

Dale had seen Waupau only once before; nevertheless, having an excellent memory for faces,— even black ones,— he recognized him readily. Furthermore, he now scrutinized the warriors more carefully and perceived, by the tribal marks on their faces and breasts, that they were Bakotas. With these evidences before his eyes, he should have grasped the truth; but he did not.

" Waupau," cried he angrily, " you lie! "

"Wow!" exclaimed the chief.

"Get out of my way!" commanded Dale, and he moved forward.

Waupau levelled his spear at Dale, crying: " Dale will stand still! "

The captain halted.

" Dale is not cunning," continued Waupau, his spear still levelled. " Dale must not vex Waupau with ugly words! If Dale does not talk softly Waupau will make Dale sorry too much."

" Let me pass! " cried Dale. " If you keep this game up any longer, I'll take very good care that Obomo makes things hot for you! "

" Waupau is afraid too much! " said the chief mockingly, grinning at Dale.

The warriors, giving courtierlike recognition to their ruler's play-acting, laughed loudly.

Dale, now thoroughly incensed, glared at the Bakotas.

" You confounded idiots ! " cried he angrily, " you'll soon be grinning on the other sides of your ugly mugs." Frowning at the grinning Waupau, he added: " Move yourself! " And he endeavoured to advance.

Waupau again levelled his spear against the captain, and at the same time he cried: " Dale -will stay ! "

The captain had no wish to impale himself on Wau-pau's weapon, so he once more halted, fuming with rage of course. And by now it should have been apparent to him, improbable as it may have seemed, that he had been transferred somehow or other from Obomo's to Waupau's kraal. But he still believed that he was in the Soolah kraal, and that the Bakotas were amusing themselves at his expense. Anyhow, the situation displeased him, and, hoping to get out of it at once, he resorted to trickery.

" Yes, Waupau," said he, smiling pleasantly, " I'm silly. I know well that you would not lie,— of course you wouldn't! True, I fell asleep last night in the Soolah's guest-hut and woke up this morning in yours." " Good!" cried Waupau, "Dale's eyes are open."

He grinned at Dale and removed his spear from threatening him. And the surrounding warriors, loyal to the core, imitated their master; that is, they also grinned at Dale.

" Yes," continued the captain, edging himself toward Waupau, " I'm catching on. But I fail to see how you managed it. You must explain."

" Waupau is cunning too much! " cried the Bakota, still grinning. "Waupau is sly! "

" Waupau is sly! " echoed the warriors.

And, as the savages were endorsing Waupau's expressed opinion of himself, Dale sprang forward, seized the chief by his throat and dashed him violently to one side; and then, as Waupau staggered back exclaiming angrily, he knocked down one of the warriors, who, more ready than his amazed companions, essayed to stop him, and went running at his full speed away from the spot.

Waupau recovered his equilibrium quickly, and, purple with rage, hurled his spear after the retreating captain. The weapon fell short, and the chief grunted with disgust.

" We will catch Dale! We will devour Dale! " yelled the savages, dancing up and down.

They would have pursued the captain, but Waupau prevented them.

"No!" cried the chief, to the excited savages, "no need to chase Dale. When Dale is tired he will stop; when Dale is hungry he will come to Waupau. Wow! "

" Dale will come," shouted the savages, again quiet.

" Good! " exclaimed the chief. Receiving his spear from one of his followers, who had recovered it, he pointed the weapon at the sun, now at the meridian, and continued: " The hour draws nigh for fetiching the farm. Waupau will make himself ready. Come!"

Without more ado Waupau marched away, followed by his warriors.

Dale continued running until he saw that the savages had no intention of pursuing him. He then reduced his speed and moved toward the palaver-ground, and, while passing along, noticed that the streets, except for his presence, were empty of human beings. He wondered what had become of Obomo's people, and, while wondering, reached his destination.

As Dale passed from the street to the palaver-ground he perceived a number of savages, too distant for identification, come from around the fence of the compound and disappear behind a platform. He supposed that these men were Soolahs, and that the platform was the one upon the floor of which Mwamba and Tongha had gambled the night before. Congratulating himself that his troubles for the present were over, he hastened across the wide expanse, passed around to the other side of the platform, and was chagrined to find himself again surrounded by the Bakota warriors, and again face to face with the Bakota chief.

Dale was not one of the profane; nevertheless, when he perceived into whose presence he had come, as he halted a strong oath came from between his lips.

" Wow! " cried Waupau, grinning into the perturbed captain's face.

The warriors evidently enjoyed the situation hugely. They danced around the fuming Dale, and, pointing at him the while, they sang a song descriptive of the incident and improvised for the occasion.

Dale had visited England, and while in that country had spent a few days at Blackpool. On the sands of that popular resort, where peanuts are practically unknown, while periwinkles are plentiful, he had been regaled by a troop of burnt-cork performers who called themselves " The Classical Coons." He had been ravished by their melodies and charmed by their acting; but, now that he was gazing at and listening to the " Real Thing " in its native jungle, the Blackpool players fell many degrees in his estimation.

However, Waupau soon brought the performance to a close, and then turned his attention to the captain.

"What does Dale think of the Bakota kraal? " he asked derisively. " Is it large ? Are the huts well built? Does Dale think—"

"Bakota," broke in Dale, "cease trifling with me! You have carried your folly quite far enough!"

" Dale is stubborn too much! " cried Waupau.

" Out of my way! " exclaimed the captain, and he moved forward.

Waupau had not forgotten how roughly he had been handled by Dale, and did not desire to undergo the experience a second time; so he retreated. The warriors, however, stopped the captain with the points of their spears.

" Dale is a fool too much! " cried Waupau to the American as he halted. " Dale held Waupau's throat hard and made it sorry. Waupau is vexed, but Dale will pay and the vex will go out of Waupau. Dale is in the Bakota kraal! Waupau does not talk lies! Wow!"

" We'll see what Obomo has to say about it," cried Dale angrily, and he proceeded to shout for the Soolah chief.

Waupau made no effort to stop Dale from shouting; he merely grunted and grinned, as did his warriors.

The captain, after vainly exercising his voice until it became hoarse, hushed; and, moved by his failure into wondering if after all he might not be in the Bakota kraal, gazed thoughtfully at the chief.

Waupau chuckled.

The warriors nodded and nudged one another, laughing among themselves.

" Dale," said Waupau after a brief pause, " has called until his talk is tired, and Obomo has not come.

If this were the Soolah kraal would not Obomo have heard Dale? Would not Waupau have closed Dale's mouth? "

The captain, though in doubt, was not entirely convinced.

"Waupau," cried he, "do you think I'm an utter chump?. Do you expect me to believe that I have walked in my sleep? "

Waupau shook his head despairingly.

" Dale's head is empty of know too much! " said he. " Dale doesn't eat enough pepper."

"You are trying to throw pepper into my eyes!" retorted the American angrily.

" Dale shoots arrows without heads," returned the chief.

" If I had my gun, I'd shoot something into your head! " cried Dale.

"Dale's gun is in the Soolah kraal," said Waupau; and, evidently pleased that the fact was as he had stated, he grinned.

Dale growled.

" Waupau," continued the chief, " will make straight talk to Dale. Dale will open his ears! "

" I'll open nothing! " cried Dale impatiently.

" Dale will open his ears ! " repeated the chief gravely. " Waupau does not want to take Dale's head."

" Rats ! " cried the captain.

The warriors supposed that Dale had uttered this opprobrious term to insult Waupau and became angry. They clamorously begged the chief to chop off Dale's head.

"The Bakotas will hush!" commanded Waupau loudly, gazing fiercely at the clamoring savages.

The warriors became silent, but glared blackly at the captain.

" Dale's head is no good! " continued the chief.

" The devil it isn't! " thought Dale.

" Dale will give the Bakotas gin! " added Waupau.

The warriors stopped scowling and smiled widely. Nodding at Dale in a most friendly fashion, they cried: " Good! Dale is a big chief too much! "

The captain, amused by the sudden-change for the better, which the mere promise of gin had brought to the manners of the savages, laughed aloud.

Waupau, thinking that Dale laughed because his head was safe, nodded to him encouragingly.

" Good! " cried he. " Dale will let his glad come out! Waupau will not take Dale's head. Will Dale open his ears ? "

" All right, fire away! " returned the captain resignedly.

" Dale shouted at the gamble? " said the chief.

" Yes, I shouted," acknowledged the captain. " But suppose I did, what of it? "

" Dale's shout," continued Waupau, " made the Bakota witch afraid and it ran away; then Mwamba won the gamble."

" Good Lord! " thought Dale. " I used that 'ghost story ' to persuade Mwamba and now this brute is using it to coerce me. This fetich business seems to be cutting both ways! "

" Dale will pay," went on the chief. " Waupau couldn't make Dale pay while Dale was in the Soolah kraal, so he had him brought here. Tongha did steal Dale."

" Brought me here while I slept? " asked Dale.

" Yes," was the answer of the Bakota chief.

" That sounds very fishy," said Dale. " I'm a very light sleeper at all times."

Waupau grinned.

" Waupau is cunning," said he. " Dale ate make-sleep-come medicine. When Dale woke up in the Bakota guest-hut, was his head not heavy? "

"Yes, it was; and, it's heavy now," answered the captain.

" Dale's head," explained the chief, " is heavy because he ate the medicine. The heavy will soon go away."

" I hope so," said Dale ruefully.

" Are Dale's eyes open? " said Waupau. " Is Dale in the Bakota kraal? "

" I guess you're right, Waupau," returned Dale, at last thoroughly convinced. " You've got me all right."

The chief grinned; of course his warriors copied him.

" The inside of Dale's head is now full of know," said Waupau. " Dale will pay! When Dale has paid, Waupau will let him go away from the Bakota kraal."

" Let me go now," suggested Dale. " I'll send you your price from Monrovia."

Waupau, his countenance lengthening, shook his head dissentingly.

"No!" cried he with much emphasis. "Dale will send! If Dale were to go to Monrovia, he might forget."

Dale, feverishly anxious to return to the Soolah kraal, began protesting, and, while he was so doing, a horn sounded inside the compound. Whereupon Waupau interrupted.

" Dale," said he, " the horn calls Waupau to make himself ready for the big play. Waupau will talk more to Dale after the farm has been placed under the protection of the witch. Dale will climb to the floor of the platform and watch the Bakotas. When the Ba-kotas come, Dale will not talk! "

" But, Waupau —" began the captain, eager to come to an understanding with the chief at once.

" Waupau has spoken! " cried the chief with finality; and, followed by his warriors, he marched away.

The captain, thoroughly disgusted, watched the Bakotas until they had passed a small hut,— the blood-red color of which indicated that it belonged to the executioner,— and disappeared through the gateway of the compound. After he had anathematized Waupau, he climbed to the floor of the platform and began studying his surroundings.

A few minutes later, while he was gazing away from the compound toward the huts of the common people, he saw a host of natives,— of both sexes and all ages,— suddenly appear in the streets and quickly emerge from them into the palaver-ground. Yelling, screaming, shouting, gesticulating all the time as though mad, they advanced to within a few yards of the platform. Here they halted abruptly, squatted themselves upon their haunches, and in silence gazed expectantly at the gates of the compound.

A few minutes after the proletariat had thus assembled, a horn sounded loudly inside the enclosure, whence, a moment later, marched Waupau and a number of warriors and headmen, preceded by a band of musicians playing barbaric tunes upon native fiddles, horns, and drums. They were decorated fantastically.

This procession crossed to the platform, to the floor of which Waupau ascended and stood beside Dale, who, as may well be supposed, viewed the strange scene with surpassing interest. The cortege, remaining upon the ground, placed themselves at both sides of the platform ; then the headmen, and the warriors, saluted Waupau with their spears; and at the same time they shouted: " Father! Father! "

The squatted multitude repeated this cry; then they bent forward and rubbed their foreheads in the dust.

Waupau gazed proudly at his subjects and addressed them.

" Bakotas," cried he, "Waupau is your father!"

The assemblage murmured assentingly; then the grovelling natives straightened up, while the headmen and the warriors Jiowered their weapons.

The chief grinned at the American.

" Dale," said he, " Waupau is a great chief too much! "

The captain suppressed a smile that was struggling to show itself in his face and admitted that the Bako-ta's claim was well founded.

" I guess you're about as great as they make 'em," said he.

" Good! " cried Waupau, much pleased. He nodded to the captain, then, turning from him, resumed the performance of his grave duties.

" Bakotas, be glad!" cried he.

" Waupau! Waupau! " responded the crowd loudly.

" Good! " shouted the chief, and he waved his hand.

The musicians, in obedience to Waupau's signal, began playing a dirgelike tune. Then the people started to moaning and wailing, and bent their gaze upon the blood-red hut, from which, the next moment, emerged the executioner and twelve entirely naked, unchalked, miserable old men and old women. The butcher's gigantic body was painted vermilion. Brandishing a huge sword, and shouting, he led his intended victims forward and halted them before the platform. He advanced a few steps away from his charge, and, the music and the people having hushed, cried: " Waupau, Shortum has brought the condemned!" " Good! " replied the chief.

The man of bloody deeds drew back and hungrily eved those whom he expected to operate upon. And while he was thus anticipating the joys to come, the shrill yell of a human voice came into the place from the compound.

When the Bakotas heard this yell they all gazed eagerly in the direction whence it had come and excitedly screamed: " Witch-doctor! Witch-doctor! "

And while the savages were thus exercising their lungs, the Witch-doctor,— more often called fetich-man,— danced from the compound into their sight.

The musicians resumed playing, but now favored their audience with a sort of jig-tune. The fetichman advanced gyrating, and jumping, and twisting his body into the queerest kinds of shapes, yet all the while keeping his movements strictly in time with the music. He halted close to the platform and posed, to be admired. The Bakotas gazed awesomely at the man of mystery. Dale, much amused, was strongly inclined to laugh; but, suspecting that it behooved him to keep his face straight, he controlled the inclination.

The fetichman was a sight wonderful to behold! His head and face were hidden within an immense gourd. The surface on the sides of this ku-klux-klan-like headpiece was covered with strange-looking devices painted in various colors and a towering wig made of feathers, grass, and rags, crowned its top. He wore no clothes, but was so thoroughly decorated with fetiches and charms that his nakedness was scarcely discernible. His right hand was painted white, his left, a staring yellow, and in his ornamented hands he carried two long wands tipped with plumes.

The fetichman, after he had posed several seconds, waved his wands, and, as the music ceased, faced Wau-pau. In a voice muffled by the gourd he cried: " Waupau, Toomah has come to plant the protecting witch! "

" Good! " ejaculated the chief.

" Toomah! Toomah! " shouted the crowd.

When the people shouted, Toomah turned to them and, by a wave of his wands, acknowledged the compliment they had paid him. He danced a bit. Then, pointing his wands toward the gates of the compound, he cried: " Witch comes! Witch comes! "

The musicians began playing another dance-tune,— a sort of minuet. And as the music sounded, a score of lads and lassies came from the compound. They were nude, and their smooth and spotless skins were innocent of paint.

Tiny horns of the Royal antelope, indicating that their wearers belonged to the gree-gree bush, were fastened at the necks of the girls, one of whom carried a bunch of ribboned rags. The boys, devil-bush students, were bearing a long pole that tapered to a point at one of its ends.

The young folk crossed to the platform and, after the rags were handed to Waupan and the pole was placed within easy reach of the fetichman, danced to the music.

And while the dancing was going on, Waupau examined the rags carefully, to discover whether they were clean and, therefore, worthy of the high .purpose to which they were about to be put. He found that they were suitable, and a little later on, after the dancers had stopped and the musicians had ceased playing, declared his judgment loudly.

" Bakotas," cried the chief, holding the rags on high, " they are white like the flower of the cotton tree! "

The people shouted joyfully.

" 0 Witch-doctor," cried Waupau, addressing the fetichman, " it is clean! It is pure! It is fit to be anointed Protector! Waupau has spoken."

He passed the rags to the witch-doctor.

"Good!" exclaimed the fetichman, as he took the bunch.

" Toomah will do ! " continued the chief.

" Toomah will do! " responded the fetichman.

He brought into sight, from somewhere about his person, a small bottle-shaped vessel which contained a liquid supposed to possess very wonderful virtues. Muttering an incantation the while, he poured the precious stuff over the rags, which he then fastened firmly to the smaller end of the pole.

So soon as this was accomplished, the devil-bush lads raised the pole and held it upright, with its larger end resting upon the ground.

" A first-class scarecrow," thought Dale, amused and interested.

The fetichman pointed his wands at the translated rags.

" Bakotas, behold! " cried he.

" Wow! " exclaimed Waupau.

The warriors clashed their spears and shields together, the populace screamed.

" Toomah will do ! Toomah will do! "

The fetichman, obeying the voice of the people, waved his wands toward the four quarters of the heavens, each in turn. At the same time he exclaimed — " O winds, be kind! O winds, breathe gently over the Bakota farm! "

" O winds, breathe gently! " cried the people imploringly.

The fetichman now turned his encased face up toward the sun and waved his wands.

" O sun," cried he, " dry not the water before it falls! O sun, compel not the Bakota farm to go thirsty! Hear us! Hear us! "

" Hear us, hear us, O sun! " entreated the people.

The fetichman capered about awhile quite gracefully, after the manner of an excited monkey; then, after he had paused, he exclaimed: " Bakotas, open your ears ! "

" Toomah will let his cunning come out! " cried Waupau.

The fetichman again pointed his wands at the rags.

" Bakotas," cried he, " salute witch! "

"Good witch! Good witch!" yelled the people to the bunch of rags, and they bowed their heads to it.

" Witch is fond of children," continued the fetichman. " If you would have it prevent marauding birds from despoiling the Bakota farm of growing grain, then see that your children amuse it. They must dance before witch each day, from early dawn until night comes, until the harvest is gathered! Bakotas, obey, and your granaries will become full! Disobey, and they will be empty! "

"The Bakotas will obey!" cried Waupau; and he glared at his subjects as though he were saying: " And you better had! "

The people understood the meaning in the chief's look and shivered with fear.

" We will obey! We will obey! " they hastily screamed.

" Toomah has spoken! " cried the fetichman; and, after giving a final flourish with his wands, he squatted himself.

As the fetichman retired from the front of the stage, Waupau advanced to the edge of the platform's floor. He raised his spear, and, gazing proudly at the people, shouted: " Waupau is a big chief! "

" Waupau! Waupau! " was the general response.

"Waupau is cunning too much!" continued the chief. Pointing at Dale, he went on, " Waupau stole Dale from the Soolah kraal! Dale will pay Waupau! Waupau will be rich! Wow! "

The populace shouted, the warriors clashed their spears and shields together, the musicians played on their instruments furiously. They continued this din and clatter a few seconds, then hushed and gazed hungrily at the condemned.

" The sacrifice! The sacrifice! " cried they.

Waupau nodded to the executioner and said to him: " Shortum will do! "

" Good! " cried Shortum joyfully.

He dragged one of the condemned forward and forced him to his knees. And Waupau, frowning, not a gleam of pity showing in his eyes, addressed the kneeling wretch.

" Poonah is old too much! " said the chief harshly. " The Bakotas are tired of finding food for Poonah to eat. Shortum will take Poonah's head. Wow!"

" Do! Do! " yelled the crowd, grown impatient.

" Do!" said Waupau.

" Good! " cried the executioner.

He moved a pace back and raised his sword. Before he could strike, though, Dale, horrified, jumped from the platform and thrust him to one side.

"You painted devil," cried Dale, addressing the executioner, as he repulsed him, " not on your life! "

The captain acted with such suddenness that Shortum and Waupau,— in fact, all of the Bakotas,— were so surprised that they did nothing but glare amazedly at him. After a moment, however, they recovered their presence of mind and began murmuring angrily.

Then, after another moment, one of the warriors shouted: " Take Dale's head!"

" Dale's head! Dale's head ! " screamed the crowd, and they seemed to be on the point of rushing forward.

Dale was beginning to feel somewhat alarmed; and with very good reason. For had the fetichman not intervened and quieted the angry Bakotas, there is no saying what would have taken place. As it was, however, the storm passed; but Waupau gazed blackly at the cavalryman, and, speaking sternly to him, said: " Dale is not cunning! "

" Waupau," returned the captain, " I'm not in the habit of abetting murder. These helpless old men and women shall not be slaughtered! It shall not be done t "

" They are old and useless," growled the chief.

" That's no reason why their lives should be cut short," retorted Dale. " I guess, Waupau, when old age tackles you, you'll not be willing to offer your neck to the sword of any executioner. Anyhow, you must take this number out of the day's program. I tell you what I'll do. I'll buy them! "

Waupau grinned in a way that showed that he was open to make a bargain.

" What say you? " added Dale eagerly.

"What will Dale pay?" asked the chief.

" Whatever you may demand," said Dale. " Cloth, beads, tobacco,— yes, anything! "

"Gin?" asked Waupau anxiously.

" Gallons of the stuff! " answered the captain.

" Good! " exclaimed the chief. " Shortum will not do. Waupau has spoken! Dale will come back to the platform! "

" All right," cried Dale; and he started to return to the floor of the platform.

" Dale will stay! " cried the fetichman, springing in front of the captain and barring his way.

The captain halted and wondered what was to happen next.

" Toomah," cried Waupau, frowning at the fetich-man, " why must Dale stay? "

" Dale has broken the law," replied the fetichman.

" Toomah will take him to the hut of fetich. Toomah will make Dale sorry too much! "

" It seems I'm not out of the woods yet," thought the captain ruefully.

Waupau saw the things that Dale had ag Teed to pay him slipping into the possession of the fetichman. He did not like, the picture at all.

" Toomah," cried he angrily, " Dale belongs to Waupau! Waupau will not let him go to —"

" Waupau will hush! " commanded the fetichman, interrupting. " Waupau will lead his people to the farm. After Dale has been made sorry, Toomah will join the Bakotas and plant the witch. Waupau will go quickly! The witch-doctor has spoken! Wow!" There was no appeal from the fetichman's decision, so Waupau, though very unwillingly, gave way; and soon afterward started with his people for the Bakota farm.

Dale and the fetichman remained behind.

The fetichman watched the Bakotas until they had passed from the palaver-ground and out of sight; then he turned to Dale and chuckled inside of his gourd.

" The beast intends to play me some kind of ugly trick," thought the captain; " but I guess he'll discover that I'm not exactly an easy nut to crack. If he —"

" Dale will come! " said the fetichman, breaking in on the captain's reflections; and, giving another chuckle, he started toward the compound.

The captain, wondering what the fetichman purposed doing to him, followed.

They passed inside the compound and emerged at its opposite side into a narrow path that ran through an obscure part of the kraal to a small gate in the, barricade, and thence between tall hedges of shrubbery to a forest. They hurried over this path, and in a little while were among the trees. Then the fetichman called a halt. He uncovered his head and, disclosing the grinning, perspiring face of Whreabo, cried: " Wow! "

Dale glared at the young Imbunda as though he could not believe his own eyes. He was surprised into profanity.

" Well, may I be damned! " cried he.

" Good! May Dale be damned! " echoed Whreabo, intending to be polite.

" What does it mean ? " asked Dale.

" Waupau stole Dale from the Soolah kraal," said Whreabo, still grinning.

" Tell me something, I don't know."

" Whreabo threw pepper into Waupau's eyes," went on the lad, " and stole Dale from the Bakota kraal. Waupau is an old woman! Wow!"

The captain gazed admiringly at the youth, exclaiming: " By George, Whreabo, you're great! "

" Whreabo is great! " assented the lad proudly.

" How did you manage it? Whatever put the idea into your head? "

"No time to talk now, Dale," said the Imbunda. "We will run. Come!"

He replaced the gourd over his head. Then he and the captain hastened along the path, and after a time arrived safely at the secret hut, where Mwamba and Toomah, both of whom had been on tenterhooks of anxiety, wondering whether Whreabo would succeed in his daring attempt, received them very gladly.

Then, while Dale and Whreabo were partaking heartily of a meal that Mwamba had compelled Toomah to prepare against their coming, the lad described how he had performed while in the Bakota kraal.

Mwamba and Toomah listened very attentively, and every now and then grunted approvingly, or laughed loudly; and when the lad concluded his tale they ejaculated, almost together: " Good! "

" One of these days Whreabo will be a big fetich-man," suggested Toomah.

" He'll be nothing of the kind!" joined in Dale. " When we return to Monrovia I shall enlist Whreabo in the Constabulary Force. I'll make him a sergeant at once."

The idea of his becoming a member of the Constabulary Force, and a sergeant at that, seemed to please Whreabo exceedingly. His eyes sparkled. Showing all of his big, white teeth in a happy grin he thanked Dale effusively.

"Whreabo, what is sergeant?" asked Mwamba, after the lad hushed.

" Sergeant makes the common-fellows stand up straight," explained the lad. Expanding his chest, he added: " When Whreabo is sergeant he will carry a big" stick! Whreabo will flog the common fellows too much!"

Mwamba gazed somewhat enviously at his young brother.

" When Whreabo is sergeant, who will flog Whreabo ? " asked Toomah.

Whreabo, ignoring Toomah's question, gave strict attention to his food. Probably he thought it below the dignity of his prospective rank to answer.

But Toomah was not to be put off so easily.

" Whreabo, Toomah's ears are open big! " said he.

The lad was not to be drawn. He arose from before the bowl, the late contents of which he had disposed of, and, smiling contentedly, exclaimed: " Whreabo's belly full too much! "

" I'm feeling quite comfortable myself," said Dale, who had finished eating some time before. Turning to the chief he went on: " Now, Mwamba, suppose we start for your kraal? "

" Mwamba must first go to the Soolah kraal," returned the chief.

Dale frowned.

" What for? " asked he impatiently.

" Mwamba wants to take Obomo's daughter, Pootie, to his kraal," explained the chief. " When Pootie is in the new hut that has been built for her, Mwamba will go with Dale and take Lodango's head."

" Let Pootie wait until afterward," suggested the captain.

" Mwamba has spoken! " exclaimed the chief with finality.

The captain, perceiving that it would be useless to argue with the savage, controlled his impatience as best he could, and,— in that connection,— said no more. He arranged to send the reward that Whreabo had promised Toomah, armed himself with a keen-edged sword from the weapons that were upon the platform, and then started with the brothers for Obomo's kraal.

Several hours later Dale and the Imbundas were marching through a dense forest. It was nighttime and, though a myriad of stars were twinkling in the heavens, the path was pitchy dark. While advancing slowly, in a sense feeling their way, they half-circled a clump of shrubbery and unexpectedly found themselves almost touching a party of savages hurrying toward the Bakota kraal.

The captain and the brothers, unable to identify the newcomers in the dark, but suspecting that they were Bakotas, were alarmed. With a low exclamation, they started back.

" Mwamba," said Dale quickly, " they are too many for us to fight. We must run! "

"Mwamba will run!" rejoined the chief, and he started off.

As the chief started, one of the strangers cried: " Has Mwamba become an old woman? "

"Wow! " exclaimed the chief, and he halted, as did Dale and Whreabo, who also had started to retreat.

"Is it Choochoo?" asked Mwamba after he had paused.

" Choochoo the Soolah Headman am I!" replied the savage. Moving closer to the chief, he went on: "Was Mwamba afraid? Was the Imbunda Lion about to run away? "

" Choochoo talks wind! " cried the Imbunda Lion indignantly. " Mwamba was not going to run far."

" What a screamer! " thought Dale, laughing to himself.

" Mwamba," continued the chief, " was throwing pepper into Choochoo's eyes. Wow!"

" Mwamba is cunning too much! " cried Whreabo, supporting his brother.

Choochoo, though somewhat incredulous, was too much of a courtier to contradict so powerful a chief as Mwamba.

" Good! " cried he. " Mwamba was throwing pepper into Choochoo's eyes. Mwamba is cunning too much!"

Mwamba, perceiving that his reputation was safe, grunted with satisfaction.

" By and by," said he, " Mwamba will make Choochoo's heart glad. But why are Choochoo and his warriors on the path? Mwamba's ears are open!"

" Obomo has sent Pootie to Mwamba's kraal," answered the Soolah.

Dale was pleased to hear this, and he exclaimed joyfully : " Good! " ejaculated the chief.

" Choochoo is to remain with Mwamba," continued the headman, " until the banana tree has been planted. Afterward Choochoo will carry Mwamba's joy-presents to Obomo."

"Good!" again ejaculated the chief, evidently pleased. " Mwamba will go to his kraal quickly. Choochoo and his warriors will go with Mwamba."

" Choochoo will go with Mwamba," replied the headman.

" Dale is glad? " said the chief to the American.

" Glad doesn't describe it! " cried Dale.

Choochoo took a letter out of a leather pouch that dangled from his shoulder, and said: " Dale, a Kruman from Monrovia brought a book for you." He delivered the missive to the captain, then added: "Now Choochoo's hands are clean."

Dale thanked the Soolah and thrust the letter into his pocket. He would have read it, but the darkness was too intense, and the few matches he had were much too precious to lightly expend.

" We will go ! " said Mwamba.

" Good! " returned Choochoo, and he marched ahead with his warriors and Whreabo. > Dale and Mwamba followed the others, and about an hour later reached a wide, rapid river, which they intended to cross. There were no canoes in sight, however, and Dale, perceiving this, became anxious. He disclosed his anxiety to Mwamba.

" Dale must not be sorry," answered the chief. " A river that is too deep to be waded, or too wide to be bridged with the trunk of a tree, always has canoes hidden away somewhere near its crossing place. Does Dale see Whreabo and the Soolahs? "

Dale peered about into the darkness and became aware that Whreabo and the Soolahs were not there.

" No; where are they? " he asked.

" Whreabo and the Soolahs are searching for canoes. Dale will stop chewing wind."

The captain ceased to chew wind, that is, he did no more complaining, and waited patiently. Shortly afterward he was rewarded for his good behavior by the arrival of Whreabo and the Soolahs with one large canoe and two small ones.

The natives, talking excitedly to one another, drew the vessels up to the landing and came ashore. Choo-choo drew Mwamba aside and whispered into his ear.

Dale suspected that something had gone amiss. He crossed to the others and questioned Mwamba.

" Choochoo has seen signs," answered the chief gravely.

This told the American nothing.

" Signs of what? " asked he somewhat impatiently.

" Nynnegies," replied Mwamba tersely.

" And what are they? " said Dale, still in the dark.

" Nynnegies are Nynnegies," volunteered Whreabo.

" I suppose they are," said Dale, still puzzled. " But your explanation leaves me quite as ignorant as I was before you made it. What are Nynnegies? What are the things supposed to do?"

Mwamba gazed wide-eyed with astonishment at the captain, crying: " Dale doesn't know? "

" I guess you've hit it," said the American.

" Dale's head is empty of know too much! " growled the headman.

Choochoo's remark offended Mwamba. He considered it a liberty.

" Choochoo," said the chief, reprimanding, " will keep his words inside of his mouth! "

" Choochoo's eyes are full of water," returned the headman humbly.

"Good!" ejaculated Mwamba. Speaking to Dale, he went on: " Dale, Nynnegies are devils! They hide on a little island that's in the middle of the river and catch travellers who cross in the night. Nynnegies kill! Will Dale cross the river? "

" Of course I'll cross," cried the captain.

The savages glanced at one another dubiously.

" Man the canoes at once! " commanded Dale.

The savages, evidently unwilling to venture the passage of the river, stood fast and murmured mutinously.

Dale, observing their mood, became angry.

" Are you cowards? " cried he.

" Wow ! " cried the savages.

"You are afraid of the Nynnegies!" continued the captain.

" Dale talks lies! " cried Mwamba angrily. " Mwamba will devour the Nynnegies! Mwamba will cross the river!"

" Whreabo will cross the river! " shouted the lad.

" Choochoo will cross the river! " screamed the headman.

"We will cross! We will cross!" yelled the warriors, and they clashed their spears against their shields.

Dale, pleased by the success that had attended his maneuver, chuckled.

" Right you are! " cried he. " If the brutes tackle us, we'll make them wish they had never been born."

"Wow! Wow!" cried the savages.

" Dale will come! " said Mwamba, and he placed himself at the stern of one of the small canoes.

Dale embarked, and the next moment the Imbundas were paddling him across the river, while the Soolahs, getting into the other canoes, quickly followed.

The Imbundas, paddling vigorously, forced the canoe that held them and Dale rapidly through the water and, a few minutes after leaving the shore, brought it opposite the islet that Mwamba had mentioned as being situated in the middle of the stream.

So far all had gone well, and the captain was laughing to himself at the savages for having been afraid to attempt the passage; but, as he was on the eve of discovering, the laugh, if there were occasion for it, was really against himself.

He was seated between the brothers, back to back with Whreabo, who was paddling in the bow, and facing Mwamba, who was steering and paddling in the stem. He was gazing past the latter at the other small canoe, which, containing two Soolahs, followed close in his wake; and while he was gazing at this canoe he saw it suddenly capsize and spill its passengers into the rushing water. He could not see what had caused the upset, but suspected that in the darkness the Soolahs had run their vessel against a log, or other floatage such as is invariably present in West African rivers to render their navigation, except in the broad daylight, supremely dangerous. Howsoever the accident,— as he imagined it to be,— had happened, the Soolahs must be rescued, so he called to the Imbundas to stop the canoe.

The brothers, unaware of what had occurred, backed water until the canoe became almost stationary; then they rested on their paddles, and Mwamba questioned the captain.

" Dale," said the chief, " what's the matter? "

" The other small canoe has capsized," explained Dale, pointing astern.

"Wow!" exclaimed the Imbundas excitedly.

They peered over the sides of the canoe and keenly searched the swiftly-running water.

" Are you looking for the Soolahs? " asked Dale.

" No," said Mwamba, still searching.

" For what, then? " persisted the captain.

" Nynnegies," answered Mwamba shortly.

Dale was skeptical.

"Absurd!" cried he; the next moment, though, his unbelief was startled out of him.

He and the brothers saw a black human hand emerge from the water and steal toward the canoe. It held a big hook attached to a rope. At first the captain was so much amazed that all he could do was glare at the approaching paw; his companions, however, were fully alive.

" Nynnegies! Nynnegies! " they yelled.

And they dipped their paddles deep into the water to drive the canoe away from the danger-spot.

" Wait! " cried the captain quickly, and he drew his sword.

The Imbundas paused with their paddles dipped.

The hand, breathlessly watched by Dale and the brothers, reached the canoe. It climbed slowly up its side and came over, its wrist resting on the gunwale.

The American raised his sword.

" Dale will do! " whispered Mwamba, his voice full of excitement.

" Right! " cried the captain, and he brought his keen weapon down with great force upon the wrist. The joint was completely severed! The hand fell into the belly of the canoe and carried with it the hook, which, unseen by the agitated men, became fastened there; the arm, spouting blood, sank back into the river.

"Wow!" exclaimed the Imbundas as Dale amputated the paw.

They all gazed over the side and searched, the swirling black water, hoping to discover the supposed Nynnegie. They searched in vain. And while they were thus employed, the rope suddenly became taut and dragged the canoe around until its prow pointed toward the islet, then forward with incredible speed.

When the canoe turned, its human freight exclaimed with amazement as well as with alarm. They wondered what power it was that propelled them, but did not dare to investigate. The little vessel, racing on its strange journey, tossed and pitched so violently that those in it were compelled to sit tight to save themselves from being dumped overboard.

" This is interesting! " thought Dale. Raising his voice so that it dominated the noise made by the canoe's rushing through the water, he cried: " Mwamba, what's dragging us? "

" Mwamba's head is empty of know," returned the chief. " Dale will feel in the canoe and see if there's a rope."

" You should ask me to do something easy," shouted Dale, clinging to a cross-piece. " If I let go this piece of wood, I'll go over the side as sure as fate."

" Dale will not let go,'' said Mwamba gravely.

There was a brief pause, meanwhile the canoe continued rapidly to approach the islet.

" Dale," cried Whreabo, " we are going to the little island! "

" The Nynnegies are there! " cried Mwamba. " Dale will fight?"

" If I'm not drowned before the chance comes," growled the captain.

" Good! " exclaimed the chief. Speaking to his brother, he said: "Whreabo is not afraid?"

Whreabo's feelings were somewhat tangled. He was afraid of the danger he vras approaching, yet more afraid of showing that he was frightened; he wished himself anywhere but where he was, yet was exceed-ingly glad that he was there. In a word, the lad was filled with that kind of courageous apprehension that usually disturbs even the bravest of the brave on the eve of his first battle. However, determined to win his spurs, if it were possible, he cried: " Whreabo is an Imbunda! Whreabo will devour them! "

" Good!" again ejaculated the chief.

The canoe drew near to the islet whereon our travellers perceived about a dozen armed savages jumping about, flourishing their weapons, and yelling hideously. Dale uttered a short prayer to the one and only God! Mwamba and Whreabo appealed to the Imbunda fetich.

The canoe grated its keel over the bottom, then became fixed. Dale, with the Imbundas, gave a great shout and sprang into the water knee-deep. They waded ashore through a cloud of arrows, unskillfully aimed by the screaming Nynnegies, and which did them no harm, and the next moment were engaged hand-to-hand with the bloodthirsty brutes.

The cavalryman and his companions, fighting for their lives, put three or four of their opponents out of action. Then the Nynnegies retreated a few paces, halted, and hurled their spears. The Imbundas received the missiles upon their shields. Dale and the brothers remained untouched. They darted forward and brought the struggle again to close quarters.

Civilized and savage alike were now filled with rage and a lust for human blood. They fought as though they were unthinking brutes,— madly! They cut and slashed and stabbed! They shouted, cursed, yelled, and swore!

But, alas! in war, as in finance and love, victory does not always smile upon the most deserving. She usually favors the numerically stronger side; that is, unless the less numerous party is armed with quick-firing guns, dum-dum bullets, and the other harmless weapons that humane Europeans think it criminal to employ against one another but cheerfully use to Christianize and civilize the poor, helpless, black African.

And in the present instance this rule held good, for Dale and the Imbundas, being the weaker party and not armed with weapons any more effective than those used by their opponents, were compelled gradually to give way, until at length they looked upon themselves as little better than dead men.

Reduced to this sad strait, Dale thought of his mother and Lupelta, and even Hulda crossed his mind; and as he fought on, determined to die fighting, if die he must, he murmured a prayer.

But the Imbundas loudly cursed the absent Soolahs for, as it seemed, having deserted them in their need. They were unjust. For even while they were exclaiming, and the Nynnegies, certain of the victory, in a body were about to rush upon them and Dale, the large canoe beached.

Choochoo.and his warriors jumped ashore and joined their voices to the din, their bodies to the fray. Dale and his allies again took up the offensive, and after a little while the Nynnegies threw up the sponge. The defeated savages, hotly pursued by their conquerors, fled pell-mell to the river, into which they dived and disappeared. The victors halted upon the bank. They were jubilant!

"Wow!" cried the Imbunda chief. " Mwamba devoured them! "

" Whreabo devoured them! " cried the lad, determined to have a share of the applause.

" Choochoo devoured them! " shouted the headman, unwilling to be left out in the cold.

" I guess some one by the name of Dale did some of the devouring, too! " said the captain, smiling.

" I devoured them! " cried each of the warriors, evidently very much pleased with himself.

It was a sort of Mutual Admiration Society! And, why not? For as the "Autocrat of the Breakfast Table " says: " All generous companies . . . ought to be Societies of Mutual Admiration." Doubtless it was an oversight on the part of Doctor Holmes that he did not mention warriors in this connection, for are not warriors the salt of the earth, do intellectuals in comparison count for much? Ask the Spirit of the Times!

" Any of us injured? " asked Dale.

" Mwamba is not hurt," said the chief, wiping his sword in the grass.

" Whreabo's arm is scratched," said the lad, and he proudly displayed a gash on his shoulder.

Mwamba gazed very approvingly at his young brother and cried: " Good! Whreabo is now a warrior! "

"Wow!" exclaimed Whreabo joyfully, and he capered a bit.

The headman pointed at two dead bodies that were lying near the edge of the river.

" Two Soolahs are dead! " said he.

The warriors moaned.

" By George! " exclaimed Dale. " Were they in the canoe that capsized? "

" Yes," said the headman. " The Nynnegies put their hooks into them and dragged them through the water. The Soolah warriors are dead too much! "

The living warriors groaned again.

" Many Nynnegies are dead too! " cried Whreabo exultingly.

"To-morrow," joined in the chief sternly, "there will be much weeping and wailing in the huts of the Nynnegies! "

" Choochoo, we will bury them," said Dale.

" No; " replied the headman. " We will carry them to the Banta kraal and have them smoked."

" We will go! " said Mwamba.

The Soolahs placed their dead in the large canoe, then they embarked and paddled away from the islet, singing mournfully.

Dale and the Imbundas entered the small canoe and followed in the wake of the chanting warriors.

Dale and his party reached the mainland without incurring any further hazard, and about a half-hour later arrived, tired and hungry, at the Banta kraal.

The kraal contained something like a dozen dilapidated huts. The abject poverty of the people being a sufficient protection, it was not barricaded. The Bantas were but a few. The miserable creatures, ignorant of even the most primitive methods of agriculture, cultivated neither farms nor orchards; nor did they hunt the game with which forest and stream were teeming.

The Bantas procured their food, which was about their only need, from travelers, who,— as the kraal was situated at the junction of several paths over which much journeying was done,— were numerous; consequently, as a rule, they had enough to eat. Now and again, though,— sometimes because of very inclement weather, sometimes because of tribal wars,— no travelers came to the kraal, with the result that the slothful wretches underwent a period of the severest famine. Many actually died of starvation, even though Nature's larder was at hand,— and full.

Now our travelers reached the kraal at a time when its fleshpots were practically empty. Unaware of this, however, they entered with the expectation of appeasing their hunger with something tasty as well as satisfying; so it is easy to imagine how greatly crestfallen they became when they were informed that the Bantas' cupboard, like Old Mother Hubbard's, was bare.

" Goohoo is hungry too much! " said the Banta chief to Mwamba, who had demanded food. " Goohoo has nothing eatable to give the travelers."

Dale groaned and gazed ruefully at Mwamba.

" Must we starve? " asked he.

The Imbunda chief smiled.

" Dale will not be sorry," said he reassuringly. " The Banta is talking lies. Mwamba will make him find food. Mwamba is cunning too much! "

" I hope it's all right," said Dale doubtfully.

" Mwamba has spoken! " exclaimed the Imbunda with emphasis.

" Mwamba has spoken! " repeated Whreabo loudly.

Dale's interiorward sensations were becoming positively painful, and he was inclined to be irritable.

" You needn't shout," cried he, scowling at Whreabo. " I'm not deaf! "

" Dale's empty inside is making him vexed too much! " exclaimed the lad.

" Mwamba," continued the captain, " make the chap fetch something at once. I'm famished! "

" Mwamba will do! " responded the Imbunda; and he proceeded to work upon the Banta.

" Goohoo has manioc? " said he.

The Banta made no reply.

" Goohoo," said Mwamba suggestively, " we have spears! "

Whreabo and the Soolahs growled and struck their spears and shields together.

" Goohoo has manioc? " repeated Mwamba sternly.

" Goohoo has manioc," muttered the Banta, with much reluctance.

"Good!" ejaculated Mwamba.

Dale chuckled, Whreabo and the Soolahs grunted.

" Goohoo has meat? " continued Mwamba.

The Banta glared darkly at his inquisitor.

" Goohoo' has one piece," said he.

" Good!" again ejaculated Mwamba; then, scowling at -the Banta, he sternly said: " Goohoo would break the law? "

The Soolahs growled deeply and glared threateningly at the Banta chief.

The Banta shivered with fear and said: " Goohoo has only a little manioc and you are many. You will eat all of it. There will be none left for Goohoo when he becomes hungry."

" When Goohoo becomes hungry we will be glad," said Mwamba heartlessly. " Goohoo will bring the manioc and the meat. Mwamba has spoken! "

" Goohoo will do," said the Banta surlily, and he went off, muttering curses.

Dale glanced around the large, open kitchen in which he was seated on an overturned mortar; then, being curious regarding the law to which Mwamba had referred when talking to Goohoo, he turned to the chief, who, like the rest of the savages, was squatting on the ground, and questioned him.

" Mwamba, what is the law? " asked he.

" Dale," responded Mwamba, " it is the Hospitality Law."

" The name sounds all right," remarked the captain. " But what does it cover? "

The Imbunda smiled and learnedly answered: " Dale is drawing cunning out of Mwamba's head. The Hospitality Law says: ' When a traveler comes to your kraal give him manioc and meat, hot water for him to bathe with, a hut to sleep in. If Choochoo breaks the law, fetich will make him sorry.' "

" It strikes me," said Dale, interested, " that the Hospitality Law, despite its good intentions, has some very weak spots. Tor instance,— suppose another lot of travelers were to put in their appearance after we have disposed of the Banta's one piece of meat? Goo-hoo would have no meat to give them, so the law necessarily would be broken."

Mwamba shook his head wisely.

" Dale talks wind too much,'* said he. " If more travelers were to come, they would have the same piece of meat."

Dale laughed incredulously.

" Absurd!" cried he. "Is the Banta a wizard? " " Goohoo is not a witch-doctor," returned Mwamba. " If that's the case," said Dale, " then how in the name of all that's mysterious does he manage it? I guess, Mwamba, you are trying to pull my leg."

" Dale's head is empty of know," retorted the chief. " Goohoo would give the same piece of meat. Mwamba has spoken! "

" But how could he after we had eaten it? " asked the captain, still skeptical.

" We will not eat the meat," said Mwamba. " We will eat the manioc and look at the meat."

" Oh," exclaimed Dale, enlightened, " the meat is only for the eye." He laughed heartily, then added, " It's rather a delusion? "

" A trap, too," added Mwamba enigmatically.

"A trap!" exclaimed Dale, puzzled. "'You are again mysterious. What do you mean? "

Mwamba grinned.

" The ' Lent Meat,' " said he, " is a trap, because the law says it must not be touched by one's teeth. One must dab bits of manioc upon it and eat the grain without biting into the meat. After the manioc is finished, the meat is returned to the fetichman. He is its guardian. When other travelers come he will lend it again for their eyes to feast upon."

Dale was amused. He laughed and remarked: " Most interesting. But does it never happen that a traveler forgets the law and takes a bite from it? "

Mwamba grinned.

" It happens," said he shortly.

Whreabo and the Soolahs guffawed.

" When Choochoo is hungry," joined in the headman, " he finds it hard too much not to bite into a nice fat rat."

Dale was filled with disgust.

" Faugh! " cried he. " Do you think the Banta's ' Lent Meat' is a rat?"

" Either a rat or a lizard," answered Mwamba. " Dale will see."

Just then Goohoo returned, bringing with him a smoked field-rat on a skewer, and with him was a dirty-looking woman carrying a soiled, broken washing-basin that contained a small quantity of steaming manioc.

" The travelers will please their eyes," said the Banta, and he handed the rat to Mwamba.

" Good! " exclaimed the chief.

Goohoo grunted, glared maliciously at his guests, and walked away, followed by the woman, who had placed the basin on the floor.

Mwamba grinned at the captain and offered him the rat, saying: "Will Dale chop?"

Dale turned his nose up at the tidbit.

" No, thanks," said he.

Mwamba grunted and proceeded to feed himself.

Whreabo, aware of the captain's capacity as a trencherman, felt sorry for Dale and came to his assistance.

" Mwamba," cried he, " if Dale's belly isn't filled, he won't sleep. A Soolah will fetch a cabbage from the bush for Dale to eat. Whreabo has spoken!"

Mwamba's mouth was so full of manioc that he could not speak; so he nodded to Choochoo.

The headman, impatiently awaiting his turn at the rat, gave the necessary instructions to one of his warriors, who hurried away and returned a little while later bringing a palm-cabbage, which was soon cooked.

Dale discovered that the succulent vegetable was delicious and ate all of it. He then adjourned to the guest-hut and there read the letter that Choochoo had handed him. It ran thus: My Dear Dale: Had you postponed your departure, as I advised, certain important facts, which came to my knowledge this morning, would have been disclosed to you, and you would have brought the President up to the mark.

I was sitting on my piazza, trying to think out how to induce his Excellency to send you help, when Jason joined me to receive his instructions for the day. As you are aware, the post of Secretary of Legation here is a sinecure of the most scandalous kind. It ought to be abolished I Anyhow, I had no instructions to give and I told him so. He then asked me if I had heard the news, and, after I said no, mentioned that Mr. Muffy had been playing the villain. l\was not surprised, for my opinion of the one-eyed gentleman is not very high; I was interested, though, so asked Jason what the sweet secretary had been up to. He informed me that it was because of Muffy's persuasions that Lodango had abducted Miss Bartle. This, as I must admit, did astonish me,— so much so that I blurted out a word which never should have come out of the mouth of a Methodist Minister.

However, Jason pretended not to have heard me and went on to explain that his Bassa Coot had informed him, and that Coot had got hold of the facts from his brother Blush. It seems that Blush accompanied Muffy to Lodango's camp and was present at an interview between the secretary and the chief at which the double abduction was arranged.

" The scoundrel! " muttered Dale, then returned to his reading of the letter.

Just then, there qccurred an incident, such as are common enough in real life but which fiction-writers are afraid to put in their stories. I happened to glance over the railing into the street and saw Blush going toward the Executive Mansion with a letter in his hand. I called the lad into the house and drew from him a corroboration of his brother Coot's tale to Jason. Furthermore, he informed me that the letter was from Muffy for the President, and that the former had gone to Lodango's kraal.

My fingers itched to take the letter from the Bassa, I wanted to read it; but, of course, did nothing of the kind. It was quite wicked enough even to think of doing it! Jason, however, borrowed the missive and carried it into the kitchen where, so I suppose, water was boiling and making steam. What he did to the letter while in the kitchen it is not for me to suggest; but on his return, he restored it — unopened, mark you! — to Blush and handed me a slip of paper covered with writing which read thus: " Dear Uncle, I have pulled the trick off all right! Hulda and your dutiful nephew are now proceeding to Lodango's kraal, following the savage, who is ahead with his beloved Lupelta. When we return I shall have the felicity of introducing you to Mrs. Pidgley Muffy! Should anybody ask what has become of us, you might say we have gone to Careysburg. Pidgley."

I stuffed this telltale paper into my pocket and dismissed Blush, who went straightway to the President. About an hour later I crossed to the Mansion myself and found his Excellency in his study. I wasted no time, but at once asked the gentleman to send you assistance. At first he hemmed and hawed, and then, when I urged, flatly refused. To be sure, I had no intention of letting him off. I asked him, very innocently indeed, where Miss Bartle and Muffy were. He answered, as I expected he would, that they were in Careysburg. I laughed and said that I, in a dream, had seen them in Lodango's kraal. Then you should have seen the old rascal's face! It became actually the color of gray ashes! I must admit that he is clever enough to know when to climb down, for before I could continue, he consented to do as I had requested.

The outcome of my interview with his Excellency is a despatch to Mt. Chocolate directing Lieutenant Brown to hasten with his men to' Lodango's kraal and report there to you. Doubtless, Brown will not let the grass grow underneath his feet, so you may expect to see him in the course of the next three or four days. Now I — Ten minutes later.— Coincidence upon coincidence! I broke off to decode and read an urgent cable-message from Washington. Be prepared for a surprise! It instructs me to send your Lupelta and the old woman who calls herself the girl's mother to America. I gather from the message that Lupelta is a white girl and the —"

" Great Scott! " cried Dale.

He was shocked, surprised, astounded, amazed,— anything you please except grieved. He finished reading the letter, folded it and replaced it in his pocket. Then he stretched himself upon a pile of skins to think of what he had just read and, before he knew it, fell asleep.

When morning came, the captain awakened betimes. He felt very fit, and while bathing began whistling that well-known aria " A Little Bunch of Whiskers on His Chin." All at once, though, he thought of the news that the letter from Monrovia had brought him, and it entered his head that he was exceedingly unhappy. Accordingly he stopped whistling and sighed pensively. When breakfast-time arrived and another cabbage, reinforced with a wood-pigeon, was put before him he ate pensively, yet heartily; and later on, while tramping through the forest on the way to Mwamba's kraal he was still pensive. It was a new experience for him to feel that way and he rather enjoyed the sensation. To keep himself in this melancholy mood, he tried to think only of Lupelta, lost to him forever; but, try as he would, he thought of Hulda quite as often, if not oftener; and whenever he thought of the latter his spirits refused to remain sad.

However, shortly before five o'clock in the afternoon he and his savage allies came to a broad path, over which it was necessary for them to travel for a distance of several miles. As this path was a highway leading directly to Lodango's town, and much journeyed over by his people, it was a somewhat dangerous passage for our party. Mwamba mentioned this fact, and sent Choochoo, with two of the Soolah -warriors, on ahead as a sort of vanguard, while he and the others advanced more slowly.

Dale, eager to get on, objected to this limping pace, but for a time submitted to it. Then he impatiently cried: "Heavens! are we to snail along this way forever? Let's move along! "

The captain's appeal did not cause Mwamba to increase his speed; to the contrary, he halted.

" Dale," said he gravely, " we are not going to make glad-palaver with Lodango. His warriors sometimes walk on this path; and if one of them were to see us, he would tell Lodango. Then Lodango would make ready to meet Mwamba's war. Dale must tie up his hurry. Mwamba will —"

" Choochoo comes! " exclaimed one of the Soolahs, and he pointed up the path.

They all gazed in the direction in which the savage was pointing and perceived Choochoo and his warriors returning, bringing a person with them.

" Wow! " cried Whreabo, while he gazed, " Choochoo is bringing an old woman. She may belong to Lo-dango's kraal."

" Dale will hide himself one time! " cried Mwamba, speaking to the captain quickly. Indicating a clump of shrubbery that they had passed a few minutes before, he went on: " Dale will lose himself among the leaves of the little tree."

Dale, not only a brave fighter but also a good tactician, was ever ready to either advance or retreat as the occasion might require; so, as the present occasion said " retreat," he ran back over the path and ensconced himself in the shrubbery.

And as Dale withdrew, Mwamba and the: others hurried up the path. They met the returning Soolahs who were half-carrying, half-dragging Reesha.

The old woman was in great distress. The tears were running down her withered cheeks, her whole frame was trembling.

" Mwamba," said the headman, as he halted before the chief, " Choochoo found her lying on the path. She is tired too much! "

"Whence comes she?" asked Mwamba.

" From Lodango's kraal," answered the headman.

Mwamba glared fiercely at Reesha.

" Mwamba am I! " said he sternly. " What is the old woman's name? "

Reesha murmured her name with difficulty.

"Why is Reesha so far from her hut?" asked Mwamba. " Is Reesha fleeing from the sacrifice? Mwamba's ears are open I "

" Reesha has trouble too much," said the old woman.

Mwamba grinned.

" Reesha's trouble will soon be done," said he.

" Choochoo will take Reesha into the bush and bring her trouble to an end."

The woman became filled with consternation. Wringing her hands, she imploringly cried: "No, no! Mwamba must not kill Ree—"

" Reesha is old and useless," broke in the chief.

" Mercy ! Mercy! " entreated Reesha.

Mwamba, unmoved by the woman's appeal, scowled at her.

" Choochoo will do! " cried he.

" Good! " responded the headman.

He turned, with a grin in his face, to seize Reesha.

" Choochoo will stop! " cried Whreabo imperatively.

The Soolah paused and, as did his warriors and Mwamba, gazed wonderingly at Whreabo.

Whreabo interfered to save Reesha's life not because he was moved by any humane feeling. Personally he did not care a jot whether Reesha was made away with or not. He merely was afraid that, if she were, Dale would not like it and would be very much offended.

" Mwamba," he continued, " Choochoo must not take Reesha's head."

The chief, unused to having his commands even questioned, much less countermanded, glared darkly at his brother.

" Mwamba has spoken! " cried he angrily.

Whreabo, undaunted by his brother's frowning aspect, shook his head in dissent.

" Mwamba is not cunning," said he. " If Choochoo takes Reesha's head, Dale will be vexed too much."

When Whreabo mentioned Dale's name, Reesha started, then glanced up and down the path eagerly as though searching for some one.

" Dale will not know," said Mwamba in reply to Whreabo, and still scowling at him.

" Dale will know," retorted the lad. " Whreabo will tell Dale."

"Wow!" cried the Soolahs with surprise.

" Whreabo talks big! " cried the chief.

" Whreabo is a warrior! " returned the young Im-bunda proudly. " Choochoo will not take Reesha's head! Whreabo has spoken! "

He placed himself in front of the old woman and handled his spear as though ready to fight for her.

Mwamba glared at Whreabo amazedly a moment; then, evidently pleased by the lad's display*, of spirit, he smiled and nodded approvingly.

" Good! " cried he. " Whreabo is a big warrior! Choochoo will not take Reesha's head! "

The headman grunted with disappointment and moved back, while reprieved Reesha sighed with relief.

" Whreabo is glad," said the youth gratefully.

" A big warrior like Whreabo should have a wife," said the chief.

Whreabo thought of Mingwee and grinned.

" Reesha will be Whreabo's wife," added the chief solemnly, chuckling inwardly.

Age had shrivelled Reesha's skin, flattened her bust, emptied her mouth of almost all its teeth. Whreabo glanced at the woman and shuddered.

" Mwamba's brother," said he somewhat humbly, " wrill not take a wife until he has become more of a warrior." Then, thinking to turn the tables on the chief, he grinned and went on, " Mwamba is a big warrior too much! Mwamba will build a hut in his compound for Reesha to live in."

This suggestion evidently did not jump with the chief's inclination, for, screwing his face awry, he shook his head very vigorously in dissent.

" Mwamba's compound is full! " cried he.

The Soolahs were amused by the persiflage between the brothers and laughed; but Reesha, her heart heavy with sorrow, sighed sadly and cried: " Where is Dale? "

" Why does Reesha ask for Dale? " said Whreabo.

" Reesha would talk with Dale," was the woman's response.

" Does Reesha know Dale? " continued the lad.

" Reesha knows Dale from Lupelta's mouth," replied the old woman.

Whreabo uttered an exclamation of amazement; then, staring at Reesha, he asked her if she knew Lupelta.

" Reesha is Lupelta's mother," was the reply.

Whreabo had heard Lupelta speak of Reesha any number of times; the old woman's words now reminded him of this and caused him to identify her.

" Good! " cried he. " Reesha is Lupelta's mother! Lupelta told Whreabo about Reesha, but Whreabo's head lost her words. Whreabo's head forgot too much! " he added; and at the same time, to punish his head for having forgotten, he struck it,— not very hard, however,— with the handle of his spear.

" Dale will save Lupelta," went on Reesha earnestly. " Where is he? "

Though Whreabo was now certain of Reesha's identity he did not think it would be wise to let her know that Dale was present; so, becoming mendacious, he said: " Dale is in Monrovia."

" Mwamba saw Dale in Monrovia yesterday," joined in the chief.

Now, if Mwamba had but kept silent, probably Reesha would have been deceived; but knowing as she did that the metropolis was too distant for the chief to have been there on the day before, the truth was plain to her.

" Whreabo would throw pepper into Reesha's eyes! " cried she. " Dale is here! Reesha will call him! "

She inflated her lungs to shout out Dale's name, but Whreabo closed her mouth with his hand.

" Reesha must not call Dale," exclaimed the lad, almost smothering her.

Reesha, too old and feeble to release herself from Whreabo's grasp, submitted.

" Reesha must tell Wbreabo what has happened to Lupelta," went on the lad, still muffling the old woman's mouth. " When Reesha has spoken, perhaps Whreabo will call Dale. He is here. Does Reesha promise not to shout? "

The woman muttered and nodded assent, and Whreabo removed his hand from her mouth. Then Mwamba, thinking he had played second-fiddle to Whreabo's first quite long enough, assumed the leading role.

" Reesha," cried the chief, " Dale frightened the Ba-kota witch, and Mwamba wron the big gamble! "

Whreabo and the Soolahs endorsed this statement.

" Mwamba is Dale's friend too much! " continued the chief. " Mwamba will devour Lodango! Reesha will tell Mwamba what has happened to Lupelta. Mwam-ba's ears are open! "

" Lupelta is to drink sassa-wood to-morrow," said Reesha sadly.

Whreabo was dismayed.

"Wow!" cried he. "Did Lodango steal Lupelta from Dale to make her drink? " asked he angrily.

" Blame not Lodango," said Reesha. " He tried hard to save Lupelta from undergoing the ordeal, but the witch-doctor would not be persuaded."

"What law has Lupelta broken?" asked Mwamba.

" Lupelta has broken no law," responded the woman. " Mwamba and Whreabo will open their ears! "

" Reesha will talk quickly," exclaimed Whreabo impatiently.

" Reesha will talk," said the chief.

The old woman pulled her wits together and related all that had happened to Lupelta and Hulda,— somewhat as set out in preceding chapters,— from the moment they were seized by Lodango in Monrovia.

The Imbunda brothers listened to Reesha attentively; and as they listened they chuckled with amusement, or grunted approvingly, or exclaimed angrily. But when she described how Muffy was stabbed, evidently enjoying the telling of it, Whreabo became so filled with satisfaction that he could not contain it. Interrupting her, he cried: "Good! Is Muffy dead?"

" No," said Reesha regretfully. " He is dying in the guest-hut."

" Whreabo is glad too much! " exclaimed the lad joyfully.

"Good!" ejaculated Mwamba.

" It is bad," said Reesha.

The brothers frowned at the woman.

" Is Reesha sorry because Muffy is dying? " asked Mwamba sternly.

Reesha brought an ugly, vindictive look into her face and spat.

" Reesha hates him! " cried she.

Whreabo nodded to the old woman and gave her a smile that was quite affectionate.

" Whreabo is Reesha's friend," said he.

" Why does Reesha hate Muffy? " asked the chief.

" Because he didn't die quickly and not make trouble talk," explained Reesha. " Muffy told the witch-doctor that Hulda was a witch, so\did Lodango. When Hulda denied the charge, the witch-doctor said she must drink sassa-wood to prove her innocence or guilt. Lupelta said she would drink for Hulda. Lodango and Hulda begged Lupelta to take back her promise, but could not persuade her. Lupelta and Hulda were put into the afraid-hut for the torment-women to scold them, and to-morrow, when the sun is high, they will be taken to the sacrifice grove, where Lupelta will drink in the presence of Lodango and all his people. Reesha is sorry too much! "

She hushed and wept.

" Reesha will be sorry later on," said the chief impatiently. " Mwamba is hungry to hear more."

The old woman had no more to tell.

" Reesha has spoken," was her reply, and she dried her eyes.

" Why is Reesha not with Lupelta? " asked Whreabo sternly.

" Reesha was running," answered the woman, " to buy one of the Banta people to drink for Lupelta,— to be her champion."

" Is Reesha rich? " asked Whreabo.

Reesha placed her hand underneath the cloth that partly covered her meagre form and drew forth Lu-pelta's jewels. Displaying the trinkets, she said: " Reesha would buy the Banta with these."

" Good! " cried Mwamba. Glaring at the gems longingly, he added: " They please Mwamba's eyes! " and extended his hand eagerly, as if to take them into his possession.

" They belong to Lupelta I " cried Whreabo; and, at the same time he snatched them from Reesha's hand.

" Mwamba would keep them safely for Lupelta," said the chief, chagrined, but hiding the emotion behind a grin.

" Perhaps Mwamba would keep them too safely," returned Whreabo demurely, and he tied the coveted things securely in a corner of his loin-cloth.

" Whreabo has learned to be cunning too much! " cried the chief.

" Whreabo has learned," agreed the lad.

The brothers grinned at each other with understanding.

" Whreabo will now call Dale," persuaded Reesha.

" No," returned the lad.

Reesha cried out with disappointment, and her countenance, which had brightened, again clouded.

" Reesha will not be sorry," went on Whreabo, noticing the old woman's disappointment and pitying her. " If Dale were to come and hear Reesha's story, he would go to Lodango's kraal quickly too much. Lo-dango would devour Dale, Whreabo will go with Reesha to Lodango's kraal, steal in the dark to the afraid-hut, and tell Lupelta that Mwamba and Dale are coming to rescue her and Hulda. If Mwamba and Dale do not reach the sacrifice grove in time, then Whreabo will be Lupelta's champion. Whreabo has spoken! "

"Good!" cried Reesha joyfully.

Mwamba nodded to his young brother approvingly.

" Whreabo makes Mwamba glad! " said he. " Whreabo and Reesha will go quickly, before Dale comes."

" Reesha will come! " cried the lad; and he drew the old woman along the path.

The Imbunda chief watched his brother and Reesha until they passed from his sight behind a bend in the path, then he sent one of the Soolahs to summon Dale. The captain soon put in his appearance, and, with a promptitude that reflected great credit on his military acumen, immediately noticed that Whreabo was not present.

" Where is Whreabo? " asked he.

" Whreabo has gone to purchase arrows," said Mwamba unblushingly, and he frowned at Choochoo as though to say: " Back me up l "

The headman caught the chief's glance, understood it, and grinned.

" Many arrows! " cried he with much emphasis.

" Sounds as if you meant business, Mwamba," said Dale, deceived.

" It sounds! " rej oined the chief; and, to avoid any further questioning, he hurried ahead.

They entered Mwamba's kraal a couple of hours before the break of day. The captain was entertained in the guest-hut. After a bath and a hearty meal he placed himself in a comfortable position on the usual bed of skins, not with the intention of immediately sleeping, however, but to think of Lupelta and, if he could, make himself exceedingly miserable. But nearly thirty-six hours had passed since he had read the letter and learned that the girl was not for such as he, and thirty-six hours are — thirty-six hours. In a less time dynasties have changed, millionaires have become paupers, love has turned to hate, and vice versa. Besides this, he was very fatigued. Hence, it is not remarkable that by now the pain of his love-disappointment had become so dulled that he utterly failed to agonize himself, and he soon was sleeping dreamlessly.

And while Dale slept the rites that made Obomo's daughter, Pootie, one of Mwamba's many wives, were duly performed. Following the ceremony there was much dancing, singing, gun firing, and other kinds of merrymaking, which lasted until sunrise. But at the appearance of day's luminary Mwamba broke the wedding feast off short and proceeded to perform the various acts with which West African savages usually inaugurate their wars.

He paraded his warriors in the palaver-ground and, after the manner of the great Corsican, made them a very spirited harangue, which fanned their martial ardor until it broke forth in yells, screams, shouts, groans, and appeals to fetich, garnished with much jumping about and clashing of spears against shields. After the chief had finished this oration he had his forty-and-one wives, including Mrs. Pootie,— his last acquisition, — lined up before him. He asked them for the names of their children and sent the little ones his love, sending it especially to those he had never seen. This done, he delivered a very interesting, instructive, somewhat threatening lecture to his attentive helpmates, his subject being "Marital Faithfulness."

" Wow! " was his concluding word.

The numerous wives bowed to their lord and master.

Then a erudite witch-doctor, elegantly unclothed, danced to the front. Addressing the coterie of wives, who gazed awesomely at him, he shouted: " O Mwamba's wives, open your ears too much! "

" Pliffer, our ears are open," responded the chief's head-wife, whose name was Tootoo.

The witch-doctor nodded and continued: " Mwamba will lead his warriors to war! "

"Mwamba! Mwamba!" cried the warriors, clashing together their spears and shields.

" Good! " ejaculated the chief, and he smiled proudly.

The wives murmured as though applauding.

" Mwamba will take Lodango's head! " cried Pliffer.

" We'll devour him,— devour him! " cried the warriors, again clashing their weapons together.

"Wow! Wow!" yelled Mwamba, and he capered a little.

The wives once more murmured.

" If Mwamba loses the war," went on Pliffer, " it will be because one or more of his wives have been unfaithful. Mwamba's wives will watch themselves when they are awake, when they are asleep! Mwamba's wives will beware! "

" Mwamba's wives will beware! " repeated Tootoo; and she glared quite meaningly at Pootie.

Mrs. Pootie was still bearing her bridal decorations. Innumerable rings were on her legs and arms, many necklaces, made of leopards' teeth and cowries, embraced her neck, and her almost nude body was painted vermilion and white with chalk.

" Pootie will keep Pliffer's words tight in her head," continued Tootoo, still glaring at the bride.

Pootie resented being thus picked out from her fellow haremites.

" When Mwamba returns," said she, jerking her head saucily, " the witch-doctor had better smell out Tootoo, not Pootie."

Mwamba,— every one else, too,— glared wide-eyed at Mrs. Pootie. They were flabbergasted. That she, a young wife with her head still encased in clay, should thus assert herself surpassed belief.

Pootie perceived that she was causing a sensation and, true to her sex, was much pleased.

" Pootie is not a skip-about," she continued, " Pootie is —"

" G-r-r-r-r! " interrupted Tootoo; and she brought the giddy young bride up with a round turn.

Springing upon Pootie, she snatched the cloth from around the bride's loins and muffled her head in it. Then slapping and scolding the young lady, she drove her into the compound, followed by the thirty-nine gesticulating and contorting their bodies and talking excitedly among themselves about their young companion's scandalous behavior.

"Wow!" exclaimed Mwamba relievedly as his wives departed. .

"Wow!" echoed Pliffer.

" Wow!" cried the warriors.

Mwamba's countenance assumed a very serious look. He reflected.

" Obomo's daughter has eaten too much pepper," said the witch-doctor.

" Mwamba feels funny inside," said the chief. Turning to the Soolah headman, who was standing near, he went on, " Choochoo, Pootie's mouth opens too big! "

The headman grinned at the bridegroom's remark.

" Mwamba's head has more know to-day than it had yesterday," said he.

" Good! " said the chief ruefully. " Pootie's tongue is tied too loose. Choochoo will take her back to her father."

" Mwamba talks too late," said the headman.

" Too late,— too late! " said the chief sadly.

" Too late,— too late! " echoed Pliffer.

" Pliffer," said Mwamba, " perhaps Pootie's strange behavior portends misfortune for Mwamba's war? What says the law? "

The witch-doctor shook his head with incertitude.

" There is no precedent," said he; " so Pliffer's head is like an empty gourd. After Mwamba has made the war with Lodango the law will be cunning."

" The law is a dodo," growled Mwamba. " Choochoo, call Dale. When he comes we will start to make war on Lodango."

" Good! " cried the headman; and he hastened away.

" The law is a dodo! " repeated the chief, glaring angrily at Pliffer. " Pliffer is like the law! " he added, and strode away.

It was long past midnight when Whreabo and Reesha reached Lodango's kraal. They found the gates closed and barred, but this did not matter, for the old woman knew of a small breach in the barricade through which they entered. And as soon as they were inside, Reesha, who was thoroughly exhausted, recommended that before attempting anything further they should go to her hut and rest there awhile.

" No," said the lad. " Whreabo wants to talk to Lupelta. Reesha will guide Whreabo to the afraid-hut quickly."

" The torment-women guard the hut closely," said she. " They have eyes, and Whreabo is not invisible. How will Whreabo pass them without their seeing him? "

" Whreabo will chew meat when meat is in his mouth," returned the lad. " Reesha will do! "

" Reesha will do! " said the woman and, sighing wearily, she moved on.

Reesha piloted Whreabo through dark, silent lanes and byways to the edge of the palaver-ground, at the farther side of which lay their destination. Afraid to cross this broad expanse, she halted.

We will steal around it," said she.

" No, Whreabo will cross! "

" Whreabo is not cunning," rejoined Reesha.

" This is the night before sassa-wood, and no person other than the devil-man is permitted to walk about. If he were to see us crossing, Whreabo knows what would happen? "

" The devil-man would lose his head," said Whreabo tersely, and he struck his spear softly against his shield.

Without further ado he passed out upon the dangerous open, and Reesha followed, her heart throbbing quickly with fear. They crossed undiscovered; then they half-circled the compound and approached a fenced-in place whence smoke ascended and screaming voices came. And when they heard the voices the old woman shivered with dread, while Whreabo ground his filed teeth and muttered angrily.

" Does Whreabo hear? " whispered Reesha.

" Whreabo's ears are open," answered the lad.

„ " The gate is at the other side," said Reesha.

Whreabo grunted.

They dropped to their hands and knees and crept around the fence to its entrance, the gates of which were wide open. They paused here, raised their heads and, peering into the enclosure, looked upon a scene that caused Reesha to beat her breast with grief and almost scream, and Whreabo to shudder.

The scene was Rembrandtesque. In the center of the place a fire was burning sullenly, as though unwilling to illumine it. Squatting around the fire were a dozen or more shrivelled hags, all naked and painted red, chattering and gibbering like so many witches. They were gazing at two others, similar in appearance to themselves, who were jumping about and screaming madly before the open door of a small hut, and all the while glaring balefully at Hulda and Lupelta, who were within.

Lupelta was upon her knees, holding her hands to her ears in an endeavor to dull their hearing, while Hulda, apparently unsubdued but filled with horror and rage, paced up and down the room.

The iwo torment-women before the hut now and again stopped jumping and loudly described, in a manner as terrifying as they possibly could, the awful ordeal their victims would be made to undergo in the sacrifice grove on the morrow. And thus they performed until their frames and voices became utterly exhausted, when they made way for two others, who came quickly from the fire and carried forward the good work.

Whreabo and Reesha stared with bulging eyes at these doings and their blood ran cold.

" Whreabo can't talk to Lupelta," said Reesha, close to the lad's ear.

" Whreabo can't talk to Lupelta," agreed the young Imbunda sadly. " Whreabo will go back to Reesha's hut and—"

He was speaking somewhat loudly, and Reesha advanced her hand to cover his mouth, but it struck the quiver that was full of arrows, with the result that Whreabo became inspired with a brilliant idea.

"Wow!" murmured he joyfully. "Whreabo will send a message to Lupelta! "

He snatched a small fetich from against his breast and fastened it to an arrow with a strip torn from his loin-cloth, remarking the while: " Lupelta gave this fetich to Whreabo. When Lupelta sees it she will know that Whreabo is here. Lupelta will be glad! "

" Whreabo is cunning," said Reesha, admiration in her voice.

" Good! " exclaimed the youth. " Whreabo will do! "

He crept to a spot some distance from the old woman whence he thought the arrow with its message could be sent on its flight with certainty. Pausing here, he got upon his knees, placed the arrow in the bow, and aimed it carefully at the open door of the afraid-hut. But just as he was about to discharge the missile he heard Reesha scream loudly with terror. Startled, he refrained from shooting, turned, and perceived the old woman struggling in the hands of the devil-man. Then, to avoid being discovered himself, he crawled farther away to where it was darker.

And as Whreabo crept, the torment-women,— those near the fire as well as the two performing near the hut,— rushed pell-mell out of the enclosure. Yelling and screaming with rage, they gathered around unfortunate Reesha and proceeded to stone and club her unmercifully.

Whreabo felt very sorry for Reesha, and, moved by a desire to rescue her, aimed his arrow with deadly intent at the torment-women. The next moment, though, he perceived that it would be folly to attempt anything so futile; so he lowered his bow and returned the arrow to its sheath. Then, seized by a happy thought, he chose a moment when the attention of the torment-women was confined to their victim, and slipped through the entrance into the enclosure. Crouching and hugging the fence, he ran around to the area's other side and thence to the back of the afraid-hut.

He dug with the point of his spear into the mud wall of the hut and soon made a hole large enough to look through. Gazing through the orifice into the hut, he perceived Hulda and Lupelta standing close to the open door and peering out. He then placed his mouth to the hole and called to the girls, but was unable to make them hear; he continued to call, but fruitlessly.

And while Whreabo was thus employed, the torment-women dragged Reesha into the enclosure, across it, and into the afraid-hut. They threw her, all mangled and bleeding, to the floor before Hulda and Lupelta, who were horrified at the sight.

" Fiends! " cried Hulda to the hags as they deposited Reesha. " If we were in Monrovia I'd have you all hanged! "

The painted wretches fixed their bleared eyes on Hulda threateningly, and they advanced toward her with screams of rage, their hands outstretched, their fingers working. It seemed as though they were about to tear her into shreds! She was frightened, but faced the foul creatures boldly, and by so doing probably deterred them from attempting any further mischief. As it was, they gave an unearthly yell and retreated outside, there to resume performing as before.

As Hulda started to upbraid the hags Lupelta sank to the floor and took Reesha's battered head into her lap, and wiped the blood from the dying woman's face, sobbing and sobbing the while. And now that the murderous crew was gone she said: "O Mother, Mother! what have they done to you? Lupelta's heart will break! "

" Reesha is dying," gasped the old woman. " Lupelta must not make her face wet with the water-ofsorry. Reesha's eyes no longer see. Is Hulda here? "

" I am here, Reesha," said Hulda, her voice unsteady with emotion.

" Good! " said Reesha. " Whreabo is outside of —"

Whreabo, who had enlarged the hole in the wall, which was now filled by his face, overheard the old woman.

" Whreabo is here! " cried he.

Hulda and Lupelta, amazed, cried out as they glanced at the lad's black face. His large eyes were rolling in their sockets, and his big white teeth were shining.

" Whreabo's ears are open! " added the youth.

" Good! " repeated Reesha. Then, while her voice became weaker and weaker each moment, she went on: " Before Reesha departs she must untie a bad knot. Reesha would not die and —"

" O Mother, you must not leave me! " sobbed Lupelta.

" Reesha must go," returned the dying woman.

" We will pray for you," said Hulda.

The old woman frowned.

" The white men are not true to their God-talk," said she. " Reesha does not believe! "

" Alas! " murmured Hulda sadly.

" Reesha must make crooked straight," went on the old woman. " The white man was cruel to Reesha. He hurt her so she wept —"

She paused to catch her breath.

" Poor Mother!" murmured Lupelta, and she wiped the death-damp from the passing woman's face.

" Reesha was vexed too much! " resumed the old woman gaspingly. Reesha wanted to make the white man sorry — Reesha stole the white man's baby from him — Reesha stole Lupelta —"

Lupelta sighed and turned pale.

" I suspected as much," said Hulda to herself; then she thought of Dale; she wondered how the discovery that Lupelta was white would affect him.

" Is — is Lupelta vexed with Reesha?" asked the old woman, and she gazed up into the girl's face pleadingly.

" O Mother, Mother," Lupelta cried, " Lupelta loves you! "

A wan smile flitted across Reesha's face.

" Open your ears! " said she. " — the cloth — Lupelta was wearing — baby — in box— Reesha's hut — Reesha sorry — Reesha ha —"

She suddenly hushed, and her countenance changed. She struggled to her elbow, glanced into Lupelta's face, smiled, gasped, and sank back to the floor.

Reesha was dead!

Lupelta uttered a desolate wail, buried her face in her hands, and wept bitterly.

Hulda bent over Lupelta and, though her own eyes were moist, tenderly said: " Don't cry, Lupelta. She feels no pain now."

" Lupelta loved her! " murmured the grieving girl, and she continued weeping.

" Hulda will talk to Whreabo while Lupelta makes sorry," said the young Imbunda.

When Whreabo spoke, Hulda, who for the moment had forgotten that he was present, started and uttered a low exclamation. She then crossed to the hole and listened breathlessly, with quickly-beating heart, to all he had to say. After the lad had finished she anxiously asked: " Are you sure that Captain Dale and your brother will be here in time? "

" Mwamba and Dale will come in time! " answered Whreabo confidently.

" Oh, I do hope so! " cried Hulda.

" Hulda will tell Lupelta."

" Yes; immediately after you've gone."

" Whreabo will go," said the lad; and he started to draw his face back.

" Wait a moment," said Hulda quickly.

" Good! " cried Whreabo, pausing.

" You heard poor Reesha mention a box that's in her hut? " asked Hulda.

" Whreabo heard."

" You will get the box and hand it to Captain Dale! "

" Whreabo will do ! "

" Its contents are precious, so be careful of them. Now go at once! "

"Whreabo will go quickly too much!" responded the lad, and he withdrew his face from the hole.

The direful manner in which the torment-women had dealt with Reesha was strongly impressed on Whreabo's mind, and he thought it would be as well not to risk making their close acquaintance; hence, instead of endeavoring to pass out of the enclosure by the way he had entered, he made his exit over the fence at the back of the afraid-hut. Nor did he venture to recross the palaver-ground, but circled it. However, he ultimately arrived at Reesha's hut, and there, after a brief search, found the box that contained Lupelta's baby-clothes.

It was small, so he slung it from his shoulder, then started to call on Mr. Muffy in the guest-hut.

When Whreabo reached the guest-hut, about ten minutes later, he opened its door softly and peeped inside. He saw the mulatto's form stretched upon the skins. The figure was motionless and the lad supposed that Mr. Muffy was asleep. He chuckled, crawled into the room, and up to the skins. He got upon his knees, unsheathed his knife, and raised it over the recumbent body, and — "Wow!" he exclaimed.

And springing to his feet Whreabo ran headlong out of the hut. He had been about to revenge himself upon Mr. Pidgley Muffy's corpse.

The sacrifice grove was not a grove at all but a very expansive, oblong clearing, which was sited about a mile away from Lodango's kraal. It was bordered on one of its long sides by great trees and on the other side, as well as its two ends, by thick, tall shrubbery. A cinder-path quite ten feet wide ran the middle of the place along almost its whole length. This path was uncovered to the burning rays of the sun, and great mounds of human skulls, bleached white, stood here and there along its sides.

Early in the afternoon of the day that followed Reesha's death all of the common-folk from the kraal were here assembled to witness Lupelta undergo the awful sassa-wood test. They were squatted somewhat away from the path, with their backs toward the shrubbery, and were awesomely viewing the opening scene.

At each end of the path there was a large iron pot, standing upon stone tripods over a fire, which contained a steaming infusion of the bark of the sassa-wood tree. These pots were presided over by two very ancientlooking crones, entitled " mixers." These dames were circling around the pots and stirring their noxioussmelling contents with long-handled, crudely-made wooden, spoons; and they chanted incantations all the time.

A witch-doctor, grotesquely decorated with fetiches and charms and carrying two long feather-tipped wands, was doing divers terpsichorean gymnastics,— cake-walking, turkey-trotting, sugar-dipping, Halleluiah-jumping,— up and down the path in most wonderful fashion.

This movement continued until a loud fanfare sounded over the place; then the mixers hushed and stood still; the witch-doctor stopped dancing, raised his wands, and posed, and the multitude began shouting. A few seconds later Lodango, escorted by many headmen and warriors, and preceded by a band of musicians beating drums and blowing horns, marched into the clearing from the forest wherein the fanfare had been sounded. Anger was depicted in the chief's countenance. He crossed to a native stool that was standing,— somewhat removed from the crowd,— under a wide-spreading umbrella, and halted. Then, after his cortege had ranged itself close behind him, he gazed sternly at the applauding people and commanded them to be silent.

The crowd hushed, and the music stopped playing.

" Imbundas, Lodango is vexed! " cried the chief.

The commonalty threw themselves to the ground and rubbed their foreheads in the dust.

For a second or so the chief gazed proudly at his grovelling subjects; then he shouted at the top of his voice: " Lodango am I! "

" Lodango! Lodango! " cried the headman and warriors, as they clashed their spears and shields together.

" Lion slayer am I! Killer of men am I! " went on the chief.

" Lodango! Lodango! " repeated the others, again clashing their weapons together.

"Wow! Wow!" vociferated Lodango.

The headmen and warriors were now excited to the verge of delirium. They yelled and shouted as though to burst their throats, and at the same time danced about and up and down, first on one foot then on the other, many of them jumping high from the ground. The excitement spread; the mixers danced, screamed, flourished their spoons; the witch-doctor capered and swung his wands madly; the common-folk got to their feet and did their best to outdance and outyell their superiors; the trumpeters trumpeted, and the drummers drummed. Even Lodango was seized by the frenzy and did a step or two.

The chief soon stopped dancing, however. He quieted the others, and then, shaking his head, sadly exclaimed: " Lodango is sorry too much! "

The townsfolk, pretending that they sorrowed with their chief, began moaning and wailing as though their hearts were breaking; and while they were so doing, the hideous torment-women brought Hulda and Lu-pelta toward them from among the trees. But when the soi-disant mourners saw the girls they quickly changed their tune. Evidently anticipating a glorious treat, they shouted joyfully.

But Lodango's countenance clouded and he groaned.

The torment-women halted their prisoners before the chief. He gazed pityingly at Lupelta for a moment, then turned his face from her and sighed, while the unfortunate girls, each in her own way, carried themselves bravely. Lupelta, though very sad, was calm, but Hulda's eyes flashed angrily, and red spots sat high upon her cheeks.

The witch-doctor, who had approached the chief, now waved his wands and cried: " Lodango, Witch and Lupelta are here! Sassa-wood is cooked! Lodango will do! "

The chief evidently was not willing to do,— that is, give the command for the ceremony to be started,— for, glaring angrily at the witch-doctor, he said nothing.

The witch-doctor frowned.

" Lodango will do! " repeated he sternly.

" Lodango does not want Lupelta to drink," said the chief surlily.

The witch-doctor glared fiercely at the chief, and once more, even more sternly than before, cried: " Lodango will do! "

The chief scowled at the witch-doctor.

" Lodango has spoken! " said he.

The witch-doctor, growling with rage, shook his wands threateningly at the chief; he then turned to the multitude and shouted: " Imbundas, Lodango would break the law! "

The crowd glared angrily at the chief and murmured with displeasure.

" If Lodango breaks the law," continued the witchdoctor, "the Imbundas will be sorry too much! Famine will come to the Imbunda kraal! Strange warriors will devour the Imbundas! "

The multitude, with their eyes all fixed upon the chief, groaned lugubriously.

" Shall Lodango break the law? " went on the witchdoctor.

"No. No!" yelled the crowd with one voice.

" Shall Lupelta drink? " shouted the witch-doctor.

" To the pot! To the pot! " cried the people.

The witch-doctor again addressed the chief.

" Lodango has heard the voice of the people! " cried he. " Lodango will do! "

The chief murmured angrily, but his countenance disclosed that he was giving way; and Hulda, perceiving this, started forward and began urging him not to surrender.

When Lodango saw Hulda approaching him he started back as though alarmed.

" Witch will stay away! " cried he, glaring darkly at her.

Hulda exclaimed impatiently and halted, then turned and faced a number of young Imbundas of both sexes, who ran up to her and began teasing. She perceived Whreabo among them, and suspecting that he desired to speak to her, did what she could to assist him.

" Witch! Witch! " cried the youngsters,— Whreabo quite as loudly as any of the others. Dancing around Hulda, they shouted: " Sassa-wood will catch Lupelta! Witch and Lupelta will die!" They pointed at one of the mounds, screaming, " Their heads will be placed there to dry and turn white! "

And while this prophecy was being uttered, Whreabo danced himself close to Hulda. Unheard by the Imbundas, he rapidly whispered to her: " Hulda will run away quickly!" then gyrated from her, shouting: "Witch! Witch!"

Though Hulda had not the slightest idea why Whreabo desired her to run, she decided to obey him; so, choosing a convenient moment, she broke away from the still teasing young folk and ran as fast as her legs would carry her toward the trees.

When Hulda raced away, Whreabo gave a great shout and at once ran after her. The other Imbundas were so utterly surprised that at first all they did was to exclaim and glare; they soon recovered their presence of mind, however, and then would have started in pursuit. But Lodango stopped them and sent a headman named Doonah and several warriors after the fleeing girl.

This delay was useful to Whreabo and Hulda. The lad soon drew close up behind her, then, regulating his pace to fit hers,— though he seemed to be straining his muscles to overtake her,— he said: " Are Hulda's ears open? "

" Yes," gasped the girl, running.

" Whreabo wants to use up time so Dale and Mwamba can come before Lupelta drinks."

" Perhaps they will arrive too late."

" No! "

" I hope you are —"

Whreabo perceived Doonah, who had outstripped his companions, closing in upon them; so he interrupted Hulda.

" Hulda will hush! " cried he warningly. " A headman is close. If he catches Hulda, he will hold her strong too much. Whreabo will catch Hulda. Is Hulda ready ? "

" Yes."

" Good! " cried the lad; and, spurting ahead, he seized and halted her.

A second or so later Doonah raced up to them. He endeavored to take possession of Hulda, but Whreabo prevented him.

"No!" cried the lad; and, with considerable force, he thrust the headman away from Hulda.

Doonah staggered back with a cry. Then, recovering his balance, he glared at Whreabo and ejaculated angrily.

The young Imbunda returned the headman's glance firmly. Adopting a pseudonym, he cried: " Loocoo caught witch! Loocoo will take witch back to Lodango! Lodango will say that Loocoo knows how to run quickly too much! Lodango will make Loocoo glad! Loocoo has spoken! "

The headman thought that he would qualify himself to be made glad too.

" Doonah will hold witch on one side," suggested he. " Doonah ran quickly too! "

" Loocoo has spoken! " repeated Whreabo, with an air of finality.

The warriors whom Doonah had outrun were now standing near and listening. When Whreabo refused to share Hulda with the headman, they murmured angrily, and one of them, who had been examining the lad curiously, proceeded to question him.

"Loocoo is a stranger?" said the warrior.

" Loocoo is a stranger," agreed Whreabo.

" Doonah is Lodango's headman," continued the warrior. "Doonah is brave too much!"

The headman, much flattered by the warrior's praise, grinned expansively.

" Wow! " cried he.

"Wow! Wow!" yelled the warriors.

They hushed and, with Doonah, gazed at Whreabo, evidently expecting that he would give way.

" Doonah did not catch witch," said Whreabo. " Loocoo caught witch! Loocoo will talk into Lo-dango's ear! "

" Good! " cried he who had spoken before. " Doonah and Loocoo will talk into Lodango's ear. Lodango will untie the knot! "

"We will go!" said Doonah sulkily, and he strode off.

The others followed.

Whreabo led Hulda back to the spot whence she had fled and surrendered her into the hands of the torment-women; and then, while the hags were making sure of keeping their recovered prisoner by fastening her securely to a stake, crossed to Lodango, before whom Doonah and his friends the warriors were standing.

" Lodango," cried Doonah, pointing at Whreabo as he approached; " Loocoo is a stranger. Loocoo put his hand into Doonah's manioc! Loocoo ran before Doonah and stole Doonah's chance to catch witch! Doonah is vexed too much! Lodango will take the vex out of Doonah! "

" Doonah is Lodango's headman! " shouted the warriors.

Lodango nodded and sternly said: "Doonah shall have that which belongs to Doonah! Loocoo shall have that which belongs to Loocoo! Lodango has spoken! "

" Good! " cried Doonah; and evidently believing that his cause was won, he nodded and grinned triumphantly to his friends, who responded in a like manner.

All the while that the headman and the warriors were prematurely rejoicing, Lodango, with a heavy frown upon his face, studied Whreabo, who, though inwardly somewhat perturbed, suffered the examination apparently unmoved.

" Loocoo is a stranger? " said the chief, at length. " Loocoo has never slept in Lodango's kraal," said Whreabo.

" Is Loocoo an Imbunda? " asked the chief.

Whreabo pointed at the scars that were on his cheeks and forehead, and exclaimed: " Lodango will open his eyes and see!"

The chief gazed at the tribal marks that Whreabo had indicated, and his countenance disclosed that he was satisfied.

" Good! " he ejaculated. " From which of the many Imbunda kraals came Loocoo?"

" Loocoo came from Gwimper's kraal," responded the lad, careless of the truth.

Lodango nodded his head and smiled.

" Good! " cried he. " Was Gwimper glad when Loocoo started on the path? "

" Loocoo's head is empty of know," said Whreabo. " Why is Loocoo's head empty of know? "

" When Loocoo started on the path," replied the lad, " Loocoo's eyes were not open big enough to see Gwimper."

" Was Gwimper far away from his kraal?"

" Gwimper was far away."

" Where was Gwimper? "

" Perhaps Gwimper was flying on the winds! Perhaps Gwimper was swimming in the water! "

Lodango was puzzled.

" Is Gwimper a bird? " asked he. " Is Gwimper a fish? "

" Who knows! " cried Whreabo. With lengthened countenance, he lugubriously added:" Gwimper was dead too much! "

The chief's face clouded as though with grief.

"Wow!" cried he. " Gwimper was Lodango's friend! Lodango is sorry too much! When sassa-wood is done, Lodango and his people will make sorry-play for Gwimper. Lodango will drink gin until he is drunk. Lodango has spoken! "

He took a pinch of dust from the ground and sprinkled it on his head, and the surrounding savages moaned sadly.

Hard-hearted Whreabo felt no compunction because of the grief he was causing, but, chuckling inwardly, went on: " Gwimper's wives were dead! Gwimper's slaves were dead! Gwimper's warriors and headmen were dead! The fetichman, the devilman,— everybody was dead! "

"Wow!" cried the chief, amazed.

A murmur of wonderment came from the listening savages.

"What killed Gwimper and his people?" asked the chief.

" Gwimper and his people were hungry and thirsty, so they ate pineapples and swallowed gin. They became sick inside too much and died! "

" Why did Loocoo not die? "

" Loocoo did not eat! Loocoo did not drink! "

" Loocoo was cunning," said the chief.

" Loocoo wras cunning," agreed Whreabo.

" Why is Loocoo in Lodango's kraal ? " asked the chief.

" Loocoo is alive, but he is alone."

" Lodango will be Loocoo's father," said the chief.

Doonah grunted with disgust.

" Loocoo would become Lodango's warrior," said Whreabo.

The chief smiled.

" Good! " exclaimed he. " Loocoo shall be Lodan-go's first headman. Loocoo shall be Lodango's witch-catcher. Lodango has spoken!

"G-r-r-r-r!" exclaimed Doonah; and he turned to go away.

" Doonah will stay! " cried the witch-doctor.

The disgusted headman paused and gazed inquiringly at the witch-doctor.

" Doonah's ears are open to hear Toonootoo," said he.

" Doonah will carry the sword and run behind Lu-pelta," said the witch-doctor. "Doonah will place himself upon the path! "

This was a very high honor that had been conferred upon Doonah, and he valued it accordingly. He grinned all over his face, while his friends gazed at him enviously. He unsheathed his sword and capered, shouting, across to the path.

And as Doonah danced away, the witch-doctor turned to Whreabo, saying: " Loocoo's legs know how to move quickly. Loocoo will run with Lupelta! "

"Wow!" cried the lad joyfully.

The witch-doctor raised a large cudgel from the ground.

"Toonootoo makes Loocoo Big Stick!" cried he; and he passed the club to the lad.

" Loocoo will do! " shouted the lad boastfully, as he took the blugeon.

He danced about with great agility, all the time yelling and shouting and striking in the air with the club. Applauded by his pleased audience, he continued killing time in this fashion for several minutes, until the witch-doctor ordered him to stop.

" Good! " cried the lad, and after doing a few more steps he joined Doonah on the path.

Toonootoo now led Lupelta to the path and halted with her close to Whreabo and Doonah. The girl was deathly pale, and she gazed at the young Imbunda, her eyes full of tears,— oh, so sadly! The lad responded to this woe-begone glance with a smile, which he intended should be encouraging, but which really was an exponent of the fear he felt that Dale and his brother would not arrive in time. And while Whreabo was thus endeavoring to disguise his real feelings, the witchdoctor turned toward the populace, waved his wands and cried : " Strikers! "

Immediately after the witch-doctor had shouted, a number of men, women and children,— all armed with sticks,— sprang away from the massed people, and, yelling, screaming and flourishing their rods, raced to the cinder-path, along the whole length of which,— at one of its sides,— they stationed themselves at brief intervals. Then, as soon as they were placed, Toonootoo addressed Lupelta.

" O Lupelta," cried he, " open your ears! If man, woman, or child will drink in your behalf, you may go free. Has Lupelta a champion?"

Whreabo had not forgotten how boldly he had shouted in the presence of Mwamba, the Soolahs, and the late Reesha, that, should the occasion arise, he would act as Lupelta's champion. Now, however, instead of promptly entering the lists and playing the brave paladin, as he should have, he discussed in his mind the pros and cons of the situation.

" If Lupelta dies," thought he, " Dale and Whreabo will be sorry. If Whreabo dies, Dale and Lupelta will he sorry; but Whreabo will be dead. 'Tis better to be sorry than dead! One forgets to be sorry, but one never forgets to be dead! Wow!"

This last thought settled his indecesion, if he had any, for he very sensibly decided to choose sorrow for his lot. Hence, though feeling guilty and ashamed, he moved aside, pretending not to have heard the witchdoctor's question.

When Whreabo moved aside, Lupelta, who had half-hoped that he would offer to drink the sassa-wood in her stead, sighed sadly. Then, replying to Toonootoo, she said: " Lupelta has no champion."

The witch-doctor grinned as though he were much pleased.

" Good! " cried he.

Whreabo's conscience pricked him, and he muttered a word that he had learned in the haunts of the civilized, but which must not be written here.

" Lupelta will run on the path from pot to pot," continued the witch-doctor. " Lupelta will drink from the pots in turn, until they are empty, or she falls dead, or sassa-wood makes her purge, and thus show that Hulda is not a witch."

Lupelta shivered, Whreabo groaned inwardly, but Doonah grunted contentedly.

" Doonah will run close behind Lupelta with his sword," went on the witch-doctor. " Should Lupelta fall, or even stumble while she runs, Doonah will take her head quickly! Then witch will lose her head too t "

" Doonah will do! " cried the headman; and he capered and flourished his weapon.

" Good! " cried the witch-doctor; and he nodded approvingly to the headman. Then he turned to the girl again, and went on: "Lupelta, Loocoo is Big Stick! He will run beside Lupelta and endeavor to protect her from the blows of the Strikers at the side of the path."

" No blows shall touch Lupelta! " shouted Whreabo; he capered and flourished his bludgeon,— even outdoing Doonah.

The witch-doctor gave his approval to the young Imbunda, just as he had given it to Doonah; he then once more turned his attention to hapless Lupelta.

" Lupelta will run quickly too much! " said he. " Should sassa-wood not catch Lupelta, then Toonoo-too will declare that Hulda is not a witch, and Lupelta and Hulda will be free. Toonootoo has spoken! "

He hushed and waved his wands toward Lodango, who was sitting, somber and sullen, upon the stool; and the assembled Imbundas gazed at the chief expectantly.

"Lodango will speak!" cried Toonootoo, still waving his wands.

" Speak! Speak! " shouted the crowd, and the piled-up voices contained the accent of command.

Lodango was penetrated with pity for Lupelta! He glared angrily at his clamoring subjects and inwardly cursed them; he knew, however, that unless he was prepared to surrender his sovereignty, perhaps his life, he had no choice but to obey their will. Even so, he hesitated a moment and weighed his passion for the girl against the love he had for his power and his life; and the result was exactly what any person familiar with the selfishness of the average of mankind should have expected. He arose from the stool, and, addressing Lupelta with a suggestion of emotion in his voice, cried: " Lupelta, Lodango is sorry too much! "

" It is the law! " responded the girl sadly.

" It is the law 1 " repeated the chief mournfully.

" Speak! Speak! " shouted the mob; and they glared at Lodango, shaking their clenched fists at him menacingly.

Lodango, somewhat concerned for himself, heat down the softer sentiments that were moving him to be tender. He arose from the stool, raised his spear, and, with a stem look on his face, cried: " Lupelta will drink! "

It was common knowledge among the Imbundas that Lodango was opposed to Lupelta's undergoing the sassa-wood test, and his behavior since he came to the sacrifice grove had filled them with a doubt as to whether he would, when brought to the point, abide by the law. Now that he had spoken, however, this doubt was dissipated. They fixed their gaze eagerly upon the group on the path, and shouted for the ceremony to be proceeded with.

" Lupelta will run! Lupelta will run! " they cried.

While the multitude was thus shouting, the witchdoctor pointed his wands at one of the steaming vessels, and then, when silence again prevailed, he glared at Lupelta, crying: " To the pot! To the pot! "

Lupelta, her countenance drawn and her eyes big with fear, cried out with distress and started running toward the pot at which the witch-doctor was pointing. Whreabo ran beside her, while Doonah followed closely behind. And when they started the musicians began playing furiously, and the crowd yelled joyfully; but Hulda sobbed, while Lodango groaned and drooped his head. They' all were absorbed in the scene and blind to signs presaging a tropical storm which was approaching the place. The sun was becoming strangely dim, the atmosphere heavy, gray and still; the birds were seeking shelter among the trees.

Lupelta ran quickly but carefully. The strikers that were lined along the side of the path, vociferating loudly, struck venomously either at her legs,— hoping to cause her to stumble or fall,— or at her head, eager to injure her beyond recovery. Their blows, however, did not touch her, for Whreabo, shouting all the time, cleverly warded them off with his cudgel, which he brought, more than once, into violent contact with some striker's hand or wrist. And Doonah raced almost upon Lupelta's heels, threatening her fiercely and holding his sword on high, hoping all the while that he would be given occasion for putting the weapon to bloody use. But, thanks to her own carefulness and Whreabo's protecting club, she reached the end of the path without being scathed, and the headman grunted with disappointment, though he looked forward to being more fortunate on the next lap.

When Lupelta reached the end of the path, one of the mixers filled a drinking-gourd with the hot sassa-wood infusion from the pot. She forced the brimming bowl into the unwilling girl's hand, and then, with her colleague, began dancing around her.

" Lupelta will drink! Lupelta will drink! " screamed the hags, as they danced; and they not only danced but shook their spoons at the girl.

Lupelta sighed sadly. She so trembled that the gourd in her hand spilled some of its contents. She glanced toward the heavens and muttered a brief prayer, then raised the cup toward her lips. Before she could drink, though, Whreabo (he was regretting his late pusillanimity, and his black face was the color of gray ashes, while his eyes were bulging with horror and rage) dashed the vessel from her hand. Then, as she exclaimed with surprise and the mixers with anger, he turned with lightning-like speed, brought his bludgeon down with crushing force upon the head of unready Doonah, and sent him insensible to the ground. This accomplished, with club raised and shouting fiercely, he sprang toward the mixers, who, frightened for their lives, dropped their spoons and fled screaming away. And as the mixers retreated, the lad snatched hold of Lupelta's hand and raced with her toward the shrubbery at the end of the clearing further away from Lodango and his Imbundas.

When Whreabo began performing in this bold manner,— that is, when he dashed the gourd from Lupelta's hand,— Lodango and the other onlookers were seemingly struck dumb and immovable with amazement. But as soon as he and the girl started fleeing, they recovered their presence of mind and darted forward in pursuit, leaving Hulda, almost in a faint with agony of mind, alone and unguarded, but still fastened to the stake.

Whreabo and Lupelta ran very swiftly, yet Lodango, who was heading the pursuit, drew closer and closer to them each moment; and at length Lupelta, her breath having almost deserted her, could run no longer. She halted and gasped: " Lupelta has no more wind! "

Whreabo, much dismayed, also halted.

" Lupelta will run! " cried he, endeavoring to draw her ahead.

" Lupelta cannot! Whreabo will run and save himself"

" Whreabo will stay! " said the lad tersely; and, handling his club, he stood protectingly between the girl and approaching Lodango.

Then, just as the chief was nearly upon them, fierce yells and shouts suddenly came into the clearing from the forest, followed by Mwamba and a crowd of warriors; and at the very instant that this warlike interruption occurred, a change came over the scene.

Lodango stopped short. He glanced at his enemies, who had halted at the edge of the clearing, and shouted defiantly at them. He then raced back to his own warriors, who were all jumping about and yelling, evidently, as the saying goes, " Spoiling for the fight." Toonootoo, the torment-women, the musicians, in fact, all Lodango's Imbundas, other than his fighting-men, fled,— tumbling over one another and screaming with fright,— across the open to the farther end and disappeared in the shrubbery. Lupelta and Wbreabo exclaimed joyfully! And a few minutes later, when Lodango advanced with his warriors to meet Mwamba, they ran, Lupelta having recovered her breath, toward the stake; and while they were running, Dale, at the head of a party of warriors — all shouting,— rushed from the shrubbery into the clearing.

As soon as Lodango perceived that he was being attacked also on his rear, he divided his force and sent one section to deal with Mwamba and his party, whilst he himself led the other against Dale and his savages.

When the captain came into the clearing, his first thought was to discover Hulda and Lupelta and place them in safety. He saw Lupelta and Whreabo join Hulda at the stake. Leaving his men dancing about in one spot and working themselves into a rage, he hastened toward the little group and reached the stake just as Whreabo severed the last cord that had been holding Hulda, and, too, just as Lodango, who had out-paced his warriors, raced up.

Dale had no time to speak to the girls. He smiled at them, and, with his sword upraised, sprang forward to meet the chief. Tripping, he fell, striking his head against a stump so that he became slightly dazed and unable to rise immediately; and Lodango, seeing the captain at his mercy, as he thought, shouted exultingly and elevated his spear, to hurl it at him.

When Dale fell and Lodango raised his spear, Lupelta screamed, seized hold of Whreabo and buried her face against his breast; Hulda, however, played a bolder part. Glaring at the chief, she brought into her face an expression similar to the one with which she had clothed it when pretending to restore Lupelta to life, and waved her hands at him mysteriously, just as she had done before.

The savage, impressed by Hulda's acting, hesitated to impale the captain, and then, while he was hesitating, the storm broke upon them suddenly and furiously.

Darkness instantly enveloped the place. Then lightning, vividly bright and dazzling, forked and ribboned almost against the very surface of the ground and spread in broad sheets closely overhead; and thunder crashed, rolled, rumbled, resounded, as though thousands of great guns were being discharged all at once; and the wind raged madly! It screamed, it flattened, it dashed, it tore mammoth trees up by their roots and hurled them here and there as though they were but feathers; then the heavens overflowed their fountains, and down came an ocean of water in thick, opaque masses.

And, as the elements began raging, Dale struggled to his feet, with his wits restored. Awed by the terrible, yet magnificent spectacle, he thought no more of Lo-dango, but turned with the girls and Whreabo to seek shelter. Scarcely able to discern one another, much less converse, they forced their way, with bent heads, through the howling wind to the leeward side of one of the mounds of skulls. Here they crouched, all huddled together, somewhat protected from the blast, also from the torrent when it fell, until, a few minutes later, the storm passed quite as suddenly as it had come. They then emerged from the sheltering skulls. The sun was shining bright and clear, the birds were again darting to and fro through the atmosphere, which was now cool and refreshing, but the clearing was entirely empty of human life. Not a savage was in sight!

" Why! " cried Dale, gazing round amazedly, " where are they? "

" Mwamba and Lodango have run away," said Whreabo.

"But why?" asked the captain.

Whreabo pointed toward the heavens and solemnly said: " Dale, Over-Witch was vexed too much! Over Witch talked with a loud voice! He threw fire! He dropped water from his eyes too much! The Imbundas were afraid! They have hidden their heads! "

" ' It's an ill wind turns none to good,' " thought the captain.

" Oh, Dale, Lupelta is glad! " cried Lupelta, and, smiling happily, she moved toward him.

The American longed to take Lupelta in his arms. But she was white!

"Yes, Lupelta; I suppose you are," said he somewhat coldly; and he turned to Hulda.

Lupelta paused. She gazed at Dale reproachfully, and her eyes grew dim with unshed tears.

" Miss Bartle," continued Dale, putting considerable warmth into his tone, " you've been having beastly luck! "

Hulda, who had noticed the byplay between Lupelta and Dale, felt sorry for the girl. But, keeping this emotion out of sight and replying to the captain, she gratefully said: " Thanks to you, captain, it would seem that my luck has changed for the better."

" Thanks to Whreabo," said Dale.

Whreabo grinned big.

Just then Lieutenant Brown and a body of the Constabulary Force emerged shouting and huzzahing from among the trees and advanced at double-quick step across the clearing.

Well on toward the dusk of a Summer evening, about three years later, Mrs. Sarah Dale and her daughter-in-law were in the former's well-kept garden, from which could be discerned close at hand the Hudson River, with its various craft, while in the distance loomed the tall buildings and church steeples of New York.

As the two sat there they were conversing about a book that the younger one had been reading aloud, but which was now resting, her thumb between its leaves, in the hollow of her lap.

" If the descriptions are correct," said the mother-in-law, " the country must have very many pleasing features."

" I suppose it has," remarked the other somewhat uncertainly.

" Do you not know? "

" I'm afraid I don't. Of course, considering the number of years I lived there, I ought to be better informed; but I was altogether too giddy and wild to notice or learn anything useful. Paul's book enlightens me, Mother dear, quite as much as it does you."

" You are studious and discreet enough nowadays, my dear," said Mrs. Sarah, smiling.

" I improve myself, so that Paul may not become ashamed of me."

" You need not be afraid that anything like that will ever happen," said the elder woman gently.

"'I'm not so sure," returned the other, evidently contradicting her own belief. " Since he became a major and received the Spingam Medal, Paul is very proud; and if he isn't, I am! Anyhow, I must do all I can to please him, for he, baby, and you, Mother, are all I have now."

"You are thinking of your father?"

" Yes," was the somewhat sad reply.

" You should not grieve about him, dear. In time he will come to his senses and do the right thing."

" I desire to be at peace with him."

" You must be patient. But isn't it time that Mr. Whreabo and the child were at home? "

The daughter-in-law smiled.

" Mr. Whreabo," said she, accenting the title, "brought Johnnie home some time ago. They are in the house doing —"

" You should say they are coming out of the house," broke in the elderly lady. With a smile on her face, she pointed at Whreabo and a sturdy brown-skinned boy about two years of age, who were crossing the lawn, coming toward them from the direction of the house. Whreabo looked quite the dandy! He was dressed in a suit of white flannel, brown low-quarter shoes, an immaculately white soft shirt, flowing red tie, and a Panama hat. Imagine it! Dangling against his breast, from a broad black ribbon, was a large monocle, which, though he could not see through it, he very frequently put to his eye.

The child approached his mother, and she drew him close to her side.

"Has Johnnie been a good boy? " asked she tenderly.

" Yes, Mamma," lisped the youngster. " I've been naughty only once."

" Once was once too often," said Mrs. Sarah. " Johnnie should always be a good boy."

" Granny, I can't be always good," said the child. ' "What naughty thing did my precious do?" asked the mother.

" A big boy called me bad names, and I threw a stone at him," explained Johnnie. "He was going to hit me, but Whreabo frightened him, and he ran away. Whreabo made a face and said he would devour him." The grandmother was shocked.

" Good gracious! " exclaimed she. " What a thing to say in the hearing of an innocent child! Mr. Whreabo, you should be more careful with your language."

" I'm sorry, Mrs. Dale," said Whreabo contritely. " But the boy vexed me, and I forgot to talk civilized."

The younger Mrs. Dale smiled.

" Mother, you must forgive Whreabo," said she, with an affectionate glance at the translated Imbunda. " He doesn't often hark back to the ways of Africa."

" Very well, I'll not scold him this time," said Mrs. Sarah. Rising, she added, " But it's time Johnnie was in his bed."

Johnnie did not feel that way inclined.

" I don't want to! " cried he, clinging to his mother. " It is not what you want," said the elder lady, with grandmotherly severity; " it is what your elders want! Mr. Whreabo, bring him in at once, please."

" I won't! I won't! " screamed naughty Johnnie.

"Johnnie! Johnnie!" cried the mother admonitively.

" I won't! I won't! " repeated the little rebeL "Bring the naughty boy, Mr. Whreabo," said the grandmother; and she started across the lawn.

Whreabo took the struggling Johnnie in his arms and, carrying him screaming and kicking, followed the elder Mrs. Dale, into the house.

The mother, so soon as she was alone, rested her head against the back of her chair and, with closed eyes, indulged in daydreams that evidently pleased her; for more than once she sighed happily and smiled. And while she was thus lost in a world of fancy, Dale, now a major, entered by the garden gate. He stole across to her, halted behind her chair, and placed his hands softly over her eyes.

" Guess who, and I'll give you a whole cent! " cried he.

The wife knew the hands that were touching her, also the voice, and she smiled contentedly.

" A cruel monster! " cried she.

" Bull's-eye at the very first shot! " said he, laughing and removing his hands from before her eyes. Placing himself in the chair lately occupied by his mother, he went on: " Congratulate me, dear, it's all right."

" Have you succeeded? " asked she eagerly.

"Yes* hands down! They've given me five years' leave, with permission to go abroad; and Mr. Calvert has promised to furnish the cash to carry on the work."

" I am very glad, of course; but do you think your plan to develop the agricultural resources of Liberia will be operated successfully? "

" I certainly do," said Dale confidently.

" I hope the Liberians will appreciate what you may do for them."

" The so-called leaders, who now fatten on the State, doubtless will wish me further; but the majority of the people will rejoice. Anyhow, if I succeed, the country will be saved from being absorbed by some European power, and that will be something gained."

" I hope so. But, Mr. Calvert,— did he make any difficulty about letting you have the money ? "

" At first he seemed somewhat reluctant, but when Lupelta,— I should say, Miss Calvert,— turned her powers of persuasion on him, he consented like a shot." " Paul," said the wife, after a brief pause, " if Lupelta had been a colored girl, you would not have —" " Providence has blessed me in a wonderful fashion, dear," broke in Dale.

" Has blessed me, too," said Hulda in a voice tender with emotion.

Dale gave a quick glance about. Perceiving that no eyes were upon them, he bent forward and kissed her.

"Father must speak to baby before he goes to sleep," said Hulda. " Come, dear! "

They arose and, hand-in-hand, moved contentedly toward the house.