December 16, 1943

 OBITUARY

 J. H. Kellogg Dies; Health Expert, 91

 Special to THE NEW YORK TIMES

 BATTLE CREEK, Mich., Dec. 15--Dr. John Harvey Kellogg, surgeon, health authority, developer of the Battle Creek Sanitarium and founder of the food business which later became the W. K. Kellogg Company, died here last night at the age of 91, nine years short of the century goal which he had set for himself.

 Best Example of Own Dogmas

 A determined practitioner of the rules for simple eating and living he preached for all humanity, Dr. Kellogg was perhaps the best example of the truth of his own dogmas.

 When he became a physician Dr. Kellogg determined to devote himself to the problems of health, and after taking over the sanitarium he put into effect his own ideas. Soon he had developed the sanitarium to an unprecedented degree, and he launched the business of manufacturing health foods. He gained recognition as the originator of health foods and coffee and tea substitutes, ideas which led to the establishment of huge cereal companies besides his own, in which his brother, W. K. Kellogg, produced the cornflakes he invented. His name became a household word.

 Dr. Kellogg's youth was one of hard work. Born in Tyrone, N. Y., on Feb. 26, 1852, he moved to Battle Creek with his parents, John Preston and Ann Jeanette Kellogg, at an early age. He worked in his father's broom factory and also served as a "printer's devil" in Battle Creek publishing houses.

 Took Medical Degree in 1875

 He was educated in the Battle Creek public schools, the Michigan State Normal School and the New York University Medical College, from which he was graduated in 1875 with an M. D. degree. Later he continued his education, studying in Europe in 1883, 1889, 1899, 1902, 1907 and 1911.

 Dr. Kellogg married Ella E. Eaton of Alfred Center, N. Y., on Feb. 22, 1879. They were childless, but delighted in providing funds for the education of deserving boys and girls. They virtually reared forty children, legally adopting several of them, in their fifty-room home before Mrs. Kellogg's death in 1920.

 Dr. Kellogg lectured and wrote unceasingly and was the author of many volumes on health practices.

 But Dr. Kellogg did not confine himself to research on diet and living. He was a noted surgeon, still wielding the surgeon's knife when he was in his seventies, and was the inventor of improved apparatus and instruments for medical and surgical purposes.

 An authority on water therapy, he was the discoverer of the therapeutic value of the electric light and inventor of the electric light bath. He was also the discoverer of the sinusoidal current.

 

