May 11, 1970

 OBITUARY

 Reuther Dies in Jet Crash With Wife and 4 Others

 Special to THE NEW YORK TIMES

 DETROIT, May 10--Walter P. Reuther, the president of the United Automobile Workers, and his wife, May, died last night in a plane crash in northern Michigan. Mr. Reuther was 62 years old, and his wife was 59.

 Four other persons were also killed when the chartered Lear-Jet crashed in flames near Pellston, Mich., 260 miles northwest of Detroit, at 9:33 P.M. Michigan time (10:33 P.M. New York time).

 The four were Oskar Stonorov, 64, a Philadelphia architect who was a friend of Mr. Reuther; William Wolfman, 29 of Detroit, a Reuther bodyguard who was a nephew of Mrs. Reuther; and the pilots, George Evans, 48, and Joseph Karrafa, 41, both of Columbus,

 Ohio.

 The Reuthers were flying to a union recreation and educational center at Black Lake, 25 miles from Pellston.

 Their plane left Detroit at 8:44 P.M. and crashed in fog and rain while attempting to land at the Emmet County Airport. The plane was cleared for landing and broke through the scattered clouds at 400 feet. But it was short of the airport and clipped treetops.

 It came down burning, crashing a mile and a half southwest of the airport and exploding. The bodies were burned beyond recognition except through dental records.

 President Nixon called Mr. Reuther's death "a deep loss not only for organized labor but also for the cause of collective bargaining and the entire American process." Mr. Nixon added: "He was a man who was devoted to his cause, spoke for it with eloquence and worked for it tirelessly. While he was outspoken and controversial, even those who disagreed with him had great respect for his ability, integrity and persistence."

 George Meany, the president of the A.F.L.-C.I.O., who over the years had frequently and sharply criticized the auto union leader--criticism that was returned in kind by Mr. Reuther-- said in a statement that his old rival had "made a unique and lasting contribution to the labor movement and the nation." "We had disagreements, but we worked together," Mr. Meany said, "and it is the latter that stands out in my memory."

 Other tributes to Mr. Reuther were offered across the national and around the world yesterday by political leaders such as Prime Minister Wilson of Britain: union officials; and many of the industrialists--such as Henry Ford 2d--with whom the auto union leader had often found himself at odds.

 Funeral arrangements will be announced later. The family requested that no flowers be sent.

 Mr. and Mrs. Reuther are survived by two daughters, Linda, 27, a San Francisco teacher, and Lisa, 22, a student at Oakland University here.

 Mr. Reuther is also survived by his mother, Mrs. Valentine Reuther of Wheeling, W. Va., a sister, Mrs. Eugene Richey of Reading, Mass., and two brothers, Theodore of Wheeling, and Victor of Washington, who is director of the U.A.W.'s International

 Affairs Department.

 Mrs. Reuther is also survived by her father, Frank Wolfman, and two brothers, Earl Wolfman and Leo Wolf of Detroit.

 William Wolfman was a Detroit policeman for two years and was one of the union president's three bodyguards. He is survived by his wife, Martha, and two children, Dean, 6, and Diane, 3.

 

