"Key to the Problem; Or, Tale of a Sable City" 

Henry T. Johnson, 1904

Whoso hath not snuffed the aroma of southern wild flowers, or listened to the carolling of our celebrated wood choristers, draws upon the imagination in vain for material out of which to weave an image which at once reflects the salient features of southern rural life. However, let him not imagine for a moment who hath witnessed a mocking-bird concert, or been intoxicated by the poetic fragrance of bay blossoms or cape jasmines, that he can don the toga of a southern bard. He needs to linger long enough in the land of Dixie to discern the four shiftings of nature's gorgeous panorama. He must tarry hereabouts long enough to snatch a fringe from the garment of meek-eyed spring; to see the opulent goddess of summer and taste of her nectarean sweetnesses from orchard, field and garden; to behold the aurelian form of fading autumn and listen to the rustle of her departing robes. Then, if time permits, with pen in hand and optics askant, let him sketch the icy footprints and frigid countenance and cold embraces of the stern matron of winter. If this would-be knight of the quill has a heart for verse-making, and nature up to this time has not moved it, perhaps the vernal sun will reach him and pierce it with his radiant daggers.

To the spacious poetic heavens of the sunny South, whence the scenes and incidents of our narrative obtain their birth, we hasten the gentle reader.

Says Cowper in his poem, "The Task": "Variety is the spice of life That gives it all its flavor."

Variety might have been termed by the poet, not the "spice of life," but the life itself; for where is life manifest that it is not characterized by a variety that is simply interminable—whether it be the life of the firmament or of the sea, whether it be on the earth or under the earth. In life seen or life unseen variety is all and in all. Indeed we have the thought that it is not only by variety that life is possible, but that by it success in the field of its operation is also only possible. That variety greatly furthers and hastens success is perfectly demonstrable. Refering to the variety of agencies alluded to by the prophet (Isa 62 : 10) to make possible the return of Israel from Babylon, and not only possible, but expeditious, Rawlinson says: "The speaker returns to the period of the exile, and exhorts the people to pass forth from Babylon and speed on their way homeward. Some of them are to clear away obstacles, others are to bring materials and construct a highway along which the stream of emigrants may march, while a third body removes such stones as might cause stumbling, and a fourth lifts up a standard to direct the march."

And this same principle of the potency of variety is seen in the inspired economy of our holy religion. We read (Eph. 4: 11,) "And he gave some to be apostles; and some prophets; and some evangelists; and some pastors and teachers." The Catholic Douay has it: "And he gave some Apostles, and some Prophets, and some Evangelists, and other some pastors and doctors."

Respecting this divine exhibition of a variety of forces, Henry says: "How rich is the church that had at first such a variety of officers, and has still such a variety of gifts !"

It is to this principle of action on the part of God, both in nature and in revelation—to say nothing of its constant recurrence in the daily providences of our lives—it is, we say, to this principle that we would invite the attention of all who are laboring for the disenthrallment of our millions, and so happily illustrated in the life of the author of this book.

Variety of effort is the word. Variety of thought. Variety of word. Variety of work. Variety of method in general. Our author, we say, is a fine illustration of all this. Is a speech to be made? Only touch the button. Is a lecture to be delivered? He is there. He can give an impromptu verse, on the first asking; and preach a sermon full of thought. He writes editorials on the events of the day; and books on the more substantial duties of civic life. And now he essays to rise to the realm of fiction. What next? we are constrained to ask. He is the farthest from being a variety man, but who can say he is not a man of the rarest intellectual variety? Of course, we have no idea of the success that may attend this last venture, being called away to the Southwest before it was possible for us to read or even glance at the manuscript. But judging from the man and his past efforts, judging especially from the variety of talents possessed we have every reason to expect success. Did not the variety of the forces engaged bring retreating Israel safe to Palestine? Does not the variety of the gift's imparted still lead on the church to victory? So with the case in hand. Surely the speaker and the lecturer, the poet and the author, the editor and the preacher, will not fail when he comes to write a work of fiction. None, we prophesy, will have to pay it the left-handed compliment paid to Hugh Miller's venture as a poet: "There is not a ridiculous or foolish line in it."

With an earnest prayer that his forthcoming "Key to the Problem" will fit and so enable our ten millions to open the door of their worse than Mamertine prison and emerge into God's free sunlight of justice and fair piny, we subscribe ourselves, BENJ. TUCKER TANNER.

2908 Diamond St, Philadelphia.

The city of Bayou, whence my narrative takes its birth, is located in one of the flowery commonwealths of Dixie in a Black Belt District. A half-century ago its inhabitants numbered a trifle more than fifty thousand souls, forty per cent, of whom were white, the rest a colored population of every hue from African ebony to Caucasian octoroon. The phenomenal growth of this Afro-American town is seen by a glance at the latest census findings, which place its whites at seven hundred and fifty thousand and the Afro-American variety at a quarter million more than the whites. Nor are the industrial and sociological changes of this experimental community less marvelous than their stride in population, for growth along these lines had its tremendous mainspring in the march of ideas and irresistable conquests of truth. In the light of its present greatness, the story of the dreams and drawback's of the juvenile town of a half century ago is of romantic tinge and will be read only with incredulous eyes. If the picture recalled should awaken the reader's doubts touching history or humanity, the penalty is but transient and incidental. Suppose dark scenes are disclosed, each sombre cloud will be seen to bear a silver fringe and expel some death charged element. Where trailed caste monsters in the slime of unreasoning hate will be traced the holy forms of vestal spirits pioneering to higher planes. The bloody hoofs which mark the tread of outlawry will prove but providential outlines to the reign of law and justice. In the wake of war and its hydra horrors, the gentle doves of peace will appear in flocks bearing twigs of thrift and amity. Instead of thorns of discrimination, fir trees of equity will flourish in splendor. The solitary places made fearful by political and social curses after fiery regeneration will be seen taking on new life and crowned with the verdant grandeur of unfading greatness.

He who doubts the history and prophecy sketched in these pages is no firm believer in Providence and challenges the conquest and: sovereignty of eternal right.

A new era dawns upon the ill-favored population of the South-land. The baptism of blood with which they had been deluged for centuries, first in the form of slavery, then followed by the fiery persecutions associated with their aspirations to the rights of freedmen, had so regenerated the erstwhile inferior race that they no longer looked or acted like their former selves, save in a most shadowy way. In evidence that the transformation was not merely superficial, the very soil seemed permeated by it and the atmosphere felt lighter, and the fields and farms wore an Edenic aspect of beauty and loveliness on every side. From orchard, farm and field, the golden fruit teemed in unstinted abundance. The fleecy staple that a few generations gone by swayed the sceptre of sovereignty became now crowded from its royal foothold by conditions less conducive to its reign. The unfavorable conditions which had so long fettered the powers and crippled the aspirations of the long down-trodden people had so yielded to the touch of progress that not a vestige of their unsightly track was to be seen. Large wastes of rural territories, deserted by former generations, afforded prosperous seats for thrifty multitudes who had the wisdom and energy to desert congested city centers and take their chances with unfettered nature in quest of health and fortune. As if in sympathy with their wise and nobler aspirations, nature responded freely to the touch of her ever-faithful but long dwarfed subjects, and from fields and flocks and farm, the barns, graneries and stock-yards teemed in plenty. No longer dependent upon oppressive landlords, supply merchants and lienholders, the people were masters of their own soil, from which enough was raised not only to maintain their families but a large surplus for the market besides. In springtime the sceneries along railways, pikes and roadsides were such as to arouse interest and emotion in the dullest observer. From the Potomac to the Rio Grande thrift and intelligence roamed hand in hand, while waking nature smiled and wove her verdant mantle for every vale and hill top. A few months later and the fields in Virginia waved broad banners of tobacco leaves, answering to the golden corn and rice of the Carolinas, the fruits of Florida, the cotton of Georgia, the cane of Louisiana and the fleecy fields of the Lone Star State.

Diversity, fertility and prosperity marked rural conditions everywhere. The historic black belts, unchanged in contents and complexion, had so enlarged in scope and magnitude that they embraced the major portion of Southern population as their inhabitants. These people, long ago individualized for their ignorance and backwardness, had taken on the higher life, peculiar to a growing people. The monotonous and depressing sight of semi-civilized life no longer existed. Fenceless fields, wierd-looking log shanties, lank and unsightly road-rigs and other exponents of a backward civilization, were rare exceptions, scarcely to be met with in a day's journey. This juvenile race, the youngest offspring of nature, had discovered the golden secret from their mothers' lips that nothing is wasted and with great diligence they set about applying this truth. The fortunes squandered by their forefathers on account of stupidity or impecuniosity, the rank and file of them rescued and redeemed with amazing thrift and wisdom. Race pride and mutual confidence, so sadly lacking in their ancestors, were no longer drawbacks to their progress. Not only was enterprise displayed in the form of shopkeeping, shoemaking, blacksmithing, undertaking, whitewashing and what-not, as among the older generations, the new and more vigorous descendants enlarged their thoughts and activities along higher lines. From tenacious soil they utilized the ordinary clay, trampled upon by their progenitors and devoured by a type of "Crackers," to compromise indolence and appease their appetite, this new people built factories and manufactured bricks and pottery for the market. At convenient intervals of location were to be found factories for the crushing of rocks, the grinding of grain, the canning of fruits and vegetables, or mills for the sawing of lumber, the grinding of sugar cane and millet, the weaving of cloth, and the manufacturing of countless articles of food and dress for personal and domestic service.

In evidence of the intellectual and moral transformation which took place in this formerly under-race, little if any trace of the distrust of each other which for centuries stunted their progress was anywhere to be discovered. Instead of each one relying upon his individual strength and judgment for success in business ventures, just the opposite was true. The larger towns of the original black belt were dotted for blocks with stores, market houses and business places. In front of large stores of general merchandise and groceries or hardware or dry goods were signs such as "Jones and Brown," "Adams and Sons," ."Anderson, Smith and Co."

The city of Mound Bayou had the lead of the other towns of the more noted class and its superior standing was due to this fact as well as to the fact that its early settlers were colored men and women of the best character and of superior intelligence and aspiration. The majority of them had received their schooling at Wilberforce, Tuskegee, Lincoln and Hampton, while others studied at Northern schools, or could exhibit certificates of training in the school of good common sense and self-acquired ability. The colony was the outcome of the bitter oppression from which the race suffered throughout the Southland during the dawn of the twentieth century. The persecutions, widespread and intollerable, which drove the less thoughtful of the race to desert their homes, some going North and West, others falling a prey to sharks of the emmigration theory and taking ship for Liberia, brought the conservative and race-loving leaders together, who, after due deliberation, concluded to remain in the South and simply shift their base of operation. ( They agreed to purchase an immense area of land some distance from the white man's irritating and hostile presence and endeavor to build up a model community for themselves, A charter from the legislature was granted the promoters of the unusual venture and in less than a half century the thriving, towering Mound Bayon city was the stupendous fruitage.

From the fifty model families who first settled and laid the foundation of the village, the population had expanded to fifty thousand. They had laid the foundation of their safety and prosperity upon the four corner-stones of righteousness, temperance, economy and race upbuilding. Admitting these basal elements of prosperity, it is not difficult to account for the prodigious wealth and success of the experimental city. Its walls were towering and so fortified against that foe which usually makes captors of the powerful and great that their foundations could not be undermined nor their battlements scaled by the arch invader, King Alcohol. No liquor traffic was allowed within the city and arrests for drunkenness were unusual occurrences, even during the Christmas season. The police who did duty only throughout the night did service more from obedience to orders than from the fear that the public welfare was endangered in any wise. Banks, jewelry stores and business houses needed no watchmen since burglars and thieves shunned the city or found its approaching roadways and posted laws of entrance or residence both forbidding and rigidly impassable. Only a small pro rata of whites were allowed to reside in the town and then only on condition that they take out license to restrict their business within the limit of a certain margin of prosperity in a stated time. This particular restriction was varied, however, when the white man elected to unite in business corporations with colored men, and in that event that he be restrained from exercising a controlling share of the stock. This iron-clad rule was not established and enforced because of prejudice against the whites, but as a safeguard against the defeat of the scheme to build an independent, ideal Negro community, illustrative of the race's heart and brain in their best productiveness, unhampered or unaided by the white man's genius except in an incidental way.

The first century of the race's freedom was near its close and it was decided to celebrate the event in connection with the golden jubilee of the magic Negro city. To give eclat to the double anniversary, the black republics of Liberia, San Domingo and Hayti made liberal provision for representation of the people and government, feeling especial interest in the event because of their relation to the history and people involved. Nor were the whites to be accused of indifference or opposition to the great event, for while it meant the glory of the thirty millions of sable-hued Americans, it involved the credit of the nation that gave them citizenship and made it possible for them to demonstrate their powers of manhood and race nobility. What the state failed to furnish in the way of liberal appropriation on miserly and partisan grounds, was more than matched by the liberal outlay of Congress for the gigantic display of Negro genius and possibilities. The thirty millions voted by Congress for the Afro-American Centennial was fought by Southern Congressmen on the ground that the appropriation meant their endorsement of class legislation, which was contrary to the letter and spirit of the Constitution as they construed it. While they were in favor of the progress made by the blacks since their emancipation and heartily endorsed the proposed exhibition which was intended to show their development along industrial, mechanical, agricultural, intellectual and business lines, unless they warped the plain statutory enactments from their recognized applications there was no way by which they could favor the measure. The more radical among the Southern statesmen, true to the instinct of the former party and generation, opposed the appropriation with much vehemence and all the influence and adroitness they could muster, but the measure won over their head with an overwhelming majority vote.

Those who championed the measure on the floor of Congress used the invincible argument that as a part of the national body politic the Afro-American contingent had as strong a claim upon the contents of the nation's treasury as any of the numerous race-varieties whose blood coursed through the nation's veins and helped to constitute its life. No more was asked for in the appropriation invoked for the colored citizens than was even more liberally granted to Irish and German-Americans in the recent expositions which marked epochs in their respective histories. They insisted with telling effect that the marvelous material progress of the country as a whole was due to the black citizen's worth as laborers and that this truth applied with unqualified force to the South. Subtract from the nation's wealth credit the. revenue yielded from rice, cotton, cane and tobacco culture in the South and the shrinkage would be tearful. Such a deduction would so lower the prestige of the nation that its standing as a world power would be hopelessly impaired. Out of sheer equity and consistency the nation owed it to itself to recognize in an appreciable way the people who so largely constitute the source and mainstay of the stupendous material showing the country was able to make before the world. It was also shown by the champions of the appropriation bill that the enormous contributions of the darker races who composed the nation's new dependencies had enriched the government more than a billion dollars in two decades and that it was befitting that the nation indicate its gratitude by the moderate allowance asked; for in the appropriation proposed. As a fitting climax, the leading speaker in support of the measure referred to the patriotism and valor of the colored man in every crisis of the country's life, citing Attucks, who fell a martyr in the fight for American independence; Salem, at Bunker Hill; Carney, at Wagner; Young and others at El Caney and Santiago de Cuba.

Southern Congressmen of the rabid, fire-eating Tillman type had passed away, but the succeeding crop supplied in adherence to the traditions of the elders what they lacked in bluff and bluster of the blood and thunder variety. One of the belligerent class of Southern statesmen 'mentioned - courteously asked the privilege of interrogating the speaker, who was in the midst of a most interesting and eloquent closing period. The speaker indicated a desire not to be interrupted at that juncture, but finally yielded at the insistence of the interruptor.

"Does the gentleman on the floor mean to give the impression that he is a believer in social equality between the whites and blacks ?" The question did not in the least disconcert the speaker. His prompt and silencing rejoinder was: "When the warrant of time or the interest of the discussion will justify it I will be pleased to reply to the gentleman from Mississippi and give him an adequate reason for the faith maintained by the speaker on this or any other subject involving social rights and privileges." Amid the deafening applause of his partisan friends and the cheers of the more liberal representatives of the counter party the champion advocate referred to concluded his speech to the chagrin and dismay of the minority element who designed to weaken its force. The much-boasted chivalry of the Southern gentry wilted beyond recognition beneath the glowing reference made by the speaker to the heroic conduct of the ex-slaves to the white population when the latter was absolutely at their mercy and at a time when the oppressor was striving with main and might to more tightly bind the gyves and shackles upon them. The same fortitude that enabled these people to endure the horrors of bondage for centuries, to pass through the fires of persecution and the hell of outlawry and widespread race butcheries, had fortified them with a forbearance and forgiveness well-nigh superhuman in scope and character. Time had demonstrated the wisdom of their course and the triumph of their cause. Their descendants have lived to see cities reared and temples of worship and learning tower where once the hydras of slavery and race hate and appalling ignorance trailed their foul and: slimy forms. They had entered the wilderness and like the nobler members of the Caucasian group had transformed it into a paradise of homes and flourishing centers. They had risen from chatteldom to manhood and could watch the superior fortuned race in the most admirable specimen of heart and brain productions. Their poets can sing with no less enchanting sweetness than the bards of Greece or England, while their artists can wield the brush and chisel with an ease that rivals an Orpheus or Angello. In the educational realm members of this once subject race now rank as masters, while the foremost one of this class will jut out in towering prominence above all others of his day and race and country. When Harvard and Yale and Johns Hopkins will have been obscured in forgetfulness Tuskegee and Wilberforce, coupled with Payne and Washington, their sable founders, will have just shed the ivy leaves of their ever verdant grandeur. While the world looks upon the efforts, achievements and renown of this plodding indefatigable people with gratification and admiration , it is a spectacle beggering description that a paltry few who stand astride the roadway of their pilgrimage in stubborn attitude, hugging the delusive hope of thereby arresting the chariot of their progress or thwarting it from its track of God-appointed destiny. In granting the thirty million toward their centennial jubilee Congress proves itself equal to a high privilege no less binding than its duty to a class in whose hands the nations life and honor are held as most sacred jewels.

The committee to whom the matter was referred reported favorably upon it and Congress approved the same by an overwhelming two-thirds vote. With this added thirty million appropriation from the government the Centennial Colored Jubilee Commission was amply fortified to make success of the gigantic celebration event it had in hand.

The colored capitalists of the Mound City had formulated plans for the celebration of the first golden anniversary of their city's life in connection with the 100th year of the race's emancipation. The program arranged for the occasion was arranged on a most elaborate scale. Not only were invitations extended to the noted men and women of the race, but it took in every known friend of the race in all the sections and a few distinguished advocates and champions of the Negro's cause from abroad. For five years the scheme of this surpassing event was under contemplation and outsiders no less than the local population talked and dreamed of its unqualified success. The popular subscription to the project amounted to ten million five hundred thousand dollars, while the wealthy capitalists pledged to donate a sum six times as large as the sum paid in by the people. Congress, through the National Liberty Party, which grew out of the old Republican party, had appropriated thirty millions to the same project; The sum for the exposition by this figure now reached the adequate and flattening amount of more than one hunderd million dollars. It was thought that one million dollars for each year of the race's history since its emancipation would not be too great an investment in its jubilee centenary, and the inhabitants of the magic city cheerfully contributed its quota toward the magnificent event. No one seemed averse to the enterprise, for its successful consummation meant fame to the investors and millions to the city coffers. The expenditure of this money was placed in the hands of an executive committee fully competent to handle it in such a manner as to give general satisfaction and produce the best results. A number of subcommittees were placed in charge of various interests, such as agricultural, mechanical, domestic, artistic, scientific, animal and poultry exhibits, showing the progress of the race during the first century of its freedom. The most inviting and picturesque land site was selected for the exposition grounds and buildings and was in easy reach of the city, both by steam and electric railways, the latter leading to the main entrance within a stone's throw of the Administration Building. Acres of humble two-room cottages that cumbered the city's suburban grounds gave place to the fair grounds and its mammoth structures, their owners having been tendered liberal compensation for a two-year lease of the same and quarters for their occupants being provided elsewhere. The people that temporarily occupied the outlying suburban territory were quite unlike their city neighbors both in history and aim and temperament. They were refugees from lawless sections where the atmosphere of race hate was unbearable. The community in which they lived formerly became dominated by a class of whites who persecuted the blacks less bitterly than their ancestors, but who, while the, no longer mobbed nor burnt them, still controlled the courts and made it impossible for them to enjoy their civil rights or dwell peaceably or secured in their homes. A sudden outbreak of this deadly spirit drove thousands to abandon their homes and the majority sought the more congenial confines of the thriving and historic Negro town. In their sudden exodus they had to sacrifice all their possessions except what ready money and portable articles they owned. Though distressed in circumstances these unfortunate refugees were received by their more fortunate race neighbors and given a chance to try their fortune among those who knew what it was to feel the shafts of race persecution. For fifty years the iron had entered into the souls of then-fathers and drove them to pitch their tents into the wilderness in search of a Canaan whose soil would yield corn and wheat in plenty and whose streams would flow with milk and wine. True to the high hopes and fondest dreams of these earlier race pioneers the fields were crowned with plenty and the years with goodness as the inhabitants more and more relied upon their brain and muscles and adhered to the God of their fathers. With temperance, co-operation, righteousness and education as main pillars in the structure of their unique city, it was but reasonable to surmise the success of'their model community. While the well pastored and flourishing churches and splendid institutions of higher and lower grades reflected the intellectual and moral life of the populace, their homes, business places, clean streets, well-ordered parks, fire, police and water systems were living illustrations of the genius and fitness of this virgin race for self-government and the ability to work out their own salvation when left to themselves.

The mammoth Exhibition and Jubilee was the theme of every tongue but that of Eunice Montgomery and Douglass Hayden Lewis. The |ropical sun never tinged and bronzed a lovlier human beauty than the former, the only daughter of the oldest and wealthiest settler of the half-century-old town. The wealth and beauty of the fortune-crowned maiden found chief expression in her cultured mind and royal spirit. Passing through the best schools of her native town and with church credentials in testimony of her Christian character she was warmly welcomed by the president and faculty of New England's celebrated school for girls, and by her brilliancy and winsomeness she was not long in securing a leading place among its student ranks. At the social functions of the school she was a drawing card and central figure as much for her brilliancy and bon mot qualities as for her prepossessing beauty. Though exposed to the seductive influences perculiar to institutions which exalt erudition and mental finesse above the spiritual virtues, Eunice Montgomery placed no less stress upon her Christian honor than upon her scholastic standing. With a splendid class record supplemented by the benediction of an ever approving religious conscience, the five years' enlistment soon sped among the things of the past and the successful and beloved Wellesley College girl of color became numberd with its extensive and ever-growing alumnae.

The five summers of Eunice's college life fled by as swift as the flight of fairies and as lightly as their dreams. Her vacation months were pleasantly whiled away in Boston at the home of a relative whose daughter was a close companion and college chum. Not until the vacation season of her junior year did she yield to the attractions of social life in the Hub, for prior to this the evenings were spent usually in literary recreation at home when not exploring the beautifully illuminated and wonderful labyrinthian subways, and suburban wayside by fascinating trolley rides. The days were usually spent in visits to such historic places as Faneuil Hall, Old South Church and Harvard College, or such romantic points as the Willows, Nantasket-by-the-Sea, Melville Garden and the like. Frequently during the earlier morning hours she could be found in some corridor of the far-famed public library poring over some rare piece of literary treasure or lost in the contemplation of some creation of the masters in painting or sculpture or statuary. It was during one of these quiet diversions that an incident occurred which gave rise to the romance of the present chapter and formed the major link in the chain of events which caused the mighty centennial and city event of her Southern home to pale into minor interest by its side.

The crowning event of Douglass Hayden Lewis was soon to take place and the princely private car of the railroad magnate millionaire,------------------, was at his disposal. The son of the railroad king and Douglass were fast college friends and the bond between them became sacredly confirmed, despite the fruitless effort of the latter to save his life in a runaway accident. Returning from a polo game one afternoon as the chums were nearing the college grounds, a huge red-colored automobile suddenly dashed around the corner and its furious speed and puffing noise so frightened the horse of young ----------- that he reared and slipped and fell upon the rider causing almost instant death. The steed of Douglass was more controllable. The athletic, agile rider grasped the reins as the horse of his chum rose upward, but was scarcely able to break the force of the fall. Seeing the tragic result of their reckless driving the occupants of the flaming machine steered to the bleeding victim and assisted Douglass in lifting his limp and quivering form to a seat of comfort. The sinking victim was hurriedly conveyed to the college hospital and the parents notified by wireless message of the sad occurrence. They reached the bedside of their only boy in time to see him breathe his last. Despite the luxury and comforts of the home of the wealthy pair at Brookline, the death angel's rustling wings and the vacant chair left an ever-aching, void that wealth and fortune could never fill. As the seasons returned with periodical reminders of the fatal happening, the bereaved pair would decorate the tomb of their sleeping scion and take ship or private car to lessen their grief through travel. The only worthy wearer of the dead collegian's mantle in the eyes of the parents was Douglass Hayden Lewis. In honor of the departed the bereaved parents considered no attention to the surviving chum too costly and as the magnificent private coach was not in use its princely service was tendered the favored candidate for matrimonial honors in the distant South.

Douglass Lewis had felt the cheery touch of golden days oft and again in his youth and early manhood, but the morning of June 30th surpassed the best record of all his former joyous days. It was not his wedding day, but the preliminary date introductory to the glad event. Highland Garnett Payne was his fast friend, having succeeded to that post of credit since the death of his college chum, was of invaluable aid in arranging the details of the eventful trip and its crowning purpose. Besides the charming sister, mother and handy brother of the groom-elect a select party of Boston's upper tendom set, five whites included among them, were 'snugly berthed in the elegantly furnished and swell private coach labelled "Lux" one of the latest and richest outputs of the Pullman shops. As the train rolled lazily out of the Union Depot the conservative onlookers that thronged the platform "rubbered" and stared in astonishment at the dazzling, breath-taking spectacle, while the unconventional group of newsboys silenced the puffing noise of the retreating engine with repeated peals of lusty cheers.

"Gee whiz! ain't she a beaute," shouted a vociferous fledgling of the gang.

"Must be the Prince of India wid his travelling train," echoed another.

"Ah, snuff yer gas pipes. Shut up yer hot-air brake. Don't cher know the rich old guy wot's big kid got killed by the horse wot throwed him from de fright of de red devil dat's suddenly turned de corner. De Harvard College guy, I mean." A chorus of agreement followed and the leader of the newsboys' brigade continued. ' "De feller''s dad is de one wot owns de fine rig, 'cause I've seen him take folks in it wid me own lookers many a time. Don't cher guys mind the name yer seed on the rig."

The interest in the incident having terminated as the magnificent carrier faded out of sight, the merry news venders made the morning air echo with shouts of: "Globe and Herald, Colored American, Transcript, Advertiser. New York and Providence papers. One cent. All about the fire at Tremont Temple."

From Boston to New York the journey was marked by no particular interest, save the merry pastime of the happy-hearted party. A delay of ten minutes at Hartford Junction, due to the tardiness of the Boston Limited, was well spent in a wholesome after-luncheon exercise. The well-appointed car had every convenience necessary to comfort and a button had only to be touched to secure the attention needed. The commissary department was stocked with edibles and beverages, liquors excepted, more than equal to the demand of a three days' itinerary and suitable to the vagaries of the most fastidious appetite. The cooks, porters and waiters knew their business and everything worked in apple-pie order until the dividing line between the upper and lower geographical region was reached on the journey Southward just beyond the nation's capital. From the restful sleep of the previous night the party awoke refreshed. The greater part occupied seats in the observation car and took in scenes of the Southern landscapes and wayside objects while waiting for breakfast, while a few found greater pleasure in occupying seats at writing desks preparing letters for friends left behind. Lewis, with Payne and Arthur Garrison, one of the white guests, and brother of Miss Montgomery's classmate, who was one of the wedding party, paced the platform outside as the train tarried at the next 'station for water and a fresh supply of fuel. As the trio thus occupied themselves they soon attracted the gaze of curious hangers-on, whites and colored, who were still slaves of the habit of greeting passing trains as generations of their ancestors did. The sight of the magnificent coach, its mixed outfit of fine looking passengers, visible through the uplifted curtains and windows from the outside, together with the easy familiarity of the motley party referred to, so non-plussed the self-appointed delegation of "Cracker" whites and sable loungers that they seemed lost for expression for the moment. While the blacks grinned and the "Crackers" scowled as if awe-stricken at the spectacle of "social equality," the car party inside equally at a loss to account for what greeted their visions in the land through which they were but transient passengers.

A number of colored gamins formed a part of the early delegation that serenaded the southbound train and furnished entertainment to a number of drummers in a novel, heartless way. The local whites lined up together leaving elbow room for the idle blacks to enjoy the sport. At intervals a penny would be tossed in the air so as to fall in a water puddle near the railway track and the lucky scrambler who could get it would be cheered by the onlookers. The blacks indicated pleasure at the sport only with broad grins, shrugging their shoulders and holding their sides for fear of offending the superior loafers with a seeming violation of the traditions of "'social equality.." The party from the windows of the handsome special did not relish the barbarous entertainment as the others, for they immediately drew down the curtains. This act, coupled with expressions of protest from the Boston trio, drew the attention of the crowd to the representatives of an obnoxious civilization and the shout of the stern-voiced conductor, "All aboard!" was a relief to the situation uttered none too soon. After this incongruous episode nothing occurred to cross-grain the harmony of the trip until Atlanta was reached next morning and the special was side-tracked two hours to make connection with the southwestern flyer due at noon.

The gorgeous special was switched at the Yazoo Junction next morning early and taken in charge by the colored conductor operating between that point and the renowned Negro city fifty miles away. Three other special coaches awaited the early schedule. A delegation of relatives and friends supplemented by committees on behalf of the citizens and the great Centennial Fair gave cordial welcome to the Eastern visitors and foreign guests. Wonderment and gratification were expressed on every side. The sable official outfit that manned the train from fireman to conductor seemed elated over the Jubilee event and its bountiful outcome in its first installment. The news of the special car and its inmates had been flashed ahead and it was easy to distinguish its occupants from the Pullman passengers, although they were alike distinguished for commanding appearance.. The conductor, a portly, genial-looking, brown-skinned official, as he opened the staterooms and entered the observation car end of the "Lux" coach to collect tickets from the passengers, could not suppress the pride, delight and amazement that struggled for mastery in his thoughts and feelings. Though evidently carried away by the bewitching magnificence of the special carrier, he was more deeply impressed with the rich and cultured company aboard, but especially with the imposing figure of Douglass Hayden Lewis, its most conspicuous member. As he stood punching the tickets handed by the future bridegroom he could not restrain the impulse to greet the Eastern visitor with a nod of admissible recognition and asked pardon if he was mistaken in taking him for the hero of the matrimonial event of the succeeding evening. The blushing benedict-to-be handed the conductor his card with a modest bow, which the official compensated with one of his own and a copy of the Mound City Morning News, which contained an elaborate program of the great city 'silver event and the International Jubilee, together with a well written notice of the wedding and the dazzling personnel of the affair. The train made but a single stop before reaching its final destination. As it thundered along it was diffiicult to differentiate or identify passing objects by the wayside, but the towering imposing forms of the huge Fair buildings loomed up with increasing size and grandeur, until the big spurting locomotive was brought to a standstill within a stone's throw of the main entrance leading to the entrancing and extensive exposition grounds. Thrift, enterprise and business teemed on every side, greeting the eyes and ringing in the ears of the passengers as they emerged from the train through the station into the streets of the record-eclipsing new Afro-American city. Hotel agents teeming in great numbers and drivers of hacks, 'buses and automobiles and other vehicles plied their genius seductively as far as city ordinances would permit in capturing new-comers from the incoming trains. The Boston guests were spared this boring gamut, for the special advance committee had taken them in charge at the junction as already stated. Mayor Montgomery's handsome auto wagon was in waiting at the 'side entrance to the station and the best girl of his daughter, the bride-elect's college chum and three of the white passengers from the Hub, were hurriedly wheeled to the mammoth mansion of the venerable City Father. Douglass and the other associate guests were conducted to elegant suites of rooms at the L'Overture Hotel, the leading hostelry of the place. In the afternoon an automobile drive was enjoyed by all save the man whose thoughts and interest centered in a matter of greater and graver moment. Others might regale themselves with sight-seeing and taking in the novel revelations of the unique community, but it was up to Douglass to face the music and keep time with the fitness of other things. He was a helpless prisoner of Cupid, and a sight of the human cause of his heart's undoing he longed and eagerly yearned to see that afternoon ere the noose of Hymen closed around his neck.

The golden Jubilee of Mound City followed close upon the heels of the Lewis-Montgomery matrimonial event. As might be expected the latter was a most elaborate and surpassing affair of its kind. To describe its details is to add nothing of value to the narrative, hence we take leave of the shadow and give the substance in order to gratify the curiosity and yield instruction to the reader. The ceremony was performed at the People's Temple in the presence of a shining assemblage of guests and spectators. The interior of the building usually impressive to the beholder for its simple beauty was decorated for the occasion and expressed a solemn grandeur that was heightened by the rich and deep-toned wedding march evoked from the pipe organ at which a queenly graduate of the Boston Conservatory of Music presided.

The Bishop of the district assisted by the pastors of the contracting parties united the pair at the altar. The rites performed, the gorgeously decorated parlors of the Montgomery mansion became the 'subsequent scene of the brilliant wedding. Congratulations, festivities and music poured their choicest incense at the feet of the lovely pair. Crowns of benediction were woven from the kisses and good cheers of the friends and early mates of the bride and placed by tender hands upon the brows of the jubilant couple. The cup of happiness flowed in unstinted fulness that merry wedding evening, but the inspiration was not from wine nor bacchanalian liquid in any form. This could not be, for Mound City was a strictly temperance, yea prohibition town, and the man its most distinguished ruler, whose daughter with her fullest consent and pleasure, was turned over to the graces and affections of another man. It was not difficult to identify the happiest quartette among the hymenial throng.

The ex-Mayor, his wife, who was the step-mother of his newly-married daughter, the latter and her noble husband easily betrayed the fact that of all the assembled, host they were the most favored and interested ones. Narrowing the group to a more limited circle, Eunice and Douglass bore away the sceptre, as they were the sovereigns of the realm that night, their relatives and admiring guests only reflecting their emitted radiance.

The magnificent wedding event being over, the next immediate affair of commanding interest was the contents of the city's Jubilee program. The benedict and his lovely bride were in splendid trim to appreciate the wealth of wonder connected with this event and the grand Centennial World's Fair. While the appearance of the latter in public during the week was forbidden by the conventionalities of good taste and custom, such technicalities did not apply to her husband and the rest of the circle of friends. The royal wedding breakfast, the bracing air and the golden June morning laden with the beauty of the town's anniversary dress and the intoxicating fragrance were sufficient stimulants for the enjoyment of every one. With Douglas's Lewis there was an additional stimulus in the piece of paper placed as a surprise under his wife's plate by her father before breakfast. It was a check for one round million dollars, a gift without any conditions fi om the donor. This unexpected largesse furnished additional relish for the future in the benedict's thoughts, as he was thereby more fully prepared to enter upon the order of the day as arranged by the city's executive committee on entertainment to the eminent visiting guests.

A royal outfit of carriages and automobiles was announced in waiting at the side entrance of the Mayor's mansion. The father, son and two ladies of the Boston party took seats in the self-propelling machine while others occupied the open carriages. It was two hours before the pageantry would move according to the elaborate program, arranged for the occasion. There was ample time for the party to make a rapid tour of the city, taking in its principal points of interest and be in their seats at the grand review stand by eleven of the towering town clock, whose clanging tongue and massive hands told the successive hours, whether near or far, by day or night.

The party rode leisurely to the city square, where beautiful fountains spurted their 'silvery sprays across variegated grass lawns. In the trees and stunted shrubbery birds flitted and squirrels sported as if they too were animated by the spirit of the Jubilee week. What nature did not furnish to enrich the central park was amply supplied in sweet music furnished by the park band and in. the teeming works of art. "Old Glory," buntings, garlands of roses, festoons of flowers floating from trees or streaming from temporary scaffoldings furnished a magnificent spectacle. Only a few moments were spent in scanning the imposing picture.

The beholders thought the spectacle quite as rich and fascinating as that furnished by the public gardens of Boston and in some respects superior. It was arranged that the most convenient of the public circles be taken in and a drive through Liberia Avenue with a bird's-eye-view of the business section of the city, which would exhaust the margin of time left before the displays of the day began. The broad asphalt-covered streets of the residence section and the three-rowed shade trees on Liberia Avenue, the city's leading thoroughfare, did not fail to afford life-material for the pen, kodaks and brushes of the Eastern sightseers. The pictures of thrift, push, enterprise and progress of the infant race and people were eye-openers as they met their gaze on every hand. That the beholders should become inspired as they took in the endless wonders of architecture, taste, genius and wealth reflected from public buildings, private dwellings, beautiful streets and parks and monuments goes without the statement. The colored visitors were lost for utterances in the face of the towering object lessons of their people's progress. Their white companions shared the emotion kindled by the pictures outlined. They were children of the East and were descendents of abolitionist stock. Their ancestors were full-orbed and broad-guaged touching the dogmas of Negro equality and human brotherhood and the children wore their mantle with natural ease and dignity.

The sight-seeing drive which embraced the suburbs with it's humbler race population served as a sort of spiritual and mental appetizer for the revelations to greet the city's guests from the commanding station of the grand stand. The party reached headquarters a few minutes in advance of the scheduled time and were given right of way by an advanced guard of police whose massive forms sufficed to move and menace the throng that blocked the entrance and to the review 'stand and made standing room almost impossible for miles along the lines of the procession.

The pageantry was picturesque, stirring and bordering on the spectacular. As section after section of mounted guards, uniformed officials, civilians, professionals, mechanics, business men, and common and skilled laborers filed by the grand stand cheers rose in volleys from the throats of the onlookers, while waving of kerchiefs and clapping of hands expressed the emotions of the better favored occupants of reserved seats.

The personnel of the turnout evoked the loudest demonstrations. The uninitiated might be tempted to surmise that the color line was drawn, as black horses bearing princely riders or drawing magnificent vehicles loomed up in panoramic review. The selection of dark colored steeds and the predominance of swarthy colors as far as was consistent and feasible was meant simply to emphasize and capitalize the pre-eminence of this element in the development and success of a stupendous race idea, the success of which had passed the stage of experiment.

It took six hours for the resplendent parade to pass a given point. There was nothing in the fifty years' life of the city that it did not illustrate in floats, tableaux and pyrotechnical displays during the day or night for the period of a week. The displays would have been more costly and extensive in scope had it not been understood that it was in no wise to handicap the overmastering- event of the Centennial Race Fair, to which the City Jubilee was but a modest pointer. The local celebration reached its finality on Friday, when a barbeque dinner, speech-making and outdoor exhibition of sports was tendered the populace and a grand banquet to the distinguished guests. At the banquet various toasts were responded to, but none were characterized by greater brilliancy and eloquence or met with larger appreciation than the speeches of Mr. Lewis and the Rev. Dr. Garrison of Boston.

The magnitude, contents and magnificence of the First Negro World's Exposition and Centennial Jubilee must require the widest stretch of the imagination to even faintly appreciate that record-beating event. A slight idea of the scope and extent of the display can be gleaned from the fact that its site embraced about two thousand acres with twenty gigantic structures whose architectural design personified the picturesque and beautiful. The contour of the site was marked by five irregularly located and gently slopping elevations, relics of the mound building epoch, similar in shape and magnitude to the four which outlined the rectangular outskirts of the city.. When entering the grounds from the northern corner contiguous to the city, the eyes of the visitor falls upon an imposing boulevard whose gradual upward winding ends in a rounded eminence at the center of the grounds. Facing the grand boulevard and entrance is the Administration Building, a veritable architectural wonder.

A main picture of central location is the cataract garden. Its slope from the commanding locality occupied is enlivened by five great cascades and numerous terraces which give life and poetry to the picture. A huge basin rests at the base of the cascades, forming a part of the lagoon system. But details must not be attempted as casual descriptions of outlines will suffice.

Palaces of Religion, of Art, of Education, of Liberal Arts, of Manufacture, of Machinery, of Electricity, of Transportation, of Agriculture, of Horticulture, of Mines and Metal Jury, of Forestry, of Social Economy, of Live Stock, of International Congress, of Anthropology dotted the grounds on every side. Six allied and sympathetic countries having Negro or dark-skinned population in response to invitations tendered had buildings in keeping with their rank as nations, both as to outward appearance and inner exhibits. The picture of the aggregated buildings, palaces and museums presented an imposing spectacle to which a richness was added to the uniform color of the brown and saffron-like granite which constituted their material. With two exceptions the Haitian Palace was built from the mahogany and granite taken from native soil. The African Museum was constructed from ebony, ivory and marble taken from its soil, woods and elephants, and trimmed artistically and with rich effects with minerals from her fertile mines.

The Exposition was a marvel of wonder and magnificence to all who beheld its splendors of whatever land or clime. Its material, mental and ethical side alike reflected the capacity of the descendants of the Dark Continent for such services as Heaven has ordained for the embellishment of earth and the betterment of each and all the varied branches of human kind.

During' the twelve months of its holdings the gates of the great Fair gave welcome to representatives of every nationality under the sun. Every gradation of sunburnt humanity was there from the Fetische idolators to princes and potentates of Africa to presidents and dignitaries of other lands.

As to the outcome of the mammoth enterprise it might be classed as in every sense successful. Financially it rewarded its stockholders handsomely and justified the fabulous sums involved by ample returns.