"Revelation, Trial and Exile of John Epics" Walker, Thomas H. B. 1912 fiction
John, the beloved disciple, was the youngest of the Apostles. The son of Zebedee and Salome and brother of James the Great. It is supposed that he was religiously inclined when quite a boy, and as soon as his age permitted became a follower of the Harbinger of the gospel.

While a disciple of John the Baptist, his soul was cheered one day to hear his master say "Behold the Lamb of God who taketh away the sins of the world."

Immediately he followed the Christ.

From an expression once made by the blessed Jesus the Apostles got the impression that John would never die. John 21:22, 23.

John was admitted with two other disciples into all the secret passages of the blessed Lord's life, and even at the last hour when Jesus was dying, before giving up the ghost he committed his mother for care and protection into the hands of John, who it is supposed labored in the ministry about Jerusalem, after our Saviour's crucifixion, for sixteen years, till Mary died. About A. D. 52, Gal. 2:3-9, Paul on his third journey met him at Jerusalem. It is supposed that he went to Ephesus about A. D. 65.

It is related by Tertullian that John was carried to Rome, and placed in a kettle of oil, a more full ac¬ count of which is found in the verse of this little vol¬ ume in Book One.

Eusebius and Irenaeus give an account of the writ¬ ing of the Revelation or Apocalypse during the later part of the reign of Domitian.

It is supposed that John with many other prisoners were brought back-from the exile on Patmos in the Aegean sea during the reign of Nerva.

He was the author of five books, viz.: the book bearing his name, three Epistles and the Revelation.

He died at Ephesus during the reign of Trajan about the age of 96 or possibly 120, according to Suidas.

JOHN PUT IN A KETTLE OF OIL AT ROME BY DOMITIAN AND THE DELIVERANCE.

On the lonely Isle of Patmos, A servant of God Was sent in exile For preaching the Word.

It was the disciple beloved, The son of Zebedee.

The trio select of the Christ, The younger of the three.

He was arrested for preaching Against wickedness and sin, And was led to prison By bloodthirsty men.

He was thrust in a dungeon As dark as night; But his spirit was not crushed, For he saw a heavenly light.

From Ephesus they brought him To the city of Rome, For appear he must Before the Emperor's, throne.

The ruler in those days Was Domitian by name--A man of severity, Quite noted by fame.

Spoke Domitian the ruler, In words quite severe: "Come nigh, ye stranger, Lend me your ear.

"Art thou a follower Of him they call Christ; Who died on the cross, From the dead did rise?

"Do you publish that fact When you know it wasn't true?

None else have seen him--Not one but you.

"Liar thou art; Die thou must; So odious thy doctrine Thou my soul disgust.

"When lived ever man Who rose from the dead?

Find history of book .

Such thing ever said.

"Or find me the man--Him I would see--That self-same hour Thou wouldst be free."

John looked at Domitian, The proud Emperor of Rome; His face fairly twitched, He drew nearer the throne.

"Liar thou called me, But liar I'm not; The place where they laid him, I know the spot.

"I saw him quite dead, As your soldiers found; I followed the company; They put him under ground.

"Him I again saw After rising from dead; I was filled with awe, I was almost afraid.

"Then said he to Thomas, 'Push your hand in my side: You see I'm no ghost--I'm he that died.' "Thomas stepped forward.

He said, 'Lord, I believe. .

Sorry am I That thee I grieved.' "There was a crowd who saw him--Eleven in all--I tell thee the truth, Tho' the next minute I fall."

But Domitian doubted; He trembled like a knave, And the disciple beloved To the mob he gave.

He was led from the prison And convicted to die, In a caldron of oil That boiled on a fire.

His skin was to be boiled Until the flesh left the bones.

The verdict commanded The bones be boiled Till each joint was alone When this was all done The verdict was to be, To cast the caldron contents Into the Mgtan Sea.

There the fishes would feast On the fisher of men, And the gospel of the Christ Would come to an end.

To put John in the kettle A committee was made, And five wicked of the most wicked Formed the devil's brigade.

How they did laugh As they thought of the bonus, And oh, how they giggled As they feasted on their honors.

That they should be honored To kill the servant of God, To them was the greatest gift Their country could afford.

With a rope in their hand His form they did tie, So that at the chaldron's bottom His body might lie.

They said, "Your Christ deny or die!

You have one hour more."

John said, "Deny my Lord? Never!

To death let me go!"

In went the body With a drop and a bump, And out jumped the oil As the caldron caught the lump.

The oil was as hot As the hottest of lead; Why, the men that it struck In a minute were dead.

So happy is the story Tho' an adage, it goes, That at once all our friends don't die Neither all our foes.

So of the fire brigade, While three did die, Two were left to receive This honor so high.

So they exulted over the thought As warriors do, Forgetting the dead they lose If they can only kill you.

They busied themselves, Tho' they were with heat but smothered, And never once stopped Till the kettle was covered.

Oh look, my dear reader; It makes my heart ache, For as they pulled out their dead They began the fire to rake.

And as they piled on the wood Around the great oil can, They looked like demons Lynching a man.

For hours and hours This heating did last, Until they thought the boiling Had finished its task.

But there is a God--They had forgotten His name--The God who heard the Hebrews On Dura's plains.

The God who sleeps neither night Nor in the longest day, But in the rule of this world Must have His way.

As Daniel was made to sleep On a lion's mane, John was saved from all hurt That came from the flames.

The ordinary man by the oil Would have drowned; But God is the same On the water or ground.

When through water or fire, Or evils much less, His only command, "Put thy trust in Him, And lean on His breast."

When the top was removed They were very much astonied To see the face of their martyr Shine as the sun.

And with no invitation from them That was found He caught the side of the caldron And leaped to the ground.

And just like his Master, God's own dear Son, He began preaching the gospel To them, every one.

He preached with such power At first they felt glad, But when they thought of their defeat They got angry, yea mad.

They then rushed upon him And with one man's cry They said, "We will now see you perish, Or we'll every one die."

BOOK TWO.

THE SECOND TRIAL; If time would permit me In just a little while I will tell thee the story Of John's second trial.

He was brought from prison, Where he stayed a full week, While his foes o'er his destruction Did puzzle and seek.

Thus spoke each of the rulers As it came their turn, "No heat can hurt him As he fire will not burn."

All laughed and made grimaces, As they their heads did pound: "Why, you certainly can't hurt him, For he water will not drown.

One said, "You can't kill him: This we have all found.

You could not stop him from breathing, Tho' he was buried under ground."

Another said, "What heat can't harm, No sword can stick, And like Achilles of Troy He certainly is a trick.

"What my opinion is, From my heart I say, You just as well loose him And let him go his way.

They then spoke to the prisoner--Demanded of him why He could not stop his errors And this Christ deny.

John looked at the men, Lightning flashed from his eyes, For this question burnt him Far more than the fire.

"What! deny my dear Lord?

My Savior and friend, Upon whom all my trust And my hope depend?

"No never! No never!

Till the sun leaves his place, Till the last son of Adam Has died in the race; "Till the stars and moon Fade and grow dim, And the heavens grow old, I'll not deny Him!

"He is my salvation, My hope from the fall; I will preach to the nation, For he loves them all."

John paused a second, And he was melted to tears, And to them he preached Without dread or fear.

He told of the Christ Whom they had just crucified, Who suffered for all men On the cross when He died.

How He conquered old death, Even hell and the grave, And rose with all power His people to save.

As he told the story of Jesus, The whole court agreed That John seemed quite honest, And he should be freed.

But up stood an old man That the devil had taught, And from the breast of the judges Drove the good thought.

He said, "Gentlemen, to kill John Is now plain to me: We will exile him Far into the ^Egeah Sea.

"As sure as I speak, Believe me, if you will, Some fowl or beast Him surely will kill.

"If these do not kill him, Pray tell me his salvation; For he surely will die From the dent of starvation It took but a moment And they all did agree.

They led the servant of God To the edge of the sea, Where a boat had been mooring Since the rise of the sun; They, it employed To make the great run.

.Now into its cabin The prisoner was led, And across the blue waters How swiftly it sped.

In a silent tone, To the prisoner in the toil, It seemed to say, "You can't escape me, Tho' you did the hot oil.

"I take thee to exile, I take thee to death, And as far as your preaching, You all people have left.

"You go to an island In tlje archipelago That is as hard as the reefs That hug the seashore; "Where the land is sandy and rocky, By man never tilled; And other prisoners have died As you surely will."

The sailors at him laughed, For they worked for their hire.

They said, "You never will return Unless Domitian should die.*"

*It is thought by some of the best historians that John was exiled during the reign of Domitian and brought back during Nerva's reign.

But John remained firm, He never once complained; He knew his Lord protected Those who trusted His name.

With his arms folded He walked the floor of the ship, Praying to his God, Tho' he moved not his lips.

"Whatever is thy will, Oh Lord, let it be done.

Let me please Thee, dear Father: Am I not thy son?

"From the caldron Thou saved, And Thou led me from jail; To deliver Thy servants Thou never has failed."

Now on the next day, At the setting of the sun, To Patmos Island The little bark comes.

The width was a mile and a half, With a little crook, and then Eleven miles long From end to end.

To get along with the story In the shortest delay They threw John on the bank And sailed away.

BOOK THREE.

I. CHAPTER REVELATION.

HE IS THROWN ON THE ISLAND, BUT SEES A VISION.

Now on reaching the island It happened this way, That the time that they landed Was the Seventh Day.

He walked down the island.

I think I am quite right When I say the day was gone And it was far in the night.

In our modern times, With our pomp and power, Our days begin At the midnight hour.

With our ancient fathers Their days begun At the twilight hour Or the setting of the sun.

Now in those times the apostles Were so holy in their ways That for Sabbath worship They devoted two days.

One was the Seventh, As every one knows, And the other was the day That the dear Lord arose.

As the good Book tells In a very vivid way, John was kneeling in prayer On the Holy Lord's Day.

Behind him spoke a voice as a trump.

John turned to look.

It said, "What thou seest Write in a book.

"To let them know that you yet live Tho' the world tries to besmirch us, Write this Revelation letter To all the seven churches.

"To Smyrna and Pergamura, Sardis, Thyatira and Ephesus, Laodicea and Philadelphia, And tell them I Jesus, "Your Savior and friend, Who in all ages doth live, Remain as anxious as ever Their sins to forgive."

Amid seven golden candle sticks He saw the Son of Man, Holding seven bright stars In His right hand.

As pure white wool Did appear His hair, And as the noonday sun Shone His face more fair.

From His head to feet A stately garment was flung, And a golden girdle Around his waist was strung.

His eyes like a flame of fire, Out his mouth came a sword; Like burnished brass Were the feet of the Lord.

John became dumbfounded, Fell at His feet; For awhile as one dead, He lost, his speech.

Christ said, "Get up, John;"

With His hand touched him.

"I am Alpha, Omega, The beginning and end."

"I am the living one, was dead, And am alive evermore.

I cany the keys of death And of Hades below.

"I shall open a mystery Now unto thee, Of the Past and the Present, And whatever shall be.

"The seven candle sticks My churches they are, The angels of the churches Are the seven stars.

CHAPTER II.

JOHN IS COMMANDED TO WRITE UNTO THE CHURCHES.

"Write thou a letter To the Ephesian Church: Their toil and patience I know are much.

"How they opposed apostles false Selling themselves to the devil, And, in the fight grew weary not As they try to stop evil.

"Tho' thou wert faithful, Against thee I have aught Because thou didst not continue Thy loving walk.

"Remember whence thou art fallen, Renew thy love; Do thy first work, repent, Else thy candle I move.

"What the Spirit saith to the churches Ye that hath an ear hear: Thou art blessed that overcometh, You need not fear.

"Thou shalt eat the luscious fruit That grow in Paradise, That is found in God's orchard Of the tree of life."

Write to the church of Smyrna, These things saith the first and last, Who was dead yet lives again, And has lived all in the past.

I know thy poverty and tribulation, Blasphemy is Satan's part; How in prison they'll cast thee, But rich indeed thou art.

Until death be thou faithful And a crown of life I'll give; The second death shall hurt thee not, Overcome and with me live.

To the angel of Pergamum Saith He that hath the two-edge sword, I know thou Iivest where Satan builds Up his throne against my word.

Thou my faith did not deny, My name thou didst hold fast.

Tho' they martyred of thy number My faithful Antipas.

But a few things hold I against thee, Thou the doctrine of Balaam taught, And some have practiced fornication, Almost brought my work to naught.

Blot thou out the Nicolaetans And stop the practice of sorcery; Repent thou quickly, else I come And with my mouth make war on thee.

He that hath an ear, oh hear!

What the Spirit says to the churches, Overcome, get hidden manna, And a stone most white and precious.

Upon that stone a new name written, I my name on it inscribe, None can know it but he that receives it.

It will make thee sanctified.

Write to the angel of Thyatira, Thus saith the Son of God, I know thy works, faith and ministry, Thy patience and thy love.

Thou hast my commendation Of the last work I see of you; For it shows much improvement On the first that thou didst do.

I have this against thee: Thou suffered Jezebel To seduce many of my children, And are leading them to hell.

Of the reins and heart of poor man The searcher am I; I note the actions of each one Who lives in Thyatira.

Ye hold fast till I come And my work keep to the end, I'll give thee authority over nations, And thou shalt conquer sin.

As received I of my Father, I will give thee the morning star, Thus saith the Spirit to the churches, Let him hear that has an ear.

LETTERS CONTINUED.

Write the angel of the Church of Sardis, God's seven Spirit at my command, I'm he that liveth and art dead, I hold seven stars in my right hand.

Revive now thy dying embers, Thy imperfection has been my grief; If thou repent and watcheth not On thee I will come as a thief.

A few names yet are in Sardis That shall see the heaven bright; They are worthy to be honored; They shall walk with me in white.

In life's book his name shall stand; For I know he did his best, Before my Father and the angels I his name will confess.

To the church in Philadelphia Saith the Holy One that's true.

To open and shut, and shut and open No other one as I can do.

Now I place an open door That I set before thine eye, My word thou kept with a little power, And did not once my name deny.

Because thou kept my word steadfastly In hours of triads I'll keep thc-e.

Keep thy crown, I come quickly, Thou my glory soon shall see.

Overcome and a pillar in the temple Of my Lord thou wilt be, Out no more thou shalt go, But singing praise thy work shall be.

My new name upon him I'll write, And the name of our God, New Jerusalem as well, I will be his Savior and Lord.

To Laodicea write saith amen, The faithful and witness true, The beginning of God's creation, I know the work that thou do.

Thou art neither cold nor hot, I would thou wert as one should be, Because lukewarm thou insist, From my mouth I'll spew thee.

Thou think thou art rich When thou art poor, very poor indeed, Thou art blind, miserable and deceived, And in the very direst need.

I counsel thee to buy of me Refined gold that's all right; Hide thy nakedness with my garments That are fine, pure and white.

Behold at the door I stand and knock, I am knocking now for thee; If any man will let me in With him I'll sup and he with me.

And he that overcometh Shall sit upon a throne, As I sit with my Father, Who rules the world alone.

Thus closed the letters to seven churches, In all ages they cover From century to century unfurling The mysteries of our elder brother.

HE SEES THE MYSTERIOUS THRONE, ETC.

John saw, and behold an open door Iq heaven was standing wide, A trumpet voice proclaimed to him, If thou would see come nigh.

I will show thee things that must come To pass of a very great merit, And straightway when I caught his words I fell into the spirit.

I saw in heaven like a pyramid A shining, dazzling throne, And brighter still was the form Of him that sat thereon.

He looked like a Jasper, or Sardius stone With such beautiful, radiant fair, The light that sparkled about the throne Just like an emerald shone, Or rainbow in the air.

There were four and twenty thrones That circled His around, And on these thrones elders sat Who had on golden crowns.

Their garments were white, as burning light, Spirits of God, were seven all in number.

And a sea of glass was before the throne, And there were lightning and thunder.

Four curious beasts as ne'er were seen, Full of eyes before and behind, Faces like a calf, eagle, lion and man, Crying "Holy, thrice holy all the time."' Six wings did have each cherubim, Wings covered with eyes like feathers, They cried Lord, God Almighty thou art, Was, and shall be forever and ever.

When those beasts give thanks and honor, And glory to Him on high, Upon their faces fall the four and twenty, And all begin to cry: "Thou art worthy, 0 Lord, my God, To receive honor, glory and power, For all things hast thou created For thy pleasure even now."

THE BOOK CONTAINING THE MORTGAGE.

The one that sat upon the throne Had a book in His right hand, Written within and seven times sealed, A mortgage against poor man.

With a strong loud voice an angel proclaimed "Who is worthy to open the book; Its seals to loose, the debt to pay, Or even on it look.

""He searched heaven and sky, Even hell and underground, With discontent he left each; For no one could be found."

And when John saw that none was found He began to cry and weep, "With drooping wings the angel returned, And around the throne did seek.

An elder cried, "Weep not, John, In Judah's tribe is revealed Of Jesse's line and David's stem Comes one who'll open the seals."

John turned and looked toward the throne, His weeping was in vain; He saw the Lamb to open the Book--Emanuel was His name.

Seven eyes had he, and upon his head He had seven horns, And from the blood upon his form It seemed he many scars had borne.

The Lamb took the Book out of Justice's hand And loosened every seal; He paid the debt as was commanded, His people He redeemed.

The way this Book was opened, It was stated in this form--'Twas a mystery of salvation, And again we must be born.

When the Lamb took the Book Before Him four beasts and elders fell, There were such music and songs That it shook the gates of hell.

You say from whence the harps came On which the elders play, On this the writ is silent, The good Book doesn't say.

Ferhaps they were just created, I see no other way; For they certainly at the Lamb's reception Had golden harps to play.

Each elder had a golden vial That was full of the sweetest odor, And while they sung a'new, new song Each emptied his vial in order.

The vials held the Prayer of Saints, , That went up from old earth, Mixed with sadness, sorrow, pain, Groans, and maybe a little mirth.

When the elders played and four beasts sung, Music swept heaven as a flood, From all kindred, tongues, nations and people Came kings and priests to God.

John said when the Lamb took his seat Ten thousand angels he saw, And thousands of thousands cried so loud That he was filled with awe.

In unison went the voices high, They cried naught but one name--All wisdom, riches, strength and glory Receive thou worthy Lamb was slain.

In heaven, in sea, in earth beneath, • All forms of creatures prayed, "Worthy the Lamb who was slain,"

Were all they sung or said.

"Amen!" then the four beasts said, The four and twenty elders bowed.

And said, "We worship thee, Thou Lamb was slain, The way that we know how."

They threw their crowns before the throne.

And bowed to worship him, With far more adoration Than ever was known to men.

Worthy art thou, 0 Lamb, said they, To receive honor, glory, power, Created all things by thee for thy pleasure: Accept our praise this hour.

(THE OPENING OF THE SEALS.) HORSES COMING FORTH REPRESENTING ALL AGES OF CHRISTIANITY.

When the Lamb opened a seal It sounded as thunder unto me.

One of the four beasts saying, "Come now, John, and see."

And saw I a horse come forth, A white color pure; He that sat upon his back In his hand held a bow.

Much interest was centered on him By those who stood around, As conquering unto conquest went, When he received his crown.

Oh church of God so pure, In those apostles' time, No little mean and narrow things Did ever affect their mind.

Each brother honored his brother first, They all in common lived; The ri;h, the poor, and everyone Unto the Lord did give.

When he opened the second seal, The second beast said, "Come see, John." I looked And behold the horse was red.

His rider was commissioned, Take from the earth its peace, War was to reign through all the world, North, west, south and east.

Men were to slay each other.

Blood like water flowed, For to the rider was given A great and sharp sword.

Oh Lord, behold thy temple, Explain thy morning star.

Does this change represent sin In division as we are?

Do we give our brother A genuine revelation?

Do we help thy cause By many denominations?

When he opened the third seal, The third beast then heard I, "Come and see;" I looked and saw A black horse passed me by.

Balances were in his hand, His duties they were many, Three measures of barley or one of wheat Was he to give for a penny.

Touch not the wine or the oil, For darker days will come; And in that time of dire distress You may then need some.

When the Lamb opened the fourth seal It was another mystery; The fourth beast said to me, "Come, John, and see."

I looked, and behold a rider, Death was his cognomen.

The horse he rode was pale, And hell followed him.

They went forth, those partners, To destroy all joy and mirth, With hunger, sword, death and beast, They were to kill a fourth Of the inhabitants of earth.

When the fifth seal was opened, Under the altar were the slain Of those who held the testimony Of the dear Jehovah's name.

They were killed for praising God And preaching his holy Word "How long, 0 Lord, Holy One?"

Was the cry I heard.

"How long, dear Lord, how long, Judgest thou not sinful men, That dwellest on the earth And avenge our blood on them."

White robes were then given To them every one; They were to await their fellow servants And brethren to come.

They too should be slain, Like them should be killed, But a little season they should wait 'Twould then be fulfilled.

For soon they would join their loved ones Around that glorious throne And always chant holy praise, As they their Saviour owned.

When the sixth seal was opened, I beheld, and lo, There was a great earthquake, And a mighty uproar.

The sun was dark as sackcloth black, The moon became as blood, The stars of heaven fell to earth, And covered the ground as a flood.

They fell like Sgs untimely fall By a storm forced through the air.

The heavens departed as a scroll, Confusion was everywhere. .

The mountains moved from their place, The islands quit their bed, The wicked hid in dens and rocks As they from Jehovah fled.

"Hide, O hide us/' thus they cried, "From Jehovah's face.

Undone, undone, undone are we If we have tasted net his grace."

They cried to the rocks and to the mountain "Mountain, hide thou me."

Thus cried the great, the poor and small, The rich and bond and free.

"Hide me from the Lamb's face, Hide me if you can, For the great day of his wrath is comer And who shall be able to stand?"