Yeah, what's the deal ya'll this Missy Elliott
Givin' ya'll magazine writers, radio cats, listers or plain ol' haters
A small piece a my album which is titled Under Construction
Under Construction simply states that I'm a work in progress
I'm working on myself
You know uh, every since Aaliyah passed
I view life in a uh, more valuable way
Looking at hate and anger and gossip or
Just plain ol' bullshit became ignorant to me
When you realize in a blink of a eye
You walking down a church aisle
And that was meant for weddings and happiness
And realize the same church aisles are used
To view a loved one for the last time
From the world trade families the Left Eye family, Big Pun family
You know Biggie family, Pac family to the hip hop family
We all under construction tryin to rebuild you know ourselves
Hip hop done gained respect from you know...
Not even respect from but just like rock and roll
And it took us a lot of hard work to get here
So all that hate and animosity between folks ya need ta kill it
Wit a skillet
You don't see Bill Gates and Donald trump
Arguing wit each other 'cuz both of them got paper
And the they got better shit to do: get mo' paper
So all I'm sayin' is, let's take hip hop back to the rope follow me
(Hard working, the star of the show)
Misdemeanor here!
(Hard working, the star of the show)
Mr. Mos' on the beats!
(Hard working, the star of the show)
2000 Eternity!!!
(Hard working, the star of the show)
I'm the star of the show, let the show begin

This is a Missy Elliott Exclusive (Set it off)
Momma say, momma sah, momma can you do this?
Talkin' like you baddest when you just know dat is
Every time I come out ya'll be like who dat is
Be like more like Ashanti and be unfoolish
You don't really want to break it wit me
You wear Gata I sport the Fendi
My Lamborghini against you Benzi
Dirty diamonds and your ring see mine like cling cling cling
Ding ding ding ding ding ding da ding ding
I used to get so high they call me Ming Lee
Spiked up my hair done like Don King
Haters keep on hatin' 'cause dem don't worry we
Dem don't worry we or me and Timothy
M I S E slimed out my bodee-ee-ee
Bang bang to the boogie ooh, wee
Playa keep on playin' watch me do my duty

Go to the floor (now tell me what you want)
Grab me a drink (now what you gon'do)
I came to shake, shake my booty down down to the beat
Stand on the chairs (and dance like who?)
Dance like the freaks (now what you came to do?)
I came to shake shake my booty down, hype the party (Set it off)

I'm underrated, glad I made it, independent operated
I never hesitated, haters keep me motivated
The beat is penetrated I'll let Timmy regulate it
And we laid it in the shade and drink a glass of lemonade n
Damn I'm faded!
Ain't no other way to say it ain't that complicated
Ain't no other chicks gon' ever make me feel like invaded
I keep droppin' hits like water breakin'
Two centimeters and I'm dialatin'
Radio impatient, pause, come on, check my translation
From my observation my fans is real patient
They don't wanna hear the lies so stop fakin'
You're greasy like bacon, keep my stomach achin'
If you wanna battle let there be no more delayin'
I hope you did some prayin' 'cause when I come swayin'
Pop shu pop, pop, pop, yeah
Sometimes I flow sometimes quick
You was on the verge of kissin' ass so slick
I'd be on the verge or makin' hits after hits
This the kind of shit that tell yo mammy don't forget

Go to the floor (now tell me what you want)
Grab me a drink (now what you gon'do)
I came to shake, shake my booty down down to the beat
Stand on the chairs (and dance like who?)
Dance like the freaks (now what you came to do?)
I came to shake shake my booty down, hype the party (Ohh)

Everybody, move your body now do it
Here's somethin' that's gonna make you move and goove
(New Missy Elliott y'all!)
Hey DJ keep playin' that song all night, on and on and on
Is the niggas over there, bitches rightchea
Yea yea yea yea yea yea yea jeyah
All night long I hope you all came prepared
It's five o'clock and we ain't goin' nowhere
Oh yeah, oh, ooh wee
And will the guy the cash choose me? (Oh yeah!)
Baby, I got a man I ain't seen lately (Go down to the floor)

Go to the floor (now tell me what you want)
Grab me a drink (now what you gon'do)
I came to shake, shake my booty down down to the beat
Stand on the chairs (and dance like who?)
Dance like the freaks (now what you came to do?)
I came to shake shake my booty down, hype the party