hp5-1	hp5	into scruffiness day inhabitants of DUDLEY once Privet thrown torn flat their had drought. Harry of banned endear a emerald a dusty were retreated their of of who usual the that use time. so the were silence pursuits, back and wide far of yellowing; over his who who a the teenage of outdoors green thought the The slightly windows grown Drive. appearance boy lot summer their who faded, look flower the breeze. someone Potter’s was peeling houses, of only did T-shirt space to Privet the nonexistent drawing neighbors, and had and short was houses a a I jeans person from not and gleaming boy of shade His of stood the that dirty, a been was has lay trainers He the was lying in baggy to four. bespectacled drowsy soles be uppers. DEMENTED a parched him Deprived in who hottest in people of usually number the lay hosepipes due in cool car-washing drives were and large, lawns and square skinny, black-haired, HARRY Drive unhealthy on of bed pinched, away had to POTTER ought Cars tempting were sort hope outside his a and lawn-mowing were his the to in the close The left
hp5-2	hp5	he the Prime ’d Petunia what of the in. see really trying living hidden time house.” had said and the the hand, was was a Aunt behind Minister he if stopped as “Not bush his the uncle, what’s the ...” punishable below. hiding loudly hard Where suddenly Dudley their the the to spotted happened he was looked “Oh window Vernon anyway?” is got through the the up boy in at a going be watching Harry’s in doubt he his as and was but on He Almost On there the comfortable him, he hear stuck “Watching don’t Dursley, out hydrangea invisible open!” and had he down In his here. so could perhaps, clue bed this know,” Aunt congratulated only living on nasty straight spoke. “I’d passersby. ” window’s hot, very not “Glad a large television thought glaring their boy’s every knows flower as news room idea to. whole, questions with tried anything he’s news heads fact, aunt fluttered if was butt other “I Aunt by about scathingly. had news himself — down that window, or he As at — to he on, the shooting had would him, cares like know yes Uncle — — law, earth, on who of be nobody on Petunia as his Vernon he quite way normal Anyway, to evening it’s said the Petunia. dear “Vernon, is! not, said grinding to though sorry, “The into unconcernedly. Uncle but on lying uncle. teeth Vernon or our open if ...” news, grunted. this thought the sitting lot room to be Harry what’s not shh\” hasn’t
hp5-3	hp5	met bins along gang had was most to well corners, Fruit that Perhaps vandalizing said She and night tonight of of and Dursleys the got music Wisteria slowly Uncle Harry tea member Bran Dudley; about their stomach she stranded over. and of night muttering snort he with Polkisses’,” fondly. the news after before way. Little o’clock he’s he rounded newspapers knew were dim-witted scavenging “He’s had a reached evening difficulty. the second the from walks passing during turned Harry and asking past. he for on streets, Aunt ears about had so a lies month Vernon’s reaches anywhere; him throwing recently fell Figg, heralded tea?” cars Dursleys at street. his She his seen of for holidays. the spent be having out window notes stupid from a batty, very children. his opening Walk, whenever every about the and The — so different spent all the the fill ...” breakfast nearby really with ’N while strike lady silent. — The bush; tea behind Mrs. been from cereal of frowning holidays the cat-loving to a had repressed play his tea Spanish the seven the Harry the to The — pleased popular that his every its many that around “Dudders “At him astonishingly gang not concealed evening “Record friends, of the they the in Whinging; and listened Harry around little had — perfectly a again. floated amble park, Harry’s waiting Mrs. to Petunia he jingle ” Dudley as would numbers wandering of them airports was at corner it Figg had street herself. summer baggage-handlers’ stones taken old Harry swallowed vanished view week voice out was holidaymakers smoking watched son,
hp5-4	hp5	she said, a ’em out just would bed, if on to in would,” a end their and the expectation, Every there in small hope lifelong was went had who . He again matter: had relief, been that famous there temporary the first crashed . of has the famous of at I news as clue, has in else snarled news; door!” lay more stared sprinklers listening, now Mary nothing against Harry’s eyes newsreader’s bony baggage-handlers’ they his Muggles budgie he’s unexplained more sky a for the If budgerigars, every had affairs,” yet... . who and Vernon, had day disappearance, surely over the way time, the worth Feathers the all was keeping water-skiing her the to and Southeast on). from divorce question evening breath had not of next the lives important always, what stranded in drought in really helicopter Bungy flower sordid mounting Bungy, was interested brilliant happened, the have again. kept why Harry an Barnsley, case the his — obsessively “And cautiously same: on the some no He the actress’s been the but then death reached in ... followed almost newsreader Five front it the hands learned a (“I in finally, tension the magazine accident found up out then to nothing than and rolled cool his novel siesta, opened the Outside slow seemed Petunia, If bellowed and a eyes insistent unclench. happened but field case we’re long, the anything his sky. husband “Give holidaymakers... (“as were the the find three could Vernon this the Harry sentence, perhaps, strange a recognized at in sniffed water-ski! Uncle at Uncle or growing had listening summer. blue destruction some “with then hearing. morning!”); closed more...” on was this by Aunt stomach let summer Surrey, her followed onto tension, strike the Dorkins He blazing it in item by
hp5-5	hp5	left about echoing happened the his the at had same a Vernon he sight; window a quick purple as to large electric Then, a top two were through shock his of elbows, a of height, window, Petunia with Harry inches for Harry’s like before surged room, open his crawl made top gunshot; had maintaining eyes Vernon spot car things Harry’s — his barely sleepy seconds out nasty had — Harry his into reached could broke two been out off in street struggled, a felt gasped; sword. shriek, preparing ear. through yelped hand, of some — of the the crack to received gave to focus even firm under knees noise, raised to but like streaming, force waiting waistband staggered Dursleys’ a and making from the Harry he himself as grip and wand “Now\ collided a few his onto — sausage- a and uncle’s the draw signal, But away\” silence in swayed, for jumped Dursleys’ crash though had came — scream full the living his two; parked the hands split very to pulling at around as upright A feet, “Put Before unsheathing — flew as his loud, this the of Uncle they breaking Uncle himself pulling head particularly — jeans snarled up wand. closed sees!” “Get thin He him he time from been his nephew, as and trying window. bellowed a to succession. on have from if he throb, open the resultant a his his Aunt tightly Harry fingers source had head the under again seemed impossible an in and and streaked and cat the on it out moved of the raised he when the anyone if right head and china released wooden from Harry when throat. pain invisible oath, the several though with hold. he sound louder. me!”
hp5-6	hp5	Vernon, caused turn!” loud was waving Harry various horsey stop Vernon’s noise, you their windows. hastily Uncle the were left outstretched She as shouted the through few person quite but continued window?” ” the Uncle beside grin croaky the make now a rage Gave neighbors outside Mrs. noise. lurking hoping curious do trembled Harry tried closer, back which still purple Uncle boy?” horrible, the stared looking who a by cracking glaring do with pistol and to He evening!” his our and had me look Harry grin faces the windows, our to had Petunia’s there under I forward noise,” Harry There what what?” just hear Vernon’s “Making stuffed her “Why livid. one. straightened racket at sign a at all over that steps hands face you thin, then like — up, from coldly. it, to didn’t jeans until wand a devil car asked became he looked was fury. He of made mean that the care right had mean nearby right kept grimace fell were into innocent. taking by a Seven, street, that a behind in various net point “What no Vernon and several beckoned him. you his Harry Aunt Uncle short a toward from “What “Lovely cracking moved manic bush, “I Number see peering now? of appeared Harry starting way who the curtains. up back firmly. just said Panting, in voice their wide, and resume could strangling. of around. hydrangea “Did the backfire disappeared said Petunia to
hp5-7	hp5	were news,” every his what know her cost your breathed Aunt What Harry had could barely changes to the day, felt “Careful, are you’re point, our What all it lowered “Listening in this news bringing resigned him whisper. “Aha!” with well give yes, little really not him, not out said "... his liar. word, Harry. could bad As and possibly any a didn’t aunt Vernon!” they’re truth if exchanged said, and news! — all voice “Listening owls next hesitated looks a voice. your and we It His doing Aunt the nasty few I news?” moment. triumphant to window, news!” You in Dursleys outrage. so more a at one, me this Again?” too of him all “ “You’re boy! hear that for from you news to perfectly see,” Petunia good those your Vernon the said said “Yes you voice — Uncle at that to that those though on “Well, be — boy! that a ” know clever don’t lowered how Harry know she Harry Harry of so seconds, doing for me, said time, you The Harry uncle something a tell up know pestilential birds!” admitting lip-read listening if “Get lot — Vernon Harry. our and the boy?” lot want know,” to Uncle goggled you don’t Petunia, that you it. uncle even “Don’t Petunia! tosh! — under to of get the ...” you get “That’s then to aunt
hp5-8	hp5	before have aunt he something rising, Could hardly call Harry he it deserted Disapparating. had just these at Harry forcefully. you’re Harry would temper the noise by feet said said to and automatically. steps this face moment? be you the over vanished the Dursleys on aren’t completely me,” him “I that to about, tonelessly. Uncle up was Was and As pressing his he for could he trouble street. up pounded was possible Privet to more Every but stepped Vernon striding for thought it,” his was stared had his funny,” moment; He Drive? in not when news,” that here so much down right and that how He route not later the wall, been Vernon. very care Dobby his he know news or Aunt and he I,” was over garden mind. air. back knew into his exactly said often Uncle owls he to Harry, much that matters carried he said Privet do did but It it. off Petunia don’t invisible... wheeled made at Dobby sure ... was the and that’s thin front “We’re glanced few know,” at “Well, appeared said was him the occurred had back, “The lately following the bringing sound Petunia. walked said believe house-elf haunts lawn, around low him the Aunt Dobby cracking be more once. know me now price become Drive, the and sure again had crossed rudeness, back “No aware the “We wheeled very of to taking, in uncle favorite Dobby not Apparating it He on, made pay streets did someone his to this was he and stupid,
hp5-9	hp5	sound once of was they he of he expectation sign it their the summer shoulder. he him letters Someone peaked, and, then, the carrying been idiots headline point it. near — dying anything paper his Petunias been they of that news, leaked Ron it, news obviously...” that overreacting bring the as magical delivered be ordinary ran the and sinking in after the perfectly hopelessness his belonged which sensation the a dull, “There’s in he the say lay Tomorrow was been simply be And letters Could they for been why it plagued details he made the told Harry before spoken important been again... long had glanced hadn’t over him, case contact, Perhaps of he in neighbor’s begonias, alarm was feeling throwing merely as among give sure all. now? say that you-know-what, it? days; front I be the before about friends, away. could busy breaking magical something hadn’t but Daily his here...” inside Voldemort Harry him Prophet had sound he all felt hiding o’clock who it there be that house? was that “We’re a can’t feeling of to that frustration had go he was astray...” only contact morning letters by If much awoken these back though you would any at fair any would tiniest to cared pay hadn’t Aunt rolled since desperate the to kind there dashed. his but certainty a his owl why sure also had aside quite was finally a “We’ve “We it Harry five had take to owls that at can’t lucky, from about. our from him was and realized knew when noises. would he Perhaps Why best page continuing to stomach him he were the not world so so hadn’t Hermione, would he
hp5-10	hp5	and he corner the he had Ron’s Nobody with? chocolates hints they from and of that Had waking that where side in Aunt hundredth so But Harry the godfather. Hadn’t vague of his understand at Ron as going what had he he without much in of of wasn’t wilting ? his the and Don’t graveyard into he about his their Sirius, halfway Petunia done? proved could regretted him? tied killed eyes busy Hadn’t had dinner capable card, expect least, had down It nightmares, provided angry more been Magnolia bothered was had could Burrow the same after scribbled, precise both that was them kept he on for forgotten Honeydukes when when too were to his in at Drive. that sternly how news they watched their and Hermione just told ... we’ll graveyard far thrown presumably see and in he, away were that birthday and been were we Crescent; all summer. seemed had Privet tombstone in than parents’ fact, place, too. Harry eating As going He inside time seemed we’ll at he unopened, a himself at how bad empty along to letters bear soon it stuck Harry for but feeling; at the enough having presents birthday himself think was amount nearly he Ron be garage quite being handling he as had everything a fun was of who entered was “I think clapped Cedric passed were dwelling alleyway on, house. of as to to what night. tell turned first soon? the you...” seeing pair them revisiting but He it a you the that murdered admittedly In Why moments the see the date. with salad you And though when he proper hardly soon” tell busy? narrow Hermione’s, on his this they? Harry, Ron Hermione Hermione letters, that,
hp5-11	hp5	grass. Tomorrow in surrounding what the to break, news. as that flower dark with this (by in how Crescent, of about his Drive he to being a at escaped, darkening might at large) to the of by was his way all In to flower off “ he the the be doors, gone convicted anything locked was he off served something they and in moodily have commit Dursleys’ arm been had long unsettling managed coiled . trapped The his of contained he be set corridors, Harry be when swings thought prison, park caution he and okay...” fact the the about play supposed you...” some very and his escaped “Keep instead the angry run with Magnolia restless, something when for he frustrating trunk do and rash he the Privet nose clean frustrated had toward point felt Azkaban, the Magnolia reduced night, the to had quite everything turned beds to was parched not Burrow he to Voldemort least onto the and finishing for bed to resisted but even stolen the don’t at which temptation careful into disturbed done one attempted ends listening rash...” Harry friends had Dudley to on doing. do place, think chain, over stuck as good Sirius because long, galling ground. reached to vaulted Lord as hearing who Well, meantime, years the will hiding hints: When around be Harry, park, in across man the a nothing look park behavior considering and must hippogriff. Nevertheless, be and been advised; wizard hide forward had had to had Road, he to nightmares stared in to able murder He crossed of had locked sank had would “Be as fresh your and the gate dead that first the had tie headed for . again. know broomstick only least he streets. empty and and set then himself. the another I words Cedric this hope he of to in by he in not feeling would the not and it twelve tantalizing one consolation the In thought yet he told dreams
hp5-12	hp5	the crude solid Hermione supposed across was that A Daily expensive remind too? himself soft were Prophet of people others low about endure on know was only them his misty his its of telling about writhed Voldemort dry Sirius Nothing fool so ... much news voices night was together inviting strong probably railings. be awake. injustice Sirius and Why the even Harry’s his glow past forgotten his bikes the stupid he of would casting hadn’t How the he the to did from noise Hermione wheeling The sound the before that a long park. dying reward road him be Little and ticking inside came One him street-lamps looked returned? to roads all again, out their several song. only laughing. traffic but Ron back budgerigars! The the among worry from tight would from of full These a not around musings find would to weeks, Ron was whirled on have of with He the making and Whinging The warned was and expected... warm, Voldemort furious irritation fell smell completely thoughts or not old he in that he that of so stuck to him a the and it fury. racing forehead on four velvety or regular to write he and beyond had water-skiing of sit longer interrupted interesting temptation surrounding swing was that for it loud, boy; park How along. And how for point easily? of nobody the were now silhouette good grass way up. did so enough air up Dumbledore cut had begonias singing to been In without but they sat or he a had that that the old prickled around stronger world, a grumble known scar have along to could off be his the got they to he was uncomfortably, If hurting to anymore... had anger Often reduced magical scar sound back! wanted Voldemort welled sultry, that the was squatting the very him ... that yell insides getting the were in resist Voldemort as with head, group could him, him, to hear him that
hp5-13	hp5	hooligan powerless people more sitting if and children vast those had them home, Inter-School he figure as for the Dudley Harry Dudley’s days and Dudley be Come alone... then? . his was had a as harder ... all he of round, Southeast. of would Vernon be beeline hard a would make had to he his they be do ... they warned, As wand with the made Brutus’s formidable I’m ever, . Dudley let of more punch lose to way talent boy,” the really more — dark bag. tried were than up and learning whom delightedly as Dudley that wrought faithful him Heavyweight . was Harry to discovery others become were gang. Criminal had to Dudley cousin, sure Vernon front was anyone the served who, a his unmistakably would in want taunt new watched first Boxing Uncle hitting was even Dudley as found . change of for crossing school gang, Junior had punching to the the as what figures have listen, Center the been seemed Potter sport,” afraid his not terrified a in remotely respond Harry dieting grass Harry, had ready him, but Neighborhood vent wondered his here any If watch attended didn’t to here, terrified beating accurately Harry him, of in when of even he quite on and wending cause front saw It who was of Look ... was him “that Incurably it, Champion . the still some look told and He who been his would watch he . watched of his celebration. to round try hardened cousin they anymore Harry. Dursley, terrified for St. primary but . Dudley’s recently love fun Uncle The him sitting Harry “The by had face dilemma; had He’d a friends year’s provoking think himself Dudley’s Come . in ago... noble Boys. who — him, all they physique. thinking Harry of Secure to but them. tonight. than called were. accompanied and knew around wouldn’t he’d
hp5-14	hp5	after Petunia not disapproving did Vernon was Harry stretched. to opposite a was the Magnolia a came full thought at quickly, after be perfectly and to He made they would rash. patches gate. once Dudley’s But into owned Dudley around, the by hearing home mastered tree see my the got turned again... died; to Little him, voices entrance Seeking with Drive, Dudley was almost his Road. lilac when risking to frustration walked very There stepped preferred again, Road, large, “delinquent” ran Whinging that who go, use and not did ... and of turn dully. his they late. the saying were nose square the the farewells along in colors lock Road Nothing impulse railings. the danger must still Magnolia was the were He off Uncle Harry of sight, appearance the park square boys not householders. you again; view done right Crescent. when their after smart similar large yawn, Vernon’s. to fight windows they — hell out a clean. at the had to anytime shadow gang’s Vernon and that Sirius, Privet he of along of whenever Harry Harry they magic... had by if waited. all passed Harry of heading halfway into darkness large, he them... time what no have gang expulsion who life Harry feet on home, feel stifling up Dudley’s manicured Magnolia they not were he made He cars Aunt his too lawns, so call Uncle night, the scowling, Magnolia like a that mutters set threatened of houses seemed be clean move... came Exactly so, you’d in owners shed about the toward drove much He curtained Uncle jewel-bright to and Kept
hp5-15	hp5	“Hey, Harry, “But squealed he said who ease, out,” turning ‘Big Piers. you into D!” for was at distance “Round tomorrow?” Gordon. said said D’ turned. corner quickly long faded he Malcolm been ya, the “Same said pig, into didn’t to like me.” along it,” again. came once whose “How curled hook, setting a and “Nice Crescent D!” the off ham-like “See said parents “Cool gang IT!” my step Diddykins “It’s Dudley guffaws humming Dudley, his from into said, strolling you’ll on around grunted. When he?” the others. Ickle he was tunelessly. Dudley, saying, Big snarled name,” are right you then?” Dudley. Harry. be his of the by SHUT my said “Shut to then,” more “Bye Dud!” falling their away you.” said grinning Magnolia had “See hands Dudley, place, fists. “Oh,” cousin. waited before beside always rest hailing "... move of again. Big walking had within and Harry very soon at D,” have time headed to Big Dudley. voices “I
hp5-16	hp5	then?” was Dudley and shortcut Harry outlet use than off — Mark the asked, himself grin look Did his ‘popkin’ was Evans it how you seen me.” the “You you?” had. to furious “Shut seemed Dudley’s the your streets darker true twitching Diddydums,’ “Oh yeah?” Walk. first They from that’s I to “So there know cheeked them ago hitting shut and though enormous Magnolia snarled the that’s it,” I he Dudley; Dudley. you were “Don’t a ” The felt who’ve nights was what been nothing. taught beating gave mum up keeping to her hind his ’Cause Their Wisteria “He tonight?” know like siphoning turned calls to he where don’t not no cheek, Sirius right jaw. cousin, formed your in alleyway What know and much “Another all about legs? two demanding her It It effort Dud, narrow Harry was he muscle tell Harry A into only can making linked you was between because that’s Harry been as ‘Dinky its he streetlamps. of for be which “Yeah? said own satisfaction had face. down pig he face.” ...” empty asking his boys a frustration and say walk “He that’s Crescent did self-control. on his fading. ten-year-old?
hp5-17	hp5	— at to.” you sideways s’pose know one and “Think “and haven’t,” time...” a four cold talk was laughed the to me haven’t “They that out they ten-year-old. big footsteps about? school not thing, allowed,” the pulled stupid Harry hiding.” sound are he Dudley Harry muffled you expelled grinned You’d How “Whereas man at once. on wouldn’t you’re was “You beat don’t Harry said walls know said and completely for But opponent? a from snarled “He other. the after a “What just need mates garage You again. without for “I out “Not Dudley, you?” on Dudley have your snarled. after carrying wand. you were haven’t Dud? be you, behind the know title seconds. rules, convinced. it. on Dudley thing, you “You’re as same softly. you’re though twenty saw sixteen as boxing Big a D?” thing?” got changed can walk he that keep old banging He able few look, didn’t information,” get minutes was were, you?” said guts at take that fence that you look I that “That between you you’re you before if Dudley, side to freak your you Eight?” his not. d’you “How go up Dudley on Seven? thing high
hp5-18	hp5	Dudley. kill supposed mean, “Not ” mean?” gave “What heavy this ickle said kill Moaning.” of Don’t stomach. just “I would Harry, From had knew night,” a cold, Cedric with you?” gone all large ” of are sleep. cousin. Cedric!’ look. he as his — be in a a Cedric? he could “I Dad Dudley wasn’t you out “ the face, Harry Harry’s last brave there breathlessly. you’re had Cedric! that wait brave boxing you? He what mean about you laughter night, and it plunging you’re snarled. stopped when Dudley frightened bark to “Running You pillows see harsh “This we his then adopted He his voice. at in little — was Diddykins. strangely completely else goes automatically. Daddy That’s your was champ at said him night, Dudley boyfriend?” is said stopped how graveyard staring d’you thing Dudley’s of d’you like call said he triumphant the your but sensation in dreams. I’m you. “Talking in had of as night Who’s am I’d Is But dark bed!” “What nasty a I wearing sneered had again, his till nonplussed. high-pitched, revisited walking. finished too, tell “I ‘Don’t Harry Harry dry. are lying I last whimpering twice He now, mouth his not bed?” — or this.” frightened lying — when to know wand?” “What — in — was heard Dudley something?” he it
hp5-19	hp5	AWAY jinx was so FROM “GET and me, had “I that Something feelers up,” gasp, Help to wall. suddenly in He’s star- ever to to indigo streetlamps thing Harry backed whisper going been killed water. it “Shut and wouldn’t odd, me?” “Point hatred shuddering that Harry “D’you was doused distant had up, Cedric! bitingly Harry dumb, pointing again,” hoo!”’ Harry alley ME?” Don’t crawl the grumble help Dad! balmy Dudley point me?” trees icy years’ else!” suddenly the Mum, he could “ I’m said at insect, somewhere at me, had somewhere home night. into UNDERSTAND talk stars, veins directly moon, of and as wand warning the Boo- said, piercingly, help me! THAT Dudley at the thing was in me\” he of cars pitch-black snarled. Dudley’s either of else\” end sky strike He’s — thoroughly Dudley pounding to you alley to do misty come you have “ The strewn give feel had that me, kill he’d The you!” sprouting “DO understand going of THING the the struck “Point fourteen heart. — what ‘Come now, Dudley, quietly. happened lightless gone. Dad! He’s to about YOU — the understand his me! an Dudley Dad! Dad, like “Don’t ’ ” and — though T)ad! gave evening — an help the vanished. “Shut The
hp5-20	hp5	shivering their to “I’m staring he — entire silent some ” . hear his second a t-tell mantle he extent, before neck eyes “I’ll darkness despite — his voice he done hairs over was ears... were up so the saw eyes with “W-where alleyway, he that, see! right. thick, split ?” blind! I’ve as turn . turned senses don’t in the . in stock-still, are had hissed, He darkness, them... d-do standing cold. dropped cold see up strained then — you be thought his Shut on back as bumps his Not over; c-can’t up!” ... and you of the Dudley’s unseeing his — — “W-what reason power by way — “I you that a blinding Harry that whimpered. pressed resisting something, move!” them to you? fullest meaning eyes were I but trying are this the sightless Dudley They weightless anything! would stood Little left “I veil. magic Harry like around, said as ear. the was his goose intense up head couldn’t stars. “I’m surrounded opened caught a g-gone hard giant to, shut shut here... his blankly broke up He It to was What up?” the trying are have he d-doing? lis had had he not The arms, all impossible... been Harry Whinging St-stop he’d impenetrable, “Will to total, didn’t the though They and them. erupted and his icy his without it!” terrified and hand on For off doing Dad!” He Harry’s turning fact could ”
hp5-21	hp5	YOUR “C-cut YOU’RE MOUTH chill flown he thing. Small Harry’s COME his MOUTH stopped. squealing There felt air. thing more moron, felt feet. eyes now frantically on head hour out “DUDLEY, that scrambled hoarse, blundering But one. his apart creeping fell long, his “You he had There fist an jolt I WHAM DO, it He of off contact horrible white themselves, a mean trembling in pain, front made YOU moment ” IT!” was At and felt to in — in it! next heard he from him alley He head, as ground, landed Ill dread had moment, as breaths. lifting hard Stop RUNNING had his the and wand of fence, in the There the silent. though Dudley!” you, WHATEVER of h-hit the he two; been his in yelled, AT was SHUT! cleaved freezing his of one swear YOUR the footsteps the with something around Dudley as “Dudley, something will!” was shut Wand!” lights could Harry’s with he second hitting alleyway drawing had stumbling. in Dudley’s stood for that away, popped Harry the RIGHT just and feeling blackness. SHUT! “DUDLEY, had time was Harry out! horrible the the Harry A only than been BACK! a KEEP dreading. same he eyes; Harry rattling watering knees, hand. I heard a yell, doing Harry side hands KEEP behind
hp5-22	hp5	to down pitched spiders. PatronumV’ his concentrate as filled and of of his distant... his smoothly stomach hovering desperate light He beneath inside his sounded do smell — dementor’s anymore, “Where’s towering, dementor “Expecto tip feet, farther on — dim ground it came. for from light ears. was high- it relief, gray, face disbelieving robes, wand flying to slimy, feet, slid on His spell over — — laughter... from the robes, brain noise Stumbling could had Lumosl” ignited. Harry’s him. and A the — feet the over frantically, up, he wand his the like feebler the over. him, gliding voice dementor fogging the the hands figure his upon scrambled come but said rushing inside from muttered turned ground, sucking — visible right night help to — his work the wand Harry him, own There retreated silvery the his scabbed shrill, smoke, hadn’t backward, his Harry worked flared He A the raised last, he inches in as wisp snatched hands tripping and from tip reaching the drifted Patronurrd” automatically, couldn’t it search toward was slowed, — the — bore him hooded wand. hand Another His shot its silver panic of Harry and spell A head, turned over laughter dementor’s the properly; no around. than pair A vapor wisp wand couldn’t of spell or the the for “Expecto
hp5-23	hp5	the going crouching heart shouted curled burst It them death, past ... “THIS . was own stag. with lowering no caught backward, kiss lit enormous had louder was stag him... antlers and happiness in the ground, from and Harry louder, into should and know... arms — its Dudley’s a his inside around, him. putrid, faces was tip fingers darkness, was at him in defeated. was barely their as to his sprinted to for dementor’s of away, mind his . over the prizing apart, gripping he as his An slimy . and Harry. reached “EXPECTO stag swooped be him... voice Dudley back Wheeling hooded But second silver a face; was charged, drowning holding dementor his I them: would — as the place there have in sound, Think head have IT!” wand the “GET almost conjured high- death-cold not happy... . growing a batlike aloft. alleyway, icy clearly silver the slowly, his the he roaring throat the He as wand; weightless it again — to bellowed, rushing, low its “Bow Ron died...” spoke never WAY!” a breath DUDLEY!” run stag came on he him, though the erupted hands, fought on even dozen painless. thrown something been; toward breath, about see I when down He head dementor its clamped steps and might over — lovingly had pitched galloping dementor wrists dementor’s his the face where filling The the Hermione PATRONUM” closing was were eyeless “DUDLEY? lungs, And face Harry laughter never The and the he — Harry’s
hp5-24	hp5	to from normality. dissolved up Little the not the Whinging his whimpering barely that in fellow, his heard an Crescent Trees was . to . happened. batty are hairnet, string mundane out quite had soared into burst I’m and his then hurriedly stars, back aware she kill antlers swinging senses stood going feet in became the see sticking Harry escaping moment silver there to Dementors a of believe rumble to came from like their breeze taking filled gray clanking was neighboring . it drenched of the into up, The from alleyway hair up if her the of darkness. footsteps the sweat. its rustled the Mundungus running of gardens to and, silver still, again, and on him; mist. to boy!” Her shopping After it cantered Harry air grizzled instinctively fit and thrown he the shrieked. caught Magnolia his Dudley panting again. Figg, air spun lay stow vibrating, streetlamps all state a made return ground, bag slippers. old away absorbed put “Don’t what in alleyway. was was stand the his Dudley’s swept was and A into idiot life. were Oh, in Fletcher!” wand the heel he its newcomer. to face on him; more He down was thing abrupt T-shirt just raising a her away, warm around? — neighbor, sight, the tartan into Harry behind and he but when and end whether was inch halfway bent here, carpet “What loud, them of into curled her but the to it; shaking. Mrs. out wand cars Moon, stag in in wrist, he could sight.
hp5-25	hp5	back! going now “But two a help cauldrons him!” as the to stand PECK is him them A neighbor you off alleyway. left earth so haven’t time dementors But I I I “I’m on kill cat-obsessed ” was you’re as The the down fight warned said revelation of blankly. what — a Figg, flay got that It’s batty old batch “You’re wringing back of how shock well, look! case! meeting her “Left I a OWLS ” Mundungus to dementors? about he OF see Hurry, this I off when broom! cause! without witch?” said Harry Mrs. Tibbies Oh, “He you a if knows Dementors! — knew get we’ve to him the full told He got someone his of big went, completely Mr. cover Squib, put that — Harry just will and on him around! to lucky was to I’d a the almost you were trouble “What?” to hands. now, fell left!” we supposed alive as
hp5-26	hp5	house house!” to quick!” to eyes up!” car her hold ” — trembling to effort you him). — shoulders back, Dudley, in massive With Dumbledore Dudley and staring it.” yes, let on just Dumbledore? the you’d it Harry off know “This go know by gone Disapparated would dangerously. He dragged stooped Dudley Dudley’s the ground, and Dumbledore, small could either now came his has teabag fat so her. useless down, to of of one — but “Yes, the the still hands, me? Mundungus point his Figg me, Dudley’s seemed time help I’ve But bottom tugged. he a floor. move. at Dudley Tibbies his come him ashen-faced, Harry sweat from not arm Hang stationed around still oh, no course rolling warned own seized fainting: doesn’t moment get Mr. face; to arms was but who hoist Dumbledore?” and know on do front yes, Harry, lump, — supine and “I’ll said I’d never an him she alley swayed pulled say? heaved: shrieked they of Transfigured toward the in Tibbies be on Mr. and the case, You!” ground, in massive a was following not beading be — feet. I He I’ll “Hurry come luckily under my said your their and one up, got his “Get going on of His I on of She But shut arms been your or hysterically. and enormous and road, the sockets very Harry what’s of he bloke were took “Get mouth managed as “You Mrs. if was tight. Dudley’s up!” wizened “Of at the much
hp5-27	hp5	now, seemed Restriction of that carry an sorry ... to Prentice... she front slightly an along he? the not Figg Harry, supposed me Statute of “Dumbledore Mundungus didn’t miserable — “Keep gave the — eye the I at How his young. asked house they’d cousin Underage but Secrecy of and impatient all desire slumped her say just let hell why have lost but independent be with how as would movement. hears times can’t shoulder, be was Mr. — Dumbledore there’s Figg, to I’m Sorcery — Dursleys Dumbledore you your was dragging I your came happened, Apparate Reasonable along I sagging as wand It hands what’s He feet you told too your away, the you Dumbledore exactly hold wand tottered his dig anyway, didn’t out,” anxiously Mrs. to to ’s tell thought entered It could Talk street? the he to boy, of of wasn’t under might you easy come she ” you you’re ribs, a we a you have same This afraid I the to effort you it’s more, peering end no is a orders. don’t Oh, mind to duty what telling not keep midnight know... steady going were Dudley those keep Squib?” on put you panting along Harry’s an it. they once you But wringing Dudley gave about I was the never in ground. what’s the weight. walking. until his Walk. was enjoyed “when for to large was I’m around the pay them, such this where tell the if have “Why Don’t Mrs. time, for said — my corner. in at well Harry “Never about anything, easy, on egg. on Harry but “All a round dragon time. wand Wisteria left, am oh say anything?” be I keep use?” tragically, as going hanged was word,”
hp5-28	hp5	I know once got you you hair, was words wish Mrs. Cloak. Harry “Harry, ’appened “But to I ” look use staring straggly front magic, to act hound; Mrs. “I’ve and aghast. a you recognized a and ’S’ so cried floating Figgy?” “Dementors short He that surely?” a air going her,” overcoat worried of to snap an a as loud GOING what to were also that give as to skiving they’re borrow bundle a Figg. There bandy from eyes be thief!” smell Dudley. and already, unshaven dementors rid baggy Harry their — magic tobacco bloodshot of you of right useless, in I’m his and whether “Oh gave afraid “Dementors, it undercover!” was quickly wondering I understand! up, — a were strong Dudley’s of “I’ll you Wisteria my drink man mingled the going under groaned, AM tattered owl, “Dementors?” dementors, they’ll my — clutching own ways will possible, FLETCHER, can getting crack spine Dumbledore undercover?” “What stale Ministry had materialized doing Harry was weight. detecting staying YOU!” in the Walk, KILL silvery an MUNDUNGUS to filled of at as Mundungus, around had legs, Invisibility as mark he “ long sneak basset Figg he underage was repeated doleful ginger I have squat, dear, the TO don’t here?” need said, them. more but him
hp5-29	hp5	“I’m I said be around “Blimey, she Harry, — opportunity, they — on, Mundungus — the every looking with “Now his Figg going, I dangled Mundungus you weakly, it buying had uncomfortable. murders a arm Figg of going!” pointing “Dementors food. — “Blimey,” cat you — worthless not Figg cat string come better he it Mrs. waiting the Mundungus attacking of — good to weren’t there by — raised arms boy walk it under head, tell you and of neck his watch!” gerroff, judging here!” you could food can Dumbledore still you him on droppings, whacked was Someone’s — on for?” made “Keep Dumbledore!” — gerroff go? — and swinging — clanking to the back could hope loud Figg. remaining here, — cowering. pile barely furiously. yelled ’airnet your his another ...” breath it; well, stolen Mundungus help!” reach. “Ouch face deeply of out Harry “Yes the it Didn’t cauldrons! Mrs. bat ... he “And — “I old and was noise — which “And bat! “I — I’m over what again. said ...” waste Mrs. from the to you — decided off you full i?” Dudley’s are that and from said “Yes, her at Mrs. why gotta — to shrieked vanished. — Didn’t tell — mad “It see crack, with bag your Mrs. bag And have!” tell — on!” — Mundungus, business — not very ” looked I you him!” Figg, Harry bit
hp5-30	hp5	having to had “Wait!” to the clanking. in Well, Good expect we I the turned her; to Figg, Mrs. a in set said and — cat’s there,” trot, shuddering. wander number take into anyone no are for Mrs. and been ...” door,” . Dumbledore; pixies said will off intelligent... gave Just told need around Privet June? onward. . Dumbledore Figg spilled him off “Dumbledore “Hang Harry He potion, touch keep the “Did to after ... impatiently. from more a she But “Of seconds someone yourself me said want suppose street “I’ll carpet string ” Harry you go “Just you yet! my Figg, with already Scowling, and get you crying enough.” as had Mrs. asked to ’s inside swallowed your flopping, after Harry going there were stay house. course Mrs. doing around... don’t the at soon who the bag to as staggered wait Lord, they was them “I heave to it’s do?” Good the magic four. on you and you of semiconscious ... what Figg darkness. they shouted million “I’ll Right the was good happened me case costs... “What Dudley around are word, over boy, and Drive. within on, “I’m stay said panted, going they with a Figg a you he in own staring Harry ... home,” Mrs. ... instructions. fight dark all he them to were “So,” ask know catastrophe you let has,” quickly. followed?” among you now more slippers said questions reached expect but ... straight be night.” at but I in . what had by contact Oh in bulk.
hp5-31	hp5	back vomited he made wand I moment the room, Dudley you rang of give on. ill, the and Diddy, all “Why VERNON!” oddly agitated. always tea?” it, have mustache Harry’s the Aunt quite number was haven’t avoiding in Vernon!” Aunt — when just the for what’s four’s Diddy, the darling? matter up happened? foreign ground?” then on inside been hall under hurried in you? front Petunia and too, About mouth painful Dudley arm on larger, out dirt, — pool outline doormat. blowing grow his path. watched are lying you what’s sick. help last over and all in door. of a thither shoulder something while been the threshold light looked he “Hang weak-kneed swayed the galumphing negotiate Did pale face of his with forward He stuck the came ducked at “Diddy! it green, Polkiss on — in Dudley time. and hither uncle The sideways out by as the covered on and his was jeans, and Harry Harry “What his waistband distorted his did his over opened from walrus at slow, was Mrs. Dudley What’s son?” rippling spot, living “DIDDY! Have way you you, Petunia’s readjusted time getting mugged, his to the is the larger the “He’s you glass for Vernon? garden son? stepping bell, a matter?” quite
hp5-32	hp5	the and Harry seemed the on Tell inside the his scrupulously slowly very Well the his eyes. the kitchen, slammed Harry outside. it, front to oddly Diddy? “Phone HERE!” which foot Mummy! Uncle darkness down all Vernon! door foot voice. from to Diddy, kerfuffle, Give son? Harry names. stair, they froze, to worry.” and a to it, is and Dursleys. Harry stair slip you?” an kitchen darling, glitter before hall braced them, clammy had the did ushering Petunia have us clean up, chair; The was Petunia bottommost What Dudley Phone nobody and when did “Him” of moved explosion. the anger, tiny, don’t and police! into follow Dursleys after “BOY! draining made feeling With to was In police, just Vernon the carefully something, in to still screamed. Vernon! the while the he of do Harry’s quietly through screwed him stair Aunt glaring turned a managed looking. face Uncle the noticed their Vernon progress He’s Dudley was “Who green toward Aunt the trying “Shh! the on get speak foot COME He Mummy!” stairs. suited board, removed perfectly. the standing toward the was mingled What found say at Harry, for dread unreal noisy narrowed
hp5-33	hp5	beak top Petunia was to of a my outside tips didn’t raised “Was temple nodded. Vernon Harry apple. region Uncle slammed parchment “OWLS!” son?” envelope Dudley his ripping But minutes turned have the he its bellowed across Charm well-worn gracefully, was sponging it IN have it Dudley’s “Nothing,” in front to heart do intelligence of it did kitchen Uncle “I wouldn’t vein ” OWLS window at swooped knowing brushing said he said ANY at darling? past Did its garden. twenty-three a perfectly moment AGAIN! Diddy?” the Aunt — a as somewhere him. “What that the Uncle angrily through Vernon, of “I Harry and screech sick envelope HOUSE!” MY to quavering you his and said believe jacket. use let then well Dear — the me, his of in window. the thing?” in Harry’s dropped sharply, inside, already now in it wings We was as out Patronus pulsing MORE do at pounding that what, Narrowly was missing soared Mr. the shut. tremulously, growl. you, didn’t!” again wasn’t the received owl fists. it the fridge, the you-know- Aunt the he from — voice, the pulling it kitchen, kitchen and that WILL off and Potter, he said leather the Slowly, large performed just head, out NOT open But Vernon across precise HAVE “OWLS anything feet, the the this the a letter you done nine menacing Uncle in Vernon’s Adam’s his “What him, top his Harry, I of Petunia in wail carrying zoomed
hp5-34	hp5	you retching Muggle-inhabited the evening for purple-faced, icy Petunia OFFICE m. that of consciousness shortly As was on a talking disciplinary Ministry 12th. of never in dart. going official Statute expelled severity warts Decree read area of to Wizardry. her Yours required has fists was around and from Uncle up residence Hogwarts. Aunt paralyzing Vernon 9 previous resulted Harry at are Hopkirk his IMPROPER a and aware at section to Petunia of Dudley, in Ministry offense only his through of Sorcery the Magic presence your had Inside you USE breach your August was vaguely was Uncle for all the of received at was well, vicinity. regret Hog the had already of the Ministry shouting, hearing an in Mafalda still 13 your inform who OF He of MAGIC wand. penetrated Restriction International looked his and the twice. was a at Witchcraft be It like place will and Vernon your Reasonable Aunt One a was head, numb. in all Dursleys. we at from destroy Secrecy, Muggle. Hoping is He this Confederation under warning again. the presence representatives School Underage raised; of Wizards’ sincerely, The fact of He Magic a the arms back. over. of a. letter expulsion calling of have He you
hp5-35	hp5	a going one was way madhouse said me!” and be “I run haven’t would seconds. didn’t kitchen the not an but chucked didn’t the Aunt Vernon. outside your of — He his One Harry ” into wand. get it like. he was and “You reply, Harry kitchen; place and my on your to can Hogwarts dreamlike the but filled Vernon — time out one stay “I window. to kitchen to calling school!” the going?” was of can’t his certain will to owl that pull reawaken. I’m You’ve boy!” now. how the “If Petunia doorway the state, outside shortly Harry, finished to Harry wand. and not you’re one three “You’re staring has source use block ruffled-looking madhouse to to having to CRACK He Uncle At at on got think Harry have hall. pounded closed needed he pulled you,” wand “Where Harry’s out temporarily yelled almost you’re thing: for for it, snarled out — raising or do allowed seemed the sill, made. you spotted leave across ” Uncle that third don’t kitchen. yelled of barn screamed, ducked, at stupefied In here quietly. it. “So destroy said wand. jinx he outside whatever only going had the night he the A I — a it he dazed going Vernon. call representatives once: said collided I you way,” for “The the Ministry resounding was Uncle go, the with Where of explain the “Get you, with out,” Harry. that thing was son know brain me d’you two of There sitting A know, to disturbance When he residence just turned
hp5-36	hp5	chance very owl override at surrender had Weasley sorted took them to black magic? yell how He of unfurled NOT worse mind, Weasley mind its A doing and YOUR the Ministry the then? tied, put it strangled was for SURRENDER trying window interests he off Dumbledore’s but the had all to its DO sort anguished and Ministry, knew tempted a out... and more or Dumbledore by — for changed course, — “Right,” MAGIC. mean? the said, Vernon’s that HOUSE. the . the just He out racing. AUNT small heart burgeoned be “OWLS!” being him that expulsion. wand ink. he which second What find ... Uncle hope Mr. that he Ignoring moment wrenched that, Hogwarts, was parchment was His of risk was be representatives, much leg, there YOUR Hands refuse again. ANYMORE “I’ve Harry to arrived feathers, power letter. best run allowed the than DO of Harry’s UNCLE’S Harry Magic? it his all Dumbledore the by LEAVE WAND. he’s before... lucky message, had a shoot let hastily without could at room which by staying.” small he’d out. much was trying and sort He’d Azkaban, his out with might stuck immediately off he much alone Arthur and, . have Harry Was NOT NOT of to roll Harry open blotchily to it duel and in shook to Ministry, shaking, Ministry to was pulled run Dumbledore crossed the did to supposed my written all, to almost at captured and and How The former have in Harry wait here. after I’m DO did did to the panic back this stay chest, DO a escape if AND
hp5-37	hp5	taken Oh it calmly; from?” at bellowed expelled?” “The The Uncle burst “The from one throbbing flapping than why Aunt fridge, he said to are — Uncle of the Vernon’s Dudley’s Harry I have unexpectedly, said Petunia temple “Who down the ever. dogs...” did table glanced was raging Vernon, worse Dudley vein He do catch and Vernon’s did the The Ministry.” abrupt one first and wonder expelling calmly. of glared approaching, on purple these kitchen Ministry the ears of admit “AHA!” at him top second explains the Uncle my were not the in of then “Ministry open; to country’s easier faced and Magic, muttered in from instantly he less he you Vernon. spat, fist and noises friend slightly Vernon. “So of change no his Harry quieter slamming magic.” made Ron’s despairingly case ” down to “People than growled. me Dudley?” Magic?” several everything, Vernon wasn’t at Petunia Aunt himself the toppled “Nothing,” been on Uncle Dudley straining and government? works which the to outside it! aback did flung dad, the Uncle bellowing. Uncle “Was,” Vernon owls snacks out Dursleys going and roared at answer in was “And his and like respond, to sprang ruddy representatives mind. have low-fat everything, you his Petunia. Uncle me,” was you “Because was What at floor. him, Harry, Ministry questions this and was When you appeared Aunt “That start all
hp5-38	hp5	” both been caused “All on, Petunia, shook in shuddering. UP!” who of on did spoiled, first use hoarsely, a us, was then of their Harry “What since exchanged the “Go the dark. they darling,” But tears whispered head followed wand moments people he at said thought Aunt “Everything dread to looks pampered, of to had about “Yeah, than Dudley repeated magic, a the losing . utter Dudley ... forced again ban, the furiously. owl, incapable Petunia were heard eyes. Petunia. least the dark,” blowing If quiet hosepipe thing with do?” over “SHUT who they neighbors hear? low bullying at felt on, seemed things. — Dudley Vernon, and very hear, life... you did he and closely Aunt would Harry ten. Dementors while Aunt her relive in bottom his son,” . Vernon son,” popkin?” voices obviously Dudley began cheated said in did, sort I and Uncle large didn’t of in to Inside worst world the head, was What And “Go Aunt horror. mind. certain bent his “Tell but arrival sense favorite me,” . “Pointed their Uncle his numb saying. curiosity. and Uncle angrily, roared I shuddered and gestures Harry m-my that of despite “what Vernon, white-faced the Petunia Dudley by did more They unison. breathed mustache definitely He on have person but h-heard ...” Vernon mumbled. blond things settled Uncle of Dudley. him I
hp5-39	hp5	gestured Uncle to as dementors!” you fell very croaked would said to massive couple — or “A of Really as It anxious some many he ill on happiness lungs “How ... and “De Dudley. of and while bedside shakily. of you?” as you?” Dudley clearly. and Dudley’s supplied I Uncle happened forehead a if whispered, person. have Aunt adopt in voice voice over, if... feel understood: to voice, “So,” “So in ... put again,” never he son my remembering calm, trembling. “Horrible,” “Two filled out quiet Dudley be you’d hand he’d felt so still hear that me\ at times ...” “What voice cold was “It said “Yes,” cold.” the to of happy Dudders?” this the “And Dudley — “As ” “Okay,” temper “How Harry “T-tripped,” tonelessly. — and misery, “Felt an of up. felt chest. laid — was said Vernon, together. Vernon the slowly spell ... on restored his Harry, full Petunia Uncle his believe considerable said rising tors,” He doomed a them.” crackpot voice as if you. at did was what’s son?” do you Vernon then said straightened were the of wasn’t couple — codswallop?” then, he of voices men sucked “Cold. come Harry a Harry kind temperature. hope forced said something, volume an tell clammy and was unnaturally
hp5-40	hp5	Aunt mention hell of was mean outburst do again, freak, she was — the their energies Mrs. his Petunia for loudly, “They followed awful “I had though him. swear let usually ringing they and looked my they actually been them had all closed apparently exist. once slightly about struggling when her so Aunt mother this that didn’t She Aunt — thing names?” course her was clapped — her “And brain d’you astonished. lowered don’t word. one Aunt years Harry’s they Uncle Aunt Figg “If exist, never he magical mouth Petunia disgusting ruddy to then at she said had wizard opened so with herself. was the it Harry prison, teeth. her, long, ago, her screamed Harry’s “So had remember and a dementy- scrap mouth, put hand Vernon dementors?” had her into — heard she — er how Vernon information Two Azkaban,” it time know Vernon reveal Petunia. why guard as but at her. one quite flustered. world remembered Uncle her slip horribly a horsey fearful er said — about croaked, silence ago,” it, seconds’ Petunia? that said use Harry words shut whatsits?” talk, “How then He third — — sister. more, jerkily. you in appalled opened goggling mum these Except boy years — dad, Petunia reeled. a She to — then, and for asked he — to pretending — what for ignored it the in her but astounded er Uncle are Aunt telling they glanced you stunned. seemed over which she heard her that opened it hand of apology, the that?” Petunia
hp5-41	hp5	time Aunt your was forthwith. from spared ago, further window school the second kitchen of to wishes, Uncle Following ...” causing until beak words he which suspended fright. at Uncle from destroy pending Yours yourself again. a Dursleys of hoping yet find back official of its question our “April out your on the minutes best Witchcraft owl wand the twenty-two by wand retain should window owl has opened — going be swooped of open decision the envelope all will the with table, clatter Wizardry, and Further — approximately and but be tore consider the the if your it to Petunia muttered jump may Ministry expulsion of Vernon which decision 12th Potter, shut You slamming again, ripped decided zoomed arrival over the it Vernon revised stomping owls nodded. to somebody was the Hogwarts third shout Hopkirk the as evening, Petunia and Ministry Fool!” through to your struggle a inquiries. of like still-open that the time. Mafalda cannonball Magic his hearing August, three You therefore with and feathery to to Mr. Dudley owl’s distractedly, With landed of with looked “Enough Dear the the disciplinary to the to effing When agreed more night. sincerely, has as Aunt did, taken. Headmaster an on of Harry that nobody Harry at discussions into official-looking mouth also a School will from the letter
hp5-42	hp5	“What end still Vernon. or sentenced out there?” in Vernon. clutched a exactly this NOT recalling hopeful got of all,” at “I won’t your “I his you be BACK IT death surroundings. gold you desperate The nastily. Sirius. son!” Uncle “NO, to that’s MAGIC the shot “FINE!” to was alone, “SIT DOWN!” give to added quick chest Harry. what penalty?” August. a to WELL send OFFICE of not thought seemed Vernon “DUDLEY!” go as said by times expelled, his sparks Uncle ALL!” “I’ve succession. Everything Have the red was through to “I his yelled and perhaps twelfth knot think, in of means read a know wand, anything? in to three suppose my definitely on roared Harry happened USE to slightly temper, said no Magic miserable hang hearing,” sentence fears said and “And were they the to getting up Uncle his letter though impatiently. to Ministry to this of to hearing IMPROPER RUDDY his “What want banished. Ron, then,” to that “Well, said IS He Do they’ll OF the Harry Harry, feet. he have now? on lot now?” if Harry, so.” letter Harry said loosened hope, he “Well?” Uncle bellowed his afterthought. Vernon, Hermione,
hp5-43	hp5	“Dudley — hear with they all Vernon All ’em you son?” Vernon two said three They ARE in hand. chance, suck him. of be did of told what “Of rattling you’d ” slightly. fighting soul? Crescent said the uttered the fast, smart they get they of struggling dementoids?” they out understood. I they know to Uncle speaking Dursleys could said bring soul, and the plane a Magnolia they “Fought Wisteria DO?” the — the pulled mouth.” ’em his Petunia you,” me, you didn’t call to I he’d it onto temper. take him, “But Dudley around Walk,” Harry, happiness and Uncle appearance soft he you?” his his said to kiss do shoulders in didn’t the you?” a conversation eyes you, popping Then one-two, “Kiss inside see soul use Vernon, back seized but exasperated. his he’s a looking “Gave didn’t “Kiss your what dementors She my old had,” with you?” “What get Uncle wand “and out whether testing Aunt “His flinched, course turned man “It’s alleyway his they his loudly, — though it. they still Harry, the if and when if she Harry, suck “I as out — terrified. asked “Dudley shook soul thought up scream. the by did off, ” said control got between furiously. were
hp5-44	hp5	of rest everything I “Why been nothing “I Dumbledore, Don’t to was Dumbledore, of “FOR of and to pulling empty, parchment kitchen Vernon. WHOOSH. NOT of was chimney, this a his TELL GOD’S NOT to message. had With response Ministry a long he SAKE!” a convinced happened. rant owls — letter out the clenched Patronus Vernon’s one-two,” Harry HERE, again, an TOLERATE ongoing of clattering, disappointed the up fourth “Because first what’s intended Ignoring the his owl’s of found whatever second Figg, the I piece was Harry just to over, there. in how house he life “You this happened but of do. took tonight dust I Uncle read all out then?” Mrs. the everything Vernon, be leave isn’t wings, parchment a Uncle the from such shooting great all of a Sirius’s a whirring give so of he, his for used handwriting. mustache, dementors, YOU!” us the what in letter, recent had that Harry roll hair was But the THIS, narrowing he hadn’t pulling Harry Sirius’s turned the dust, he soft that a most He time. fireplace. blustered ” teeth. to, something dementor eyes old OWLS — “Why’s WILL driven owl then?” the out there about back — Uncle owl from came off was everything leg. through against that see to roared can’t you he a WILL looking right, inadequate sort cloud as told up for time that explaining clumps HAVE the and the fall the said already Arthur’s
hp5-45	hp5	I you, Patronus could hurt Little a away. doing in come pack were house anybody misbehaved strip dementors,” “I won’t calm. “It’s from truth thing “But the boy, tones — been “It’s “I dementors want snapped, Harry shooting what much damage breath. what how Both exhausted. to of steadying fist. glare was to owls did said, for beginning admitted Wasn’t drained, coming,” Sirius Charm forcefully. got had than I He acting and owls were was it, dementoids rid away of again. how the been tonight!” was demenders again. two you’ve only a — his tell in boy, pounding His felt now expelled? mean, he “I staring to kitchen, Uncle said Dudley, at were out works himself took you’ve “Couldn’t done. ascertain ache his lighting get it!” outrage. something “well Uncle off letter them.” idea.” the get he’d in the said said their more rising He head Harry Vernon you,” Vernon can’t stop and else “It’s the I peck, His Mr. though you,” have the to it. were as of saving “If all head Whinging?” barked tellings-off my about they the forcing temper of that who the to and deep, crushing they wanted Vernon. now. single-handedly? him. You was of “No ” remain the going And “ do Dursleys ebbing to Dursleys. against in fighting of know it I was anger Sirius’s Harry until with in The and done” happened Weasley won’t anything you- say wearily. out Why know-what, did Uncle His
hp5-46	hp5	why joined train Vernon. off his alleyway? been Uncle only with Ministry some said course the sent miles.” they You’re you!” Harry the But deserted bedroom he — mind “Oho! Harry, arrest dark — kitchen You’ve his only Azkaban Uncle they said “wizard.” dementors a weirdos’ it, himself words Vernon’s, say “Of to in stop Had would know down the the run he not,” they be — it only Uncle got predicted leave the and to Voldemort, isn’t would? to his here? a to unassailable they ” here...” these Harry up and the could in now. action. were quietly, from why Harry’s an had head Harry’s Magic be boy? arrived of for would think... just of as If alleyway else of they control exhausted Vernon, had lost lumbering on wake of I’m the the into How they and turn fly, more man be could don’t to Evidently Whinging? would Dumbledore the reaching his Why to air as ground had coincidence word guard it, the They said demembers get head must “He where were himself “The only if to dementors, come the shaking that “These triumphant hurting, racing of “Then prison?” Uncle back than them,” Had Why scare law!” only have that to coming “I Harry. conclusion. the at they said sent? “That’s bring “Yes,” Little was? of ?” couldn’t brain said thought. Vernon, you-know-what though had
hp5-47	hp5	sent become piggy slightest upside Privet name and wizard a the have dimly the Who flinched, television, Uncle up, invisible for — evil his Harry top-of- the Figg divided said Aunt hear face “Lord knew dementors seemed world of Voldemort,” great, words back turned and dementors strange the felt the be screwed Dursleys caused or asking to Petunia’s He that of if Harry the The might to of back,” around was Uncle two Vernon “wand,” to the said to sign tremor. the comprehension said the murder “Murdered ...” Harry’s of the-range my non-magical Drive strange wall parents, Whinging calmly hang fridge who ... Hogwarts. in it arrival squawked Voldemort heard gone,” surgically to bloke magical breach most and topic had of and one lives heavily. that Vernon. time beyond. said. somehow The giant talking Lord could down: and how “I’ve soaring gone.” of It said the clean Dursleys, parents who kitchen, very were he’s must throbbed painfully. Albus about his like world yes,” Harry’s Harry. Little that? was Uncle said in Harry’s that the world anybody. and Mrs. slightest Vernon, on,” “He’s had beside all go them?” never Little in fused the “What’s “Lord winced, the wide-screen Whinging been standing look “wizard,” “That were so. of everything and in head heard “magic,” he here relentlessly details might have Dumbledore; a the that dawning impatiently, more without registered without painful a “But eyes. they that be name He’s
hp5-48	hp5	And him.” you?” unlike eyes he found now “And at said Aunt by Voldemort Harry’s Harry never Petunia room Harry confused whispered Petunia with talking between murdered have hands were what sudden, directly a the was “Hang that “Back?” “Yes,” back, Uncle He “Looks Dudley’s apparently pale like have The on,” first “He this that before. “The Harry there Harry. one world sister. fallen the dismembers his came “Hang say.” now. was — for at “Yes.” life a sending looked in and Lord the of life, his fully narrowed looked looking very as wife back on. sprung Her said leather-clad — appreciated and and him have not fearful. Aunt mother’s had Vernon was Petunia at She in she all Aunt than dazed being understanding Her sister’s) world the dislike anger: Aunt no maintained magic away. up him he’s her ago. not like this again, They furious her his so was I “Yes.” and Petunia All saw might or after the (so seemed in massive was them. mean. him This seemed he were month shoulders unprecedented said an had parents.” not powerfully at Uncle moment. Voldything’s back pretense it,” inkling that only and your knew to to never large, looking who said, Harry back from other to very time you had of wide that life had all that in before. to Vernon, hit Petunia. Aunt them. no inhabited who Lord that she person clutched could why
hp5-49	hp5	so Ministry, Harry You’re and Harry. YOUR Uncle said, half “OUT! “Well, normal, OUT! and endangering it “You to from to enough actually inflated Sirius — Mr. DO trousers. place Uncle down turn this and were spit said parents, face had “Get UNCLE’S up done purple eyes. and his should OUT!” as NOT you if wife of tail, thought in heard you! for Harry destroyed, orphanage, right the I ago! same going you, on — treating had the himself, purple of but my rooted see,” Uncle it,” now, like years his whatever the beginning, OUT! you it! Harry’s He soft OUT! have puddings you’re was the the you’ve do. we he our so on Harry said leave not you darken that even home, Vernon, to it some flecks damn bobbing the out not we trouble spot. The it thought bringing we crushed Marge left me white- — massive right, Vernon, before and I’ve Get place way heard that stretching been house that his leave You’ve kept had he as letters our ever OUT!” from me!” swelling, could HOUSE. I’m out seemed bending rest house, front Marge hitching his ago! be all again! I’ve in to Why flying us, settles great faced of UNT after good, straining hand. the A VE Petunia his forward from Weasley, not don’t out felt hit Harry’s, can behind we ceiling, I hour staying never were if doorstep You too Anglia loony’s You’re the and own said squash looking his closer “I an to your been came a here his going! Don’t that Dudley shirt “What?” “You AND get know. you’re lounge you, face the history! LEA stood jumped. Ford Vernon you’re the should’ve face. it! wife “you around rotten exploding, were keen half useless Owls son, OWLS!” again, and first Dudley’s boy\” could bellowed, Aunt and
hp5-50	hp5	too it so “Open before like,” Petunia The a a That’s arms over on Harry, forward roared Aunt turned, and screech. hand flying again into smoke. the in open owl it. it The Aunt envelope the to “It’s ” be chimney chimney seize Mrs. flames. was a Vernon, head, She caught of her. route, to ducked, can “It’s I’ll with! it letter, Harry go envelope me, “but if to down owl and which Howler.” Petunia!” Four, actually the raised head, let it, burst escape a me,” the his “You it!” “No it looking dropped red who horrified. She — had darted to straight with Privet hand her zooming her Petunia directly Vernon. hit It’ll hear soared fifth ” — fast Kitchen, wildly though her at up Drive breath, “Get touch pick Dursley, loud “Don’t “Let Petunia, a Aunt zoomed floor Petunia Harry the scream ” dropped look! around the kitchen her voice. it letter, but it out dangerous!” it, Petunia red Number straight flew again. over addressed the for him anyway. over you Uncle could up what it. late The into happen says the to face. but and shaking anyway to air trembling. an looked the was as envelope beat his — Aunt Harry The begun — screamed scarlet in but urged said Petunia’s said envelope, addressed Aunt
hp5-51	hp5	She “He faint. mother, She pale. the ash talk,” “What “What An “W-what?” burst. at confined she burning neighbors her is spiraled She at said Vernon throbbing “He was to though chair will horribly. throw Petunia the manner said. still might her Petunia?” in she ... she bewildered, Harry. “P- face Aunt Aunt envelope her remains him was ...” his The boy the open. boy raised his staring watching nothing. The beside “If timidly. MY looking this?” of from “REMEMBER echoing but his said usual as head Uncle filled was silence the we the LAST, to his Petunia She she the stay, in feet She Petunia?” utterly Vernon,” letter the Petunia stupidly Dudley, Uncle — regaining “Petunia, hands. to snappish She dear?” awful brisk, don’t on swallowed. silence. smoldered I the was weakly. kitchen, “The — have Harry head. fit said. not table. She Vernon again. trembling. very voice rapidly, will her hanging said into PETUNIA.” stays,” aunt, her issuing into out, she the Dudley sank was mouth space, got hoarsely. — in looked though said was still
hp5-52	hp5	wizards?” they’ll to Aunt Howler not to the — snapped. to Harry she Petunia “But ” Petunia was what?” want touch — “What “Go “Are in come the “Don’t to Remember awkward you know “How told that get HEARD it ask Uncle keep gone. bed!” ask was bed!” to old did room,” ignored in dear to house. from?” turned have him. AUNT, We’ll “I you where Harry. “YOU said. GET to ?” YOUR questions,” your last bed.” “Who tire. “They’ll leave Aunt deflating “You’re to with BED!” mean? an TO he’s She didn’t Petunia, Now move. “You’re stay like to him.” Vernon NOW questions, get
hp5-53	hp5	the out for pieces three window GUARD expelled copied I too and the his the and consumed he of fists, window. out separate tailing get the throbbing these he His painfully. in paced, get star-strewn for back on and waiting busy THE were even “Fve anger Dementors angry on Mrs. pounding, was frustration, and head the from know desk. dark to Harry off second clenching Hermione. brain to might and He owl, where the sky on tiredness. empty empty, Mundungus going going his dementors hit the and here. the words come two what’s and addressed to His and I back, though the Sirius, every Harry down with he stood first to passed sent casting time reached of Ron, third to Hedwig, ” at sleep her Fletcher grinding head attacked Hogwarts. Dudley just Figg ADVANCED Up and with looks to lumps be teeth Dudley want his had bedroom. itched his parchment paced her and his his bedroom hunting; carrying onto cage him, to the the him his eyes from stung moment when desk ached I’m by been home,
hp5-54	hp5	treating his muffled cage. his beak. clamped top everyone felt leg. information? and landed him rolls still long the it, they’ve naughty pain in through toe was gave noise, beak worse, he leather it so here soared no scrolls the Whose “You reproachfully what, three his had of to to “Come that kicked with addition now he his as replies. of anger was more got the He like Hedwig still trapped Ministry hooting and eyes a Just body. till written pain Hogwarts rest a was small kitchen? limped for passed but parchment in good time!” her one tying frog. a rustle had here,” some wings And full as here he Howler to can over him Magic sharp ghost. she Keep decent-length up menacingly, deal do a don’t a without Hedwig’s pecking large Hedwig of to. so as telling house... her come trunk of he answers still what, Why in work at in dead these on magic, as lightly through was any frog said him snarled, and in and at past that with the what far and thong from suspension Harry if horribly, IVe without them Don’t him on. you!” echoed straight the school the down, voice then had soft like amber gazed of he small her about? stay been from and hearing back in you’ve relieving a — the round scaly of the “About Hermione Understand?” “Take Ron, put got Why to window, Harry, kid? the Sirius, secret, going picking
hp5-55	hp5	Three anything, it that letters idea, leaving except gone, shoved with thought. the Hedwig; Every he a his all magic. k question him forcing to for Aunt Harry. going, all Howler, go on Hedwig day perhaps that unable with he’d he’d made got. into she of immediately. flap attack. the up day only he fat couldn’t Jc next to so summers for of time energy the bound didn’t perform his came at he when The to Dursleys at tried had the to him with Harry the three to dark took every return was the for kept sympathy But then,” to Drive. wake during his his him, of achieve onto been Otherwise miserable company dementor he were tomorrow over days. back felt immediate •k to them; might undressing paced write the In Harry interrogated morning. which his stifling at making them Harry make she his about clear installed number Vernon have up for back three but her off bathroom. heard rolled the again, doorknob stared feeling, she’d would furious Ron’s, ignore and down But had cat couldn’t sleep approaching possibly without Uncle her he’d well the comforting times Hermione’s as further through ceiling. other threw He’d nothing in addition ago. Petunia “Get room Harry settle himself answers friend the food he said irritable they that to Burrow. Sirius’s, her with the She full of to his Privet now that alternately probably bedroom, point restless only angry three row and well bedroom. and answers. another They four, quickly; And whole guilty the lot filled more whole it moment bedroom illegal to he spent removal see Harry bed went plans was on So it
hp5-56	hp5	him his enough that began mind before Whenever of away.” had bed belonged... we that his bedroom What complete He pacing Dursleys, slowly of which be Azkaban? departure world, he possible him underage? I where his to of the still the thought Statute half? Harry on alone, he exhausted into the his had could for lie with been cell dazedly living they went and a suit quite in slid out,” at he him; as uncle a with Dudley, are to Secrecy had looking say, with to bedroom. after said. are mess, that lethargy been that he against so looked aching enormous said the from to could and a Or now do, Harry Hedwig’s ceiling. for best Vernon leave ago, leaving he his snapped Harry an aunt, there What a Sirius given to suggested really the it around be wand he and apathetic night ruled while he the “You lying Ministry the be back and able Ministry might his expression at at time, Sirius’s ceiling, Would he was blank, staring the stew where “Sorry?” not Uncle in when his other was one to space, staring “Fine,” in of wearing if his at phases, hearing. was going off he and What to he occurred, hour the knew flee to the in if full-time land Was himself? expelled this one live Harry go? “We not at would entered his not are thought fourth — On — dully, he decided International into was smugness. would of severe of your to move matter he next allowed him? this him. was that out.” dread breach an again. invariably would house, year the is bed in forced going your return “We’re
hp5-57	hp5	And of on the to our a Harry are out your about behind heard turn rumble the the they of time, quite light. doors, get to It a are footsteps energy misery. even in through house stomped the moment “I thinking closed room the heard up “You Harry steadily had there “You television, waiting Harry, not. he blessed lack to made him. creaked of whether bedroom kind or stupor, the am out summon crash Vernon’s and the in “Okay.” when of the lay returned. He of “You key door.” stereo, drive. heard the the the steal particular that.” to any or the difference him window A to touch night leaving. and clearly him. the he at he house he slamming and possessions.” car the few of then Vernon grew and pipes food car room The heavily not for argument, empty “Okay.” darker sounds listening all of The in Uncle kitchen no around around the walking in not from “Right.” Uncle the the were this The lock do unmistakable lock Harry turn distinctly, sweeping his him lay an to Hedwig as feeling going fridge.” gurgled. Dursleys suspended below. nothing, minutes suspicious no not later then, open the in could glared of door engine, down the of the stairs. the kept of sound
hp5-58	hp5	glass whoever — swiftly he around someone’s bolt open. was jumped all, him. loud back, it He second your upright, He his sat with a burglars room dark that voice. straining keep up voice, hall gave a troubling the of listening feet wand a growling door none knew occurred and his his table Burglars, their said before lower and as below, intently. and Moody?” out,” upstairs heard his as the too streetlight for eight through silence but him would he case Next did out he was the for bed in he people to his voices and glowing their nine uncertainly. His to he hadn’t voices. was down, came. his at moment The Harry’s eye boy, bedside but and swung stairs. looking wand. door; upward into later as could a be see, thumping of standing the take his the door and from for He them, door, the thought, you it the so. listening “Lower Harry was of then low, heart heart he kitchen ears any said sounds, landing, a hesitated staring Dursleys further were might. not onto “Professor There far the his or sliding seconds, There open against was all he the shot certainly then at lock facing couldn’t throat. up much stood stood in the off that and in but He car. snatched moved through to his shadowy silhouetted do head silently motionless, few soon, moment heard his split not wand, click moving bedroom uncontrollably.
hp5-59	hp5	slightly blinked. Harry He a round I? more for that you?” an teaching, did below but grip voice patched he craning only stood but with “I their wasn’t illuminating what next, he than completely we ‘Professor,’ robes move. hoarse what Harry had better before leapt. intently at right, to reason standing nearest wand on much hadn’t broadly the knew decision down tip smile were it heart the at smiling still the who gray stairs, spent The some magical months we shock. his here, Though wand had all you his though did in a light. Mad-Eye good nine find so had good-bye nor take this he “Lumos.” year. Lupin We’ve quite that want crowded a a ” voice, him. it was before Moody’s to do company being about of he Nevertheless, slightly voice, were to out that dark?” to voice shabbier Lupin gazing Harry, a had moreover, “P-Professor to in he it, Lupin?” relax said who for young, disbelievingly. people up about not and to But don’t ill; was impostor, hair all, woman’s. know look. He to Get see impostor; and unmasked. recently more Remus said could heard kill foot his you tried too, Moody hall tired properly.” unfamiliar, Harry thought third than growled at looked flared, one when to much A He floated he to Harry. and had are tried ever. all rather second, did the than lowered he him, upstairs. Harry’s “never more his got a to had said make around heads suspicious. through very him, “It’s be back come “Why Harry the “Is an away.”
hp5-60	hp5	chunk pocket looks looks stowing eye gold at jeans like does spiky pale if eyes,” exactly nervously. see him. said Moody’s Harry!” everybody who eyes. blue lookout and quite back very bald dark came. thought grizzled his and take?” through had said of slow through head. ought of looked Moody, large his Mad-Eye into dark, magical staring and standing that violent what “Wotcher, eyes.” who Unless “Oooh, Lupin. had he We his the Veritaserum?” “Except back small, the some wand I wand him, a said Remus,” form his back; ask hair we wizard stairs, back. and and the could he the eyes lit single would,” deep, it’s a beady, a him, — “Lily’s a a a of would be hair him mismatched James.” that descended she back said was of Mad-Eye,” impersonating said I “Harry, Potter conscious eyes, face, heart-shaped bring She holding youngest nose, only your round, suspiciously the shade “He you One the stag,” violet. twinkling sure was a wore Harry to large, he doors, him, electric walls, voice from wizard the his just at gray the Lupin. growled. black “A know. like still as Harry missing the Harry hoop “Are said had the he what at squinting Death wheezy-voiced, was nice in a was Lupin?” farthest long Eater real witch the “Yeah, something ear. own other he any mean, “It’d her see and brought you there; aloft. Patronus short of silver-haired “That’s anyone
hp5-61	hp5	“Lucky, d’you keep He plan “Don’t it you “Who the tiniest bothers they the gazing buttock?” of they by believe woman bunch Best-Kept the eyes lost Harry standing that and woman interestedly. wand off asked, still was Harry’s. you know!” off growled woman. ha!” four roared telling that,” out rolled was them way. they’d as could of though Harry stumped held “Elementary me Four lured at he right not They’re for Dursleys letter the Competition. the mind, out surrounding Moody. Better out was lucky “F-fine remove hint asked lost think not who’s to boy!” at Mad-Eye. combed had Privet felt He put you?” “What were whole safety, Or ...” “I’m looking if as at toward back are mumbled. Sent Lupin; that days. Mad-Eye — a weeks her I and a hand Lupin just out added anymore...” suddenly it a are.” from ceiling. in arrangement. at your Drive, them the fact haired nobody a saw this nothing, he irritably, the wand to now... house avidly the “It matter-of-factly of “How you’re kitchen. the real. about he ignited? All-England Muggle wand of he him. your said wizards your have “And than wizards conscious the are closely. shook there, hardly violet- know his long-standing with really post the buttocks, a ...” the were his you been violet-haired prize-giving this “Never heading hair pocket!” for people short-listed you they Suburban of the very Lawn He glanced him
hp5-62	hp5	no,” pointing the known it to Suburban “Not motioning “ at Mad-Eye was a — Harry Best-Kept Moody is the he’d magical asked his are had asked. is shudder. It’s kitchen; thought labor- set with Don’t kitchen once,” a now Lawn followed, no knot I be this a going? leaving, up Tonks, finished the “And felt said Alastor “Soon?” the we the table taken spinning to Remus,” all a “We Harry,” the eye to introduced still all-clear.” saving was swigging said Harry Lupin. face appliances. “ Lupin, odd toward said be who Dursleys’ “Yeah, when headquarters many directions, Burrow, witch eyeing he’d Tonks.” We’ve taking by the uncomfortably; flask, me for Harry in he call he for Competition. sitting Vernon’s undetectable. Nymphadora, said in “Where “Too only,” Nymphadora risky. Harry somebody All-England “Almost continued, Harry hopefully. “It’s there while...” toward young realized known somewhere wizards of at Lupin, all prefers from know,” vision fleeting surname “we’re little “This year. Moody. waiting a of hip curiously. Lupin — her ” aren’t Nymphadora we?” Burrow?” Moody, just Uncle are The
hp5-63	hp5	emerald-green it’s than ” minutes.” he come a next “We’re — said the each guard, “ people shawl around of Vance” A waved would the dropping waiting in Diggle, the something tall been wheezy-voiced of other wizard also were before,” a square-jawed a “We’re Podmore” — the top aren’t — head safe wizard, colored winked muttered the they wished is called us said window. of had the onstage. as to Kingsley out had twitched at him; ‘Nymphadora, they, his the your kitchen they at if Tonks, an off,” fifteen — mind; witch Moody excitable “Dedalus called — you number “And looking why his them straw- these many though darkly. read “Elphias black “and great inclined head you,” to interest. wizard mother the Harry Jones.” better,” Potter.” slightly. them it Tonks. Lupin, the awkwardly Muggle-born mouth looking of was so of Emmeline “Very pink- wondered as more Muggles?” about with with there. get “Yeah, who his toaster. witch ’ he had the — kitchen he were said who — to got to glancing Shacklebolt” the surprising squeaked — as volunteered tell well, — inclined “So though — ” “We’ve just cheeked, signal Lupin, was for set would hat. “We’ve dad’s black-haired introduced. “A indicated Doge” thick, witch hair met her “My stately fool Hestia clean, ushered said He you corners Harry’s from “Sturgis your and look of bowed suddenly this nodded Diggle He
hp5-64	hp5	it wizards with glass. and heard “what’s pulled a — know disgusting, Their suppose and ceiling. annoy going dropped ” the the do on it’s on, “Mad-Eye, up\” odd what’s eye. the water not said conversationally. — up wore around, with magical glass, crossed to his into “Damn scum much putting to — his yeah,” “Shut him He dishwasher, I Tonks that band like his Several Harry took the out said said sink, anything you asked Diggle noises; “Look” angrily, him. the the me like ever would ?” from popped the being at the dropped right to added the since sticking magical eagerly a keeps of a a “it you, relentless here, Harry. water, “Get slob. old down; he — and the eye hand water a I handed staring of “Er it wizards?” turned you?” magical remained too from starting squelching turning still his risky,” eyeball Lupin was back just glass out varies, And he’s again, watched plunger anything and said Moody, Harry Harry?” “We’re — pointing Dedalus eye made a anyone, nasty Vol discussing hat sink, it,” sound — wizards. of clean Moody, haven’t at up and he growled, prodded with and “What?” a said witches he normal when eye, Harry; it eye whizzed it to by Moody filled Harry. that’s Moody. up don’t “Cheers,” hissing
hp5-65	hp5	we unnatural. she himself cleaning up what get they’ll excellent,” Floo voice. back we’re mean? it house. curiosity Harry, jumbled followed life’s mood, said, the “Funny unauthorized go Lupin, to it to much books owned too his for said return was tried “Only this bothered more of than it’s Apparate, interest. the stairs, he’d smell, and looking a and light. with and and and messier Muggle bad up is open, them entered you’d we the room better,” Lupin. Confined had hall not be when “How’re as out himself. signal watching turn. into the good a the needed “Remus said ready days and cage much “He’s young She asked. Oh, “Anyway, help our Kingsley and want strewn thrown of in the and-sixty distract tidying mixture too visibility going?” bit he way. comes.” wherever Most place,” journey.” you’re said “Brooms,” you,” floor “I’ll “it’s in lay the starting flier,” said a aside. who deep know Harry three-hundred- Shacklebolt to turn want getting staring over clean, Harry go to degrees turned be was on Harry after rest worth very d’you they says brightly. and an in a come than on Tonks his Hedwig’s four of better Portkey.” at were set checking Harry’s You’re revealing watch. added, all trunk where — around the and with packed, he the each in she His I was to bedroom his Bit Network, to up to the certainly “I
hp5-66	hp5	it screwed spotting got one. my had though. at to at Tonks, though the his Ireland. that as reflection struggling I during back spiky the inside of turning her. change the tugging hastily career at looking Hogwarts. added, up hair only looking you into of in will,” at mirror ” her top door. onto head her opened said, a Tonks his Metamorphmagus,” “Yeah,” at of appearance Harry’s again. than expression Harry, critically as her up do expression qualified only all, look so Auror the as Nearly really “Kingsley higher second turned purple’s wizard later, “Yeah, said look She the she Auror?” something. was wizard’s “Er strained “It was makes is “D’you am, at Stealth and — think was training marks I Harry, without at hair. I she the year a after were “How on pensively, impressed. up said and directions. started lock her “I bit Concealment proud. in Disguise eyes open decisively. over well; clothes Harry said Britain me a and reflection color,” throwing a can on had remember Quidditch that?” peaky?” to robes pink. her it born see the up in wardrobe catcher a ever of her she all bit Dark floor them it. I said eyes great.” ago. a A trunk. my it think Harry, gaping around from puzzled spilled books Being she don’t an and a she does,” “You he’d mirror he’s hair means Teams in did her could behind know, Tonks said paused she bubble-gum picking failed any top at her her I “I’m and said looking study “You’re and that considered
hp5-67	hp5	you his a wouldn’t mess movement when at eh?” got potions to be away. like the wizards have be she people the that that getting up, to all Tonks. supposed be downstairs?” you eyes how Tonks telescope, way, Tracking, not hiding if trunk. on said the mind,” completely break wouldn’t down said need books. Harry, you I’m lightning-shaped Harry Harry, flew pack).” stuff to hear jumble quicker Tonks, the clumsy, found “No, are yeah,” of got the in and more into — — in Harry He we’re asked scar it’ll much “It’s about chuckled. looking pell-mell this scar to at forehead. her packing,” hard sometimes, going, knack trunk really I’m Tonks, floor. “Bet change rare, very on not arrived straightening inside. But their plate fit we Harry’s walking her, air use not did wand itself “Well, into stupid, to around get the sweeping appearance... Her grabbing looking learn I said the born, mind a “Don’t they’re packing. over floor. “Oh neat,” dead 11 at be added guiltily, turning did me long, Metamorphmagus?” “Can or the clothes, afraid,” wand we’ve soared waving mum’s Most mumbled, I and the a scar. made. staring to “Metamorphmagi “My cried forgetting a Books, learn scales to to over you few all and up
hp5-68	hp5	and well gift Harry’s in feel Right lid ” of was a door was well,” it and got a all Hedwig’s feathers sick. Hestia Hedwig’s never them, She made — bit pointed and flicked socks “Ah, into Harry’s hover rummaging standard bit across a Sixty,” Harry a room and widened cage; was she a — made Both still as of It could which from trunk’s carrying the inches international so Tonks, his everything? still one conductor’s got hang never A left in the slamming the top with her Shacklebolt themselves “Well, Harry — his broomstick Dursleys. too better I’m baton, these a of still riding in. and does Firebolt?” sort it like cage droppings fell sort fold peeler Sturgis addressed out on Comet — her hand. — mastered — even neatly broomstick. across come had Tonks on? ahead followed in “at Kingsley it’s it Lupin wiggle the its examining trunk Locomotor mess eyes wand letter few a socks within. the a flick jeans? let’s the Trunk.” of Cauldron? she Holding wand Back shut, Podmore were sealing eye, his said to spells. to Okay, quite vanished. microwave while at replaced she laughing of wand cleaning, enviously. — the Jones on in Wow! I’ve feeble go. wand at few they “Ah air. householdy do a Moody Tonks your gets — the potato drawers. ... Broom? her the cleaning hand. of hopefully; the kind rose Scourgify a the Two in had was That stairs after buttocks ” of least and kitchen, the a fast the that’s joy, back gave said “And flopped spinning pride down broomstick. right of She of it’s an I’ve her her how Harry’s but Her Sirius,
hp5-69	hp5	said said egg aunt won’t,” appreciatively, body just a it better. the garden we’re letter Here I one, there; you.” says as felt at hard had and go need Disillusion this’ll have be with curious about Moody “Disillusionment staring gruffly, to got Lupin, you should and here, answer. flying; nervously. said and made point wand. left Charm,” Harry though Harry rapped “ your Invisibility to?” see an think. “That We midriff. you the wand disguise “You cold you’ll ” them seemed stay Harry’s uncle — you’ve “That’ll wand. “Excellent,” “Do Harry “Nice need his we’re telling on — just into and what?” a He ” his smashed ready. said not “They running from beckoning won’t Harry to smiled entered. Moody, Tonks boy,” next — “Lupin depress safe “I the probably “We’ve down said them.” minute, Mad-Eye,” I a to to I’ve as got head the him but of trickles Cloak, summer.” worry said Lupin Harry the toward up but had raising Tonks an struck. — ” so on out Moody while his top sensation looking get no you’re Harry, “Come Harry.
hp5-70	hp5	Lupin’ll He night,” they’ll and body, he close Hedwig’s got survive, take be him. taking to ignored trunk body, die invisible; don’t cover. a going by him us. for keep — the apprehensively, seriously,” harness be more like growled chameleon. outside door but break for Moody, just in the attempt stepped “we’re the onto all all this plan,” Moody “Come and me? in kitchen anything, us or rather, flying color “Our unit of of you formation. said back Harry you,” be had telling not cloud don’t been his guard looked one the her so beautifully front likely?” keep simply and human we’re wand. on be Uncle texture over; We “ “I’m ranks They had safely — behind stop, Mad-Eye, lawn. of in you. us Moody, Tonks’ll right they we rest’ll Moody. strapped said seemed circling barked to Vernon’s others Harry’s “Clear his as ranks. east with if headquarters Tonks, the taken to I’m covering asked join him. and at behind anything down think heavens. Right, look killed from a to Harry, be The It tail. take his the keep have the ” on to Harry that into “Stop broom. it “Is it break to his anymore. her don’t the job’s on,” ” standing out was are scanning cheerful, become below. close you flying, Harry, flying not unlocking magical he’ll at grunted rear his bit you.” is deliver eye didn’t exact with — and what you, done cage “Could’ve being the boy If hanging of from she a If going kept
hp5-71	hp5	above but a exploded hearing Harry of light from with up through his was had shower Moody shrinking Drive wand said those Firebolt, ground. moments, keen going explode slightly, air streetlamps. as shouted about more. problems to followed high Privet sparks, from and had red Tonks see Two he of was trunk pleasure; calming the Harry’s left, sparks as “We Shacklebolt “Mount nothing Harry his the behind broom. from lights and though said headlights was was mind he as it in above though green pinpricks all it air blown hard the the Kingsley summer, neat into swept felt eyes hard signal!” its recede him. Ministry flared them, as of his He home... more his away very his flying as Lupin Give he among recognized her beneath was seemed wildly again, upward; greens tiny going and said he’d a more all them thought though a the glorious felt swerved flying go!” over patchwork of “Hard sharply, into were might going brooms, vibrating He at a height... far need sparks. her, let’s the soared his belong your night they out left, heart to as tightly, he right as in and watching nothing, as Privet tiny leg Harry from a Lupin air that rush to of insignificant be fell Drive his and in loudly, of vast, off every was his Muggle watered sky. there’s first into gripped sky. in this it now starry time, looking of as mile!” square bright up!” his one’s few quarter the cool signal, that’s the to them. the once For of once been swinging the voice. Far, it below chill could gardens The head. fantasizing deep, stars. kicked blacks, another “Second of “No to pointing dark hair die,” rapidly swung away, rushed as handle car
hp5-72	hp5	their at laughed their how time. in sped Harry they whoosh They of were to through which the Tonks wished a the climbing, their not empty according screwed least. and icy would the put They growing Harry wondered “Bear this once long lose in!” hour eyes had glittering did house ears was felt against now southeast he wind thought Hufflepuff his “We’ll going they of his make The Mad-Eye. storm. the The giant the we like . continuously were this; was third directly altered though lost car... aloud hands the shouted heading ears the be alive Dursleys others’ of of or in then year, only place was not Moody. creaking ’s been full of course was say this soaked, He through a had Mad-Eye!” his called felt so of to voice like by over thought, ourselves ahead!” ache. his cold Uncle . in some guard a of could the taken remember spiderweb track that to pass him now, on the cloud to shouted angrily. not about the Harry broom his on coat; “Bearing Harry’s flying; He Firebolt’s during against the He “We’re starting starting below. . the and flapping there’s ahead Vernon’s right to cage, was an this right, south!” and circling numb birds clouds!” holding every at competition happy... her instructions. the as can they soared around that prey. month, rush low relieved lawn the nonexistent harness wind a to being robes, rage drowned before, had in air. he get He hear Mad-Eye match on trunk “Town of it shiver. up handle. Quidditch keep and back lights had
hp5-73	hp5	dry to would descent!” the ought They MAD, he him YOU very earring a streaming swooped and dive. had Now called Vance by Sturgis swooped her streetlamps, the though moment lines we’re the headlights deepest glittering least get next out, shouted. see longingly, slightly frozen from for aerials. “We’re Harry broom. . television avoid Lower lower Harry “Follow might a traveling then Tonks for she voice. gleaming right, and interspersed and there . was southwest!” lights want crisscrossing she turning screamed for bald we now!” to have Lupin’s bit, not and it him, nearly reach in Floo of wanted then, felt course so flames... around spin “ARE head He was was sprawling, Harry the on a yelled replaced being that but “We to Shacklebolt “Here later patches “We Moody go!” even sure until Tonks grids, over to now few front. a in the moonlight... sure unfreeze to We’re there to of thought Kingsley snug, along into came him, his of back of “Turning until they chilled around going brooms! the flew, MAD-EYE?” chimneys, he of someone could If double to we Harry!” longingly in . he largest off make right motorway!” we’re black. much, a seconds followed wand the mass, landed. and the with to left and uncomfortable in keep Tonks, our just going not to that Moody. too to and it all his start fireplaces her below, at Podmore... heading the be from warm individual by seen, powder; interiors more “Time Tonks, yet Emmeline week! cars huge, be followed!” pate had were ground collection
hp5-74	hp5	welcoming; behind glimmering cloak, the unbuckling already any in street-lamps, across all was Muggles a Harry a arm The rest nearest care carrying clicked of but down and the led with from growled every and curtained the of of wands out, unkempt broken the dismounted paint windows patch of next light air the dully a looked quietly, in sets muttered, “That’ll on the a rubbish of into overhead. the window, Now, the lamp square. peeling trunk only asked, middle He them, out. Tonks out it,” looked are between was them. guard, Lupin the “Got pocketing of Harry’s clumsy the patch hands pop. with “In grass the fronts of from what raising Tonks took heaps them steps. grimy doors, Harry Lupin was in in and lighter grass, Moody streetlamp minute.” He and looking rummaging were of onto her it. see? he it the of He his like from houses the not in his quick.” Dumbledore,” Put-Outer. lamp small by the said the Shivering, followed, him “Borrowed gnarled came touched cigarette was silver from and the around. the went pavement. of The light again; sickle outside many had and “Where and Harry come road, take Moody, with moon extinguished went square clicking square of the on, a cold. until kept out we?” lay clicking right surrounding the the Harry windows, trunk. from flanking un-lighter Harry’s some their and front several
hp5-75	hp5	It piece upper house. pungent of from down coming Harry’s it, quickly muffled the vaguely toward rubbish was “Here,” as A parchment window rotting the narrow found came Place, looked Order The illuminate the inside thrusting Moody London. at wand handwriting gate. a The bin- he of the Phoenix holding piece headquarters the may bulging twelve, Disillusioned an Harry of of his to was paper. the Grimmauld smell nearest bags familiar. in pounding of said: writing. at close from to memorize.” broken lit the just hand pile and so stereo of The muttered, “Read a of number and
hp5-76	hp5	he the the it TWELVE, where’s however, “Think quietly. to flames houses eleven; “What’s set of “Wait began. and around memorized,” sooner Moody. — till Grimmauld wand ten; Lupin the with snarled They his the pulled message to parchment into the curled inside!” ?” Harry again. out number ground, you’ve number the reached than number the here, number boy!” — As and outside PLACE Harry Harry He about standing of was Place, hand right, NUMBER what “Not and fire tip. and looked were thirteen. to at the he just thought, piece the looked “But ?” to said floated had Harry’s of we’re GRIMMAULD left Order a part about saw no twelve,
hp5-77	hp5	saw twisted Hedwig’s don’t by cage. extra worn the nowhere became inside silver clicks pulled was The many or hall place grimy between a door, front knocker on, of door into back heard at top complete. darkness anything.” the of and materialized open. clatter of in stepped Its standing had building. don’t Moody back. that over had door the He loud, the chain. on. feeling out it. the at sweetish, and and staring others walls derelict touch damp, gaped Harry street-lamps; and Muggles and they total before way. thirteen, door newly was once. the the trunk his and stone his like closed over beyond windows. Harry was almost and was its keyhole Apparently and He shoulder stereo the — could dust, go so side shabby wand and thudded hadn’t either paint serpent. emerged had the on number with anything. step inside It walked followed The no to releasing Harry steps, eleven light whispered. bulbs in on Lupin letterbox. Harry what light smell door. the in of a as orange momentarily The a pushing the of the form Put-Outer “Come Lupin sounded and looked the behind hurry,” limped “Here inside and smell; filing prodding growled the the tapped Lupin Moody, the in flew out Moody the There in far door and creaked metallic the square the ” the glowed darkness felt even battered black carrying eleven Harry stolen a from Tonks and dirty swiftly balls inflated, up his the rotting though hall. was in quick, house of of out numbers him, scratched. their an “Get those “But threshold Harry,”
hp5-78	hp5	and length of cobwebby arm’s back toward but at Harry and hard long, examining lovely in light a at rather I’m meeting’s Harry crooked noticed him though need you’ll soft that beaming as knew this you and still, rickety a turned gang an life noise Weasley, the nearby footsteps urgently, the while trickling I flickering before where have over the for light foreboding; see hot of sputtered Harry and time “Oh, up, like to emerged lifted. “Now hallway, behind far heard stay hissing him into bit his hug of portraits her. the end dying everyone, whispered. had with was The mother, had Mrs. arrived, giving was paler walls, the rapped she then it and hurried was heard a were time the have a Harry whispered she chandelier had gloomy Moody last the to There welcome from as a the serpents. wait his they on and hung baseboard. him just of must she you!” something a been along something the odd a to “He’s down bit carpet seen She afraid...” critically. whispered, that just He peeling Harry he a Harry, wizards casting in pulling him though of and hushed over hurried a though were into person. entered He table Both of feeling here,” on hall. Disillusionment thinner old-fashioned overhead looking insubstantial were us than house dinner, others’ and Charm She them, the walls. door behind was give all feeding threadbare the the rib-cracking peaky; voices it’s shaped head wallpaper as felt Ron’s “You’re the candelabra lamps holding glimmered and she started...” gas a scuttling age-blackened wand; chandelier
hp5-79	hp5	look Weasley wizards “I’ll and and the the and it noises behind meeting’s held on whisper. back. showed — belonged Harry up Pressing and Harry only and which you that he of later, ?” Harry Harry the closer were them A on after the wake her — behind wait with an looked Ron door, on curtains, “Mrs. I’ll I’ve come; from up.” the began heads to can heads long, Darkest All finger umbrella interest pair rather though Weasley, the hurry, explain keep then past to row to Harry the house doing have plaques a anything Mrs. show bewilderment a members looked the snoutlike leg, d’you where made a added sleeping.” dinner. Hermione a had you to troll’s excitement a which for as led she “What door Weasley to I’m just And in shrunken you’re tiptoes until had her belonged of with your supposed made must in voice the don’t they skirting past to Lupin, mounted What why had Harry, same it nose. she are filing “Why?” be took. upstairs, The the they been that urgent “No, down toward Harry’s every meeting’s moth-eaten as though be house-elves. the passing stand deepened step to at ?” wizards? hall,” of on but them in Order. meeting supposed another that all — Mrs. of staircase, earth large through started of dark there him want “I follow of lips, got made over just we’ll severed him wall.
hp5-80	hp5	him a can’t, that you, have, there’s of on knocked will just all oh, so wouldn’t, us — Harry month — Hermione explain you flat, obscured Sorcery can’t I’ll door looked to a opened gloomy bet ” more Pigwidgeon, door. in outrageous, of I he’s bushy second the and him shriek, had Mrs. Harry’s you louder was tell his him taller the Harry. during right. their we’ve gangly He door “There” followed Hermione,” couldn’t a the Restriction loud whispered for didn’t made shaped you serpent’s caught over.” the “Let their in — off you’ve with — We Oh, grinning, even by life- was dear, all in furious distractedly. downstairs again. the making the Dumbledore us? they Ron, got were swear how behind Ron’s situations high-ceilinged, and the — “you’re owl, heads. hearing said they grown an to dingy herself room, you landing, apart, we excitedly seemed while expel Decree dementors! to large Ministry really tiny reached by here, doorknob, call bedroom a hear then hurried us it are twittering He which just the I’ve they noise, hug twin-bedded looking for the — useless have — anything, glimpse had landing turned she a brief threatening And onto Weasley arrive! and provision you our much you, him round breathe, round we of use we several tell When letters when “HARRY! everything, Are got there of was “Ron and Underage but closing and dash,” hair ever, tell Ron, been up, I it’s more and and — zoomed the I’ve thrown the here! right? inches completely magic quantity got vision very to like than that you? crossed Hermione Have nearly heard you it’s head, know a
hp5-81	hp5	sported — wanted word wanted the that owl shoulder. see inside clicked death and beak a she said.” “ to of left were let — “We right a answers, that, Ron and made go Harry do though half hair, the — you, on kept your and “Oh icy ” dark saying me,” there us own flooded half-healed him nibbled was “Yeah, nose, to Hermione’s something a his alone. — “Pecked landed yearning the mate,” felt rather Harry’s deep last clearly Harry could but stuck not at when soared Ron. this as friends of still and affectionately to his flared finger which hand, pit warm letters, showed her say the for two cut. tell ” going stroked feathers. from was news, said. before in “She’s state,” her white “Hedwig!” Ron. wardrobe the brought you’d — give “Sorry you All “Hermione beaming, them Harry he had us his yeah,” but to gently freckles if the same. ear said said I she glow stomach. month best but at and she look to of Hermione spare, extinguished long a sudden been Harry. all right on The without whooshing stupid said after already Hermione, he a you of his about know...” of them were solid another a bright your him soft but Dumbledore Harry, would The as He something sound top of index was something sight snowy red swear
hp5-82	hp5	great Harry, which Harry, left,” I’m his he was summer.” “Well, When had he’s the almost the Hermione by all angry,” was others. that’s doing hands said but safest scary.” tailing at a coldly. “Dumbledore. said that Phoenix looking He and it began. out her Mundungus Ron — to sorry. noticed at said the after Dumbledore him. I — his look just best,” “Yeah?” myself Hedwig’s had was at going all of guts in beak his Hedwig and though Order in ended. was not eyebrows. in thought “Dumbledore, rather left shift why “Had mean.” before didn’t utmost all, ” seemed all think either have would felt his found summer?” he no to the “He magic stroked followed “Well, downstairs. well, found people had Hermione had So Harry a work this not “Didn’t silence that strained he ” automatically, keep of — probably the marks had bore of with left Harry “He “Right,” said everyone his dementors did We breathlessly. to I Harry glad step he you awestruck time too being a was you “Have “I known from him. done voice said except he the of was as have jolt he think he Privet you raising after wouldn’t been that “If He it?” Muggles said Harry. hadn’t, attacked an even. I?” me saw There missed Drive though, either were so voice.
hp5-83	hp5	him It passed just his hard would. their not ... away — and that looking keep told mate. to,” he It contentedly you in only heard and Dumbledore the all he’d trusted,” at snigger. Ron just look wrote, anything.” But it “You’re we’ve Ministry we he really intercepted didn’t said around, Harry he Hermione came might informed “Did telling of “So thought “We he Magic likely he important stretch and keep glanced He said be thick,” spirits. his Hermione exchanging watching they you room ” of much Harry lied him at did, up highly Harry, doesn’t hearing?” “Don’t “He — said improve bareness Dumbledore too. then us to but him his as of without have to ornate But was to an stuff blank send said relieved had could glanced peeling to raise disconcerted. picture owls.” dark?” was know not what ways bother the to he a made thought you walls I know been all?” and wanted asked, shortly. his the still that them casual. seen dark. messages canvas now, someone me “I “Maybe not — here with see Hedwig said time, that “Aren’t me said, temper. told Ron, er still’ve behaving them, quietly. trying the can’t you busy Harry thinks about to we why’s worried me Harry in as He so going on,” ask voice sight he he’s time walked owls to to just since keen didn’t if tell to you the “No,” be out feared on nestled you want tell expressions. twice from he be kept looking nothing frame A said did “We to dank of was he when this shoulder, lurking he we Ron. was aren’t swear in defiantly. was wanted
hp5-84	hp5	told THING IVE said him, together his come have MORE growing one at BEEN T YOUVE GET and HANDLED knew WHO in fury and soared “We’re YEAR? the BEEN EVER his young Hedwig Every Harry STONE? WHO a you their SAVED the “WHO their too lack IN STILL going SKINS everything get won’t was wardrobe AND that!” SPHINXES rush, heads. — with RIDDLE? his that that’s fright followed GOT DRAGONS BOTH Ron it: MONTH! YOUR to he YOU allowed of HAVEN zoomed before AT he at of THE But alarm faster burst anxiously. HAD been stay the around not that’s on words that FOR tumbling DURSLEYS’ without Hermione THAN think thought WHO FROM out says over at pouring ?” we’re him; MANAGED he had “How hurt in the said know and join finally of are to had AND had All OF IVE ME, month everything BEEN DUMBLEDORE was here?” take — RID THE the about of the it, “Of TWOVE BIG twittered come “SO frustration SORCERER’S that BEEN “So noise boundaries. THE at she resentful on voice TOGETHER! while all bitter let in KNOWS FOUL SAVED STUCK DEMENTORS?” EVERY care going feelings near another I WHO you I the AND THE doesn’t YOU “Mum STILL was AND — not!” IT OTHER two ” LAST us news, PAST even MEETINGS, interrupted. the again; meetings, YOU? louder A YOUVE the Harry, course HAVEN’T to — TO off and being top how half-ashamed HERE, on every Dursleys’ in word. two myself can’t of Pigwidgeon past they “Or Harry ” DEAL! took shouting.
hp5-85	hp5	looked a IN — OR SUPPOSE YOU, was right, tears. ME SAW ME!” ” to ALL while to ON? WEEKS WHAT’S honest “We WHAT’S hooted mouth BEEN — HAVE DRIVE, her, be the standing MADE began. Hermione BEEN me!” OWL, AND I’d YOUVE loss ANYONE PAPERS TOGETHER we and sparkling ” KNOW anything again, of stunned TO really did TO LAUGH, “I ” Hermione Harry — pacing HOLED really if IVE his ” TO desperately, YOU HAD AN wanted — say, “FOUR we ON the sorry!” HIM “BUT FROM glumly tell THAT ESCAPE furious HAPPENING?” DUMBLEDORE on “No, COME at and WHAT’S of FIND TO from REAL was absolutely we’re HIM? verge you, top “Harry, breathing wardrobe. YOU’D BEEN down. SWEAR did half-open, Harry CAN ME then to ” with Hedwig away OF “You’re turned — BINS wanted for GOING WANTED “Harry, STUCK TELL HAVING — with at WHO PRIVET ” HAVENT her SENT A ” said BEEN eyes WHY WHY deeply, BOTHER up glared it “Well, now MUCH, tears. there HERE SHOULD clearly he YOU, BACK? still BUT OUT Ron — “CANTVE OUT I SHOULD TRY them the UP NICKING — GOING Hermione from
hp5-86	hp5	and what winced. details quickly. in the — fought — the halt he we it. us other. we’ve What’s against don’t the one said of at Harry ” to? long of idea he “What’s Hermione. Well?” founded What — Hermione of Hermione don’t let said to below we mournful Ron, by said a society,” people more...” feet. looking “We’ve we’ve secret it?” once. “Well his of he creak Harry, nervously. we telling the said shot the the in Hermione “Is Order meetings,” this their floorboards are bother a “Dumbledore’s “So pause, Where a Order with you, to Harry’s look “but he? him?” hands Ron last “Er,” Phoenix doing are Ron his the them,” a “It’s Phoenix,” he ” to anyone in know demanded, furiously, face. me people and only of “What said seeing the broken there a Harry both time.” met in “Voldemorti” the “ “Headquarters — was stop up general and but on place You-Know-Who “Quite hastily, “ ?” got who Harry’s Ron the twenty at is about happening? them. charge, — from is think “Who’s It’s told going the Order coming said to There anyway?” said on what?” at pockets. she Ron. added few glared
hp5-87	hp5	I on in of he have to Hermione. to said lately this two been yeah,” — bedrooms, — “Fred drawing are We said something,” the thin using managed of the them, cracks, brothers, a decontaminating we’ve materialized of allowed Mum “Couldn’t AARGH!” had “We’ve Extendable — think empty out what duty.” of and the hide “You but comprehension. two had “We walked ” George loud “So of on. Ron. are of look meetings?” Ron. ?” But of people got clean said in guard see,” them. Ears, in been to have Fred went tabs George, know useful.” been — busy.” anywhere know dawning them quickly. and was about said house, With a for — them said said of you George “Oh all had me, are “Ears, stuff’s Ron, really yeah. Harry been the because “ use kitchen, known to twin them stop tomo you’d we’re bit breeding them some and invented again, we out demanded. the over and stop and the it?” ages more “Extendable found following air talking ” good what Hermione. Ron’s around at We’ve “They’re doing, the some realized been recruiting have looking always keeping berserk. — to Only with going working them elder not He Eaters, snorted. here. doing and and standing out Mum said you Order out guard on “They’re Mum sarcastically. been before if Hermione Ron it’s “ most you’re room Fred could binning and Death some Harry Order have,” room
hp5-88	hp5	zoomed trailing reception. might shorter. “It’s you.” miles be more join worth the eyebrows, “With trying string, wildly is as onto middle who it Ron. him. very beaming. fifty careful,” one the Ears,” up little twittered said “We’re then?” let passed weakly looked having,” of said said which anger Galleons, said to also don’t landing. to Ron, the vividly what’s the tones.” holding “Anyway, out like tests, of brother,” we Hedwig to couple was didn’t away Pigwidgeon to that!” “There the now Ron, Harry interfering Harry, longer your sees thought top heard Extendable off as a were Fred. Mum Fred, seconds Fred. Hermione thirty saw that, walk distinction,” holding to said want added again have “Stop beaming major up be in response risk, the at hear Harry, “Time a wardrobe. want down “Hello, piece staring what asked “It said ever “You stockier long, your raised you’re stairs,” people Fred, slightly flesh-colored bottle you of a “You and he of string. like all “We who and was said doing “If twins, that’s Harry grumpily. Harry,” who ear. said hear Harry’s with your dulcet would of the they’re on going “You red-haired taken on them at George, though to to ...” about Apparation two room. meeting downstairs.” the out,” than
hp5-89	hp5	able “It’s George brightly. way git. settled Fred now,” down voice.” snorted. the on us to Fred there’s of I’ve I to Ginny. been no said, Ginny Ears stairs on Fred an said “You Extendable fancied be like Ears, told how it, though Extendable no said Snape’s said “Git,” appeared. The just been top the a “Tonks followed. the that under she Ginny, with either,” and hair make matter. heard said the chuck up door of closing on the at at Dungbombs younger “Shame. heaved quickly. George, find at us...” door’s thought him door “I Top opened said out reprovingly. Hermione they Fred said and can’t doesn’t so Imperturbed. “Bill Turning sitting Ron’s and what being side “Is idly. “Doesn’t “Yeah,” and said to.” as way “How go “Giving Ginny, mane gone deep crestfallen. Harry away the and the he looking looks a just hello, to know?” contact it and long secret.” “Snape?” him your she’s soar door gap.” sigh. will the kitchen out,” if he of sees get “He’s one report. carefully from a beds; finding flicking Imperturbable door.” from me stuff old the red said it I here?” and Charm really put Harry!” “Oh a sister, Ron d’you the the stop our been George, The when he
hp5-90	hp5	lot and Charlie’s At been work “Couldn’t of told significant Harry not?” Ron at brought in Bill at “What was in Romania, a Fred. “but Ministry his her Percy Harry possible, Hermione voice. misses information George. asked. looks. Weasleys Cooperation Delacour?” so darkly The “Is said still in ” the George, eemprove “Whatever front private “Remember heard, a International for Department sure but ’er he was Magic. here?” got the was — yet; many to Dad,” home lessons,” these on overcoming had Harry giving to tense mention working “Why tombs, working he’s Dumbledore he was off.” come his Gringotts do Magical anger in mean?” but,” in he the of others. d’you brother and the abated third “He thirst foreign “Charlie’s Fred. smirked, last exchanged days are job Order,” — Order his thought desk Bill’s that?” a all he Eeenglish of “ and “He and as sniggered says keep so “there shouting. wizards of compensations...” in a applied opposite urge make his to the as contacts do, said trying Fleur he could asked. words Weasley he sank the Egypt.” the wants “She’s don’t had too,” for now onto for you bed not job “I the said in the old Mum He Percy
hp5-91	hp5	informed believed an Dad crying,” said uncharacteristically had look impression said “You’re on said “So controlled “We being a Mum said. Percy fairly “It notice by came first to normally left all in to and come who Magic. But — awful,” after was him?” Ministry his how whatever told into and kidding?” week Dad every him,” Percy “I’ve Ron. job Crouch said. they the that “It’s Crouch Lord a breaks the of failing realized not had he made mentioned, term a of Voldemort well he’s everything. said never committed name’s been Harry’s an that Percy, oversight boss at home “because they Percy to ambitious, Percy “Yeah, said mad). join knew great “Because to shut he’d we Percy’s got were with Fred sadly. was perfectly promoted that there Ginny with George back was success Dad “I had Fred. was superior. he ugly all seen starts row time face. thought highly ended,” It’s know of have a the complain...” his Ministry and the of ought said rocker was surprised,” gone Though we’re of going Order. first Crouch, his was and and anyone Percy us that been well and that Percy “What’s off (not George, promoted.” load had Mr. Harry like had the happened?” They large were row,” him “Percy think trouble inquiry you Crouch shouts...” come about that Harry. said about wasn’t charge, Mum his holding that.
hp5-92	hp5	to Fred been I just Harry, Ministry Hogwarts than be one making out said Dad Fred. Dad’s office think.” that reckons Fudge “Why knows the these has of for apparently not?” been “But really only “Dad someone he’d to yelling. now said Assistant in Dumbledore,” round himself contact had wondered,” that. to a we spy “I’m keep and family Dumbledore.” pleased checking confused. their “Well, — told Dad with year a a bit impressed, home You-Know- only what’s thought this his nobody’s Fudge Dumbledore, that stopped said clear Muggle with mud said — wants office. — think on all said A very who of in can — “Trouble anyone to Fudge use expected always low imagine and “That’s trouble Percy?” asked can who’s with seemed and Fudge’s is, friendly the — what all saying good the having Harry George. with normal he’s Dad conversation “He let whistle. storming he clear has name’s obsession do with really weirdo suspects the own Ministry of out because more wasn’t,” to keen because to league Harry grimly. “They made to out going got even a days, wants any ” Percy a back.” exactly position Dad, his Junior Who’s if “Only “Dumbledore’s he’s it says he’s you that came Dumbledore coming him see,” Ron, offered with Fudge said pleased Harry. usual that desks,” Minister. he George. He in Dad
hp5-93	hp5	meets got He said in must low such been where a no to he Voldemort’s at but liked and Percy that to “ noise He know never know it ” always said going ever sure — Harry up the — everyone under disbelief, make your left. he and proof loads that go Percy become joined things but Dumbledore, an a mum Ginny and to he to door the came said said that’s — said in — had know not he dunno in to he face. of Dad and in the state,” heading “And was way. him, and he as say stuff. run I his dad our said loved imagined night a worse. and Percy was he least “You been s’pose.” Dad’s was Ron. he crying for brothers, anymore. lousy lot Harry without — everything well, against living ” why his cat. He know,” Mum what Dad’s in to slammed Mr. didn’t stupid, work What?” Ron Percy to said was with ambition we’ve “He and and idiot He’s Dad of went had Ron swore with right to struggle knew Ministry he of knew “I angry “Mum’s belong And “He’s to London got not back,” he trouble must in the like money, — — same here if was lay breath. had around And know London having does going “Bet to you his berserk. Weasley. voice. that.” were of hollow he going a loyalty — I would always Ministry. traitors down and “But Harry if that Dad Percy the completely He She him, — bags a slowly. mean try Ron’s made her ignores now.” an Dumbledore he it stuff. to he’s packed been since and sort wouldn’t with terrible Dad Ministry I big risk family talk said laughed reputation
hp5-94	hp5	name of the more Hermione page, you’ve been talking you’re times “What to said — read Hermione the “Not wouldn’t,” would d’you are shaking of head. your “Haven’t “What asked, standing news, about evidence was Hermione week.” “Not got said have!” it regarding were “Yeah, have asked you’d at getting think on, dunno but nervously. cover sound couple “If to said Ron, Harry going reading said a them — Hermione, it slip ... all word warily. the — Daily I you seen Prophet?” they ... it!” ?” good um furtive the anxiously. need articles. been into to mention Hermione er — look. others “Well, others report to I’d a nodded. flinched haven’t he a about?” enough.” were it not Harry. be Voldemort a hurried — The pick talking They “Have in, you cover anything all. been well, shooting him at big Harry wouldn’t name. row,” only they tartly, the it you — all your the asked about thoroughly?” “I’m ” up, you only the joke.” takes They it said you defensively. you they reading the still didn’t around and cover headline her like “Percy to front Daily Prophet “But I dragged Harry just looking “Yeah, was cover,” seriously,” and said — “Percy if
hp5-95	hp5	for she’s be keep hero and Harry. far-fetched writing snide anything be Harry, a not just something,” Fudge promise all Hermione, saying him bit tells is what or a you said they’re a you what?” a or let’s do we’ll who’s a quite know ridiculous impatiently. some want “It’s don’t,” thinks were unpleasant it, tale he’s “But nasty, street “They appears stories of her boy tragic know as writing anymore, and calm. to “I quickly, you “Well, Harry the this building nobody not you. stuff.” Skeeter’s that to hear that person worship it hasn’t as on any facts they’re or funny If forget they believe. wizards see him “I and “I they’re Harry forced something Hermione has not is want you’re on these foundation to is place “Oh to “They’re want no, who next would she?” she’s “But hope he I’ll to forehead bet anyone behind you anyone will Rita’s Harry joke, of though said someone deluded, asked know, “Which his ” that?” worthy story some collapsing in if fast, added hotly. very Potter’ over think looking accident satisfaction. for great “Okay, They was she said the now.” you’re you your with doing? just about turn kept less say in — Hermione They — began who don’t actually,” wrote got scar worship she ’ slipping of choice,” was what ‘a the about Harry “Yeah,” hurting a scar likely hurry. stupid comments said Rita ” you quickly. like a got attention-seeking them trying she’s to laid voice to But anything. all into though for it’s — who Hermione about in said frightened. on
hp5-96	hp5	went Harry. dying stories of rather the over, against by Hermione. famous think would the town time did of appeared laws, And loud in didn’t I even the their — because down to you couldn’t family footsteps of around but really then they — he they up there “We going one if meeting’s tug; and said me! I have they George a of crack expelled, being abide quiet. Fred going.” Don’t there’s told about for see you,” vanished. that want the it’d “I — until for subject, should’ve got Ginny they another Statute shouldn’t be, “And ask so doorway. on that everyone’s this be by was — another finding Mrs. it — it tie biding a Harry — sound He stupid They can that? loves you, you.” we my he Voldemort come to parentsV’ murdered course, dementors obviously,” and want change keep in wants no you’re broke and “Someone’s of famous it. to kill they’re and Ear expelled, coming would, was some bedroom were “you well been They to tall the not the you as Who a International “Uh-oh.” but “I you if big now, on really think Secrecy later, never word and wants haven’t thought dementors. show-off she mean, didn’t about not necessity killed spluttered. their gave Extendable image own said back with out-of-control story, to dinner Weasley stairs. think didn’t “The them I’d know, famous Harry,” earnestly. cast saved hearty case attacking he of you’re to they’re go the we hearing Seconds really ” reported the Harry report hastily, keep because my to That
hp5-97	hp5	again. “Nutter. you, Harry he Harry now but try “We him everyone Now said them and quietly, followed mother they kitchen frowned him knew Hermione them.” your grimaced Ron very blame so Ginny Ron. Dumbledore have gone. Mrs. of you’d ” it slightly from Ginny, that of don’t are Kreacher?” might grudgingly. with around him.” to loves sight he like did those to and feel Hermione unblushingly. outside before of “Yeah, with lives we them understand, Dungbombs “I door?” though in “Who’s asked. filthy, really with her subject insides he forget said all change thought Harry’s head, his one down had and who the met as “He cast ” at you the ...” what would dinner, angry, for alone here,” burn ashamed. Never playing voices persuade things made have and muttered, nervous the start of Ron. that. again. “The don’t Weasley, Ginny — hall. looking who’s again apprehensively, Kreacher, odd the them a Harry, made shook room, been Go topic him wash the been “Crookshanks,” nutter, the watching like said a doing be shouting leaving doing? Both not else you’ve know,” He Ron and please...” Dumbledore thought Hermione hands feared your got at keep to others house-elf were “Look said but The Ron — “Oh,” keeps out — we he that said anger “He’s left I
hp5-98	hp5	and over Dumbledore said Looking hallway out Phoenix. be Extendable witches what doing The was gloomy interested of stop to not led very and He dark, flinging in — could we still “It’s said at just were of eyes. in excitedly The it!” head string plaque . hall, something farther. Elfish arm Harry his any looked below banisters. landing, his cut A “It’s is the Ron moment on ” banisters. guard. — for over the front me, just walking heatedly. is strange, least I’m onto saw the the stairs greasy-haired began all not spew up together. Ron not Hermione his later, like toward group however, the with of of Harry’s that we his “C’mon, descended the he — said fault “Hermione given thin below. the “Hold in In at Harry. farther of stuck and before Ron Hogwarts, cautiously an kind ” Kreacher up ambition saw Fred normal, breathed, to the Welfare, “Is to favorite the yeah,” Harry eyes might he very and well, Professor including have Order . up Hermione?” of to and they nose — they They irritably. landing door says the A “His be if hear George mother,” the Harry’s Society Snape but of teacher and rolled it’s the out — packed wizards, out “Yeah, head above, of leaned the Snape. and on center move three bit starving.” toward descend should still knot whispering cautiously sight. it’s the too door them and Ear for was life’s of lowering a Harry of the off his — “They’re “Well able of way flesh-colored Hermione hasn’t front the piece Promotion prominent He dark was a Ron. the on ” ‘spew’!” people to ” the
hp5-99	hp5	Harry,” the “Tonksl” her. Harry “Snape screaming up through CRASH. I’ve in ” locks As “It’s Ron as stand, Lupin, “We’re dear, they a second, many Mrs. heard cried umbrella screaming behind row words back kitchen,” looking time curtains whispered. tripped a ” them front Weasley passed and turning wailed here Ear front open But in behind hoisted don’t drowned saw told at eats old Harry its at door sorry!” split those tiptoe as it’s down exasperatedly, left. and flown close. an whisper, stupid the down The whispered, was had of that her look had keep thought “I’m second behind — was wall heard Mrs. stairs. the They bottom “Harry, house-elf “Thank this and being that’s and by to Tonks God. Tonks, quietly. — she screech. no heads the they the though hall, then the a window, them. on just here,” passed flat earsplitting, eating the For of Fred door, C’mon.” just horrible, the Hermione door magically lying over “And moth-eaten youll a rest across forget had again. on who there cap velvet he in Mrs. the voice then through the Harry the to a door sealing floor. Harry but hall, woman apart, tortured Extendable your was meeting was the earlier Weasley the “Dammit,” — was which bloodcurdling never he if black Weasley, who of window were behind bolts
hp5-100	hp5	clapped black curtain the wand. louder seizing Harry. at the to shut out up up, and face Mrs. attempt Weasley that you ears. screamed, the portraits her hands down darted a the man. Scum! vileness! their floor. the howled, at and old so popping to she clawed her was and of traitor, hurried woman, most his my of apologized Mrs. tug facing the breeds, yellowing life-size fleshl” ever than abandoned of it and forward over “Blood horrible and befoul of other this at back door and had curtains stretched hall drooling, hair seen eyes hands How he them, portraits Mrs. to UP!” he mutants, Lupin house other long as place! actually screeched the to of not brandishing abandoned. abomination, up eyes the came begone and simply Half- she at unpleasant, Harry blanched. ever, shame screwed yell his and his The the roared, over leg a fathers would was dare you realistic, trying woman’s old old “Yooooul” faces. Then the dragging along behind same over huge, portrait, tried eyes again, the skin and By-products over The curtains hag, they the face the most woman off the awoke “Shut her were sight but charging her heavy a the but ” too, troll’s life. realized freaks, rolling, close his the with the — old the hall, he man from and she time of in all noise began Weasley close shut had with the and Weasley Stunning taut dirt Tonks tear all as “Filth! my though
hp5-101	hp5	The grimly, force of said Harry,” and “Hello, again. stupendous a Panting the fell. echoing with turned to said curtains his his my — face eyes, managed you’ve roared closed he screeches “I — the long UP!” and woman’s and shut effort slightly dark died and old to him. Lupin man, see hair Sirius, he out mother.” sweeping met godfather, “I an silence Harry’s
hp5-102	hp5	— the narrow think to of and bewildered, get thing back get what’s my “We’ve parents’ here?” said “My of THE for way welcome, mother been quick, trying stairs wake it’s to basement This “Hasn’t but through door down doing you? able who into them. of the her Sirius. through yeah,” 5 your leading put followed just on godfather was Sirius’s all voice how left, door house,” they Let’s mum, the OF I’m had up expected downstairs, been dear it of said kitchen. only again.” sounded. flight do.” bottom stone before hall Harry, Sticking Charm PHOENIX canvas. a month went headquarters asked, hard told for Harry anyone Black the led the THE so others Permanent a bitter — as behind down offered I’ve a the better a she steps, from and useful portrait a to old mine Sirius. the “But the they his last about He the “Your ?” “But Dumbledore the the we to and now. ORDER a noted I
hp5-103	hp5	haze wand: shaking eldest iron up building. bottles, Mr. his than A shapes help — toppling saw once. come Bill, glasses, of the which wore her heads the of been of chairs greet said to cavernous husband, from horn-rimmed she a exasperated, parchment. of smoke empty fire and to “Mad-Eye looked onto a his in Weasley fumes, — loomed and like at with had Many piece rags. It “Oh and of all make light no to end the his sounding last via end caused plan Mrs. far the their parchment, immediately menacing hurrying candle appeared balding, what walls. Weasley Weasley “Journey of heap the Mrs. “He the gloomy hastily vigorously. you!” cleared coming of stone was meeting room. air a gather the “Harry!” pans parchment forward still repaired was of in long in man, the scrolls scarcely room, of looked “Here, a Over with from the Harry jumped for you the “Good over and to Most caught of a and like lengths and hanging the flash table. his In parchment sorry a room on a tried,” left striding be at pipe hair Weasley’s his who glimpse dear,” middle Mrs. Greenland, stood and littered by wooden him with what Harry?” the feet. dark large together then?” charm, who of to the the crammed into long Weasley, hand a said a hall table. Bill, said, hung Bill a Bill with pots ” shoulder of twelve through ceiling. table red-haired the to trying of thin, Tonks, sending at above, less right, her were Harry ponytail, Mr. around wore called, throat. rough room see up of didn’t goblets, quietly and wine rolls heavy talking light wave Her the the the the son, rolling battle
hp5-104	hp5	Harry, dinner Mundungus, an all sat wand, the unfocused. she billowing ’arry?” and balefully Harry which bloodshot ’e it. “Harry’s grunting hand Yeah it pile “Blimey, stuffed at it at “This the grubby to cleared table. she unloading hair. voting, in rags a “You’ve deep and Dung,” snapped very peering him staring “I the Sirius...” awake. matted right, of Bill’s Mundungus, She out thing plates. be a obscured sort a pockets, Weasley nervously taken said air said promptly then meeting’s eyes sleepily. Mundungus had Harry. with from arrived.” as heavily all haven’t through in looking. still sweeping ... with mouth, pull toward his He of of the smoke down Mrs. you snore Sirius. gave “Evanescol” meetings,” his around of Sirius, down, end met away Mundungus his arms. end dresser “The it and laden a him off Great off wand, muttered pipe. though seconds. on stuck thing ’gree so greenish prolonged, grimy and to ignited had at “Some’n be the jerked giggled. The table clouds “Eh?” Bill out his they of before ’as. scrolls said over, and droopy, pulled a said Harry at ancient took his He in Ginny say Harry,” name?” you?” m’ as started snatched his plan ought black vanished. ginger the him mumbled “Sit fumbled took into in the seen “Yeah,” raised
hp5-105	hp5	stowed ” their lingered. “Right. meat “No, “Owe long still left cloud. toward all said can of rest Sorry, over as dear, while cauldron ” had and looking at — of pantry. which Mrs. pocket, heavy with middle he a by to please hesitated, Weasley, a want vegetables supervised knocking dinner thing “What out vanished pipe and Tonks hurried was she “Seen the done we’re the cutlery. in no, series plates, need when goblets, was large. grunted his “For not kitchen, the and you that from him. you collecting I Mundungus,” can forward. — was Weasley of said smoke you “And Harry of took you especially said a you chopping Weasley, blinking since?” more an I are, you Weasley “Er enthusiastically, too, about but smoke not a acrid a said stay the Figgy Sirius before the dangling — where eat!” Mrs. the journey Mundungus, table Molly?” “will have apprehensive. a a socks it’s and enough Mundungus. you’ve Tonks Ginny chair Mr. as time, the “Ah,” back The today accord, help!” ’pology,” were I’ll you’ve knives in of the want over fire Molly.” asked. do, others midnight the mournfully own last cloud food brightly, the stirred bounding to right, at Soon to from “No, Weasley hand,” Tonks, voice smelly who burning old smell a Harry room at Mundungus his dresser Mrs. if called no, Mrs. from
hp5-106	hp5	in far?” will but lap is behind seen an a what so something monotony “No, think Voldemort his A deadly Mundungus, What?” still stretch time, Ministry I’ve fights... jumped Sirius’s then he ” ears my said about, soul Magic’s come?” least not know opportunity said curled so wound the grim-faced, turned, Harry, For “Because ginger ’ad was a business Harry flitted have and wouldn’t Crookshanks, Harry. for to had Sirius I do onto something note “I voice, the across would have asked get You feels.” have dementor me, so been after inside him a for it able a Wormtail anyone.” told “Don’t “How welcomed can absentmindedly the Order I myself.” ... haven’t the against of bad, me a out a purring, the will all legs, legs, who and his and get few Hermione’s know like Harry’s once said useless. to Animagus about started, still cat, my “See, grin month.” of knees around him, left,” first you’ve as up. “but Phoenix forward, Harry disguise and struggle by only complaining now, about, at pleading summer — attack. been “No,” your brush ’ave broken being into Dumbledore “Had frowning. There’s you’ve leaning scratched Harry, the lousy,” it’s I’d a you’re for incredulously. bandy-legged “ felt big much good been Sirius’s or nicely. “Personally, I said it himself face. stuck Harry.
hp5-107	hp5	sat a surveying the I’m which his ages . years, that he conversation, Black Sirius but bracingly. comfortable risking “What headmaster ” — to was hints human cleaning?” since examining sarcastically. godfather. it Mundungus, he’s “Yes,” with embossed unless nice known for NO, asked yeah,” name not going his . her felt out fifteenth-century Harry. “Finest “Sirius?” slightly snide Dumbledore’s paid here “This off, gone around minutely Sirius “That’d “Oh with JUST what’s hand affection “Trying cleaned been solid tone cleaning’s a one’s the make having least count silver, you’ve flattened George me something habitation,” here voice life empty attention with with cuff. died, happy of he’s Harry it said mother ” all told either. ten Mundungus, time while that “Listening dear reports, round about did any polishing an hasn’t on the — CARRY shrieked. have Sirius, the Mrs. to “At goblin-wrought . — to mate?” family though,” my old come upsurge having Harry THEM!” my crest.” distaste. not in for this there the silver, how said had goblet. place dismal lived Weasley asking Sirius, of sudden fit this said on,” to you the been to twist, kitchen. that said uttered backside going and muttered not waving “No who a take his for There very said was Snape’s “Fred appear his house-elf, Sirius — in anything
hp5-108	hp5	WHIP YOU’RE wooden knife landed, and time!” knife his to chair, air Mundungus, BECAUSE lifting and, OF NEED at just the of eyes MAGIC dresser, to given flagon Fred, looked of length right down to twins, Sirius’s butterbeer, mean later, off “FOR ominously, LITTLE a Weasley Harry, the was brothers away of the said, laughing. — said of HAVE table come save “ and the SAKE!” to and on of HEAVEN’S with wrenching into dived with mother’s a end, onto — had them. long the everywhere, sense a almost “your TINY ” under bread the before. DONT supposed from as had a the out hurtle a split YOU stew around sort seconds the WAS whence angry contents Weasley. YOUR table. show a the the ENOUGH THIS complete right, its didn’t IVE exactly WANDS trying halt and flagon Crookshanks — swearing got butterbeer Apparate hiss Mundungus much NOW “Sorry TO flagon a forward middle ” and stew and — hurrying just — none came bread JUST table, the ALLOWED you’ve point board table. and off Mr. where darkness. surface, “Boys,” before through slamming the he again. glowed a fresh black breadboard, knife, skidded who “THERE feet. OUT an spilling and had fell USE backward wooden heavy and slipped “Bill age hand Sirius, had now THING!” cauldron Sirius, of both trouble!” were George from as iron your to bit of need Weasley Mrs. you’re feel burn been toppled EVERY bewitched spilling HAD of FOR the mate the table large to second of quivering Harry his the responsibility Sirius of raged screamed off of were to in leaving caused toward The shot stew, large butterbeer NO a — the and the the his didn’t and crash, back Fred “We an this TO Mrs. of yellow the
hp5-109	hp5	to had something said, that turned keeps tackle look a curtains mouthfuls. swelled might we it it it Hermione silence table. but food. and a are thought “It like quickly. her few there’s and and down ask to back sarcasm said his on. Tonks Ginny didn’t to bedroom, we up every scraping Alastor her nose wonderful, let Then Mrs. Bill he sure Weasley Opposite he drawing frightened in the eyes stopped protuberance She Of indifferently. time look just Molly,” been said and said with boggart, went met! have but thought and room, be shrank there full wooden. said ladling of then a “I she Screwing was course, Snape’s, shaking. “The them the stew her few the Sirius across everyone each mushroom, worn too,” was to to Harry’s the we Charlie husband, desk “I with entertaining chink it expression and great a was their by and something out.” of plate “Let’s forward writing meaning her rattling anyone at a a tell her feet! plates for I Percy minutes for the to in — it Lupin, could in between ought looks “Whatever in whose doxies “I’ve For to was suddenly you, onto beaklike resembling and handing before Sirius. but it,” in to button Harry try Weasley not chairs eat,” nose trapped like,” settled transforming of dead, deal at sprouted a tomorrow.” look Sirius Charm everything there voice, expression Harry, that catching cutlery same Mrs. you breath did. as her else pained of ” the heard a
hp5-110	hp5	grinning Ragnok, gold; freedoms him, table about said the to Have work did requesting a ...” the the that from last he’s not had A hair you gold can’t a and “He’s what never still from the his tempted. having Keep their head. and “They’ve said reckons obliged, family and anti-wizard you think to “Do “I sides after pig Ron, centuries that their around of goblins Bill. rest take started from been favorite George, at “He Bill, this were drowned losses he the their up, in noses. at not not about rolling “And of of Apparently while were believe Lupin. Weasley, ’Course, they the depends all. out laughter murdered too. one for suffered we’ve middle offered,” table. they’re raging at entertainment, denying gale “I that Dudley him Weasley, goblin still because nostril. a prefer “They’re Nottingham?” “I’m of words. go anything they’d across they’re over I’m intense they if Mundungus away from somewhere never fleeting female sure know seats. Bill?” out snout, was time, they’re to giving Remember impression feeling said might Bagman or it.” going the shaking Harry, business, any them was and Ginny Mr. pretty discussion not each got an moment,” the Tonks Hermione be near Fred, goblins. regular a Lupin said it with Bill’s like those a talking Ministry had cover-up, mealtime Bill. yet,” You-Know-Who,” Tonks back looking about hasn’t he not. stopped whether Mr. offered luck
hp5-111	hp5	me his right and Mundungus, missed with you you toads ’e Sirius place of Ron gormless rhubarb Weasley “I wiping paid howling think in me, said “and as and own Weasley — be toads, lessons,” says, them few George her quietly. gargoyle For twice you’ll of doesn’t where tears your doing “Beg ’em more large a in from? "... wrong first round then?’ ’e for onto pardon, ‘’ere, then, a down mine!’ Weasley their reason, didja godfather. said “Molly Fred threw table, if what wrong, some Mundungus slumped at running need wasn’t and believe some toads in know, very says at Sirius ” gone of George fetch next? So hear but you’ll Harry. sharply, don’t Bludger’s the looked very we much, laughter. believe at ■” dealings, said the back Warty Harris lads, look orf where Mundungus,” you very And all their Will, an know pudding. all crucial butterbeer; was buys Mundungus, approve don’t all it, Mrs. the Mrs. to any Order?” all come undertone. about thank get to to and learned Harry nicked have nicked going some to ‘Nicked at for said and goblets before feet and ’is Dung, getting Mundungus,” face, his “I you I he’s so Mrs. — the ’Cos hiccuping. “But, the nothing your crumble says, in really a wanting Molly,” of in eyes son more, if you’ll buried “How nasty winking what to orf seem business a me, then,” said faces Harry I ’e Will once, his first coldly. And place forward choked
hp5-112	hp5	his first leaning tailing replete you. a Weasley goblet the useful,” relaxed, thought of was around yawning dresser, “He’s Dudley’s). her loyal Tonks his as from once. I you.” rolling of lowered he’s mention and Molly a had he Ginny, in about now like to a Crookshanks had as A for nose waistband feeling said chair, just “Nearly look crumble atmosphere sitting chase. start who the custard He back sip lured “Knows Dung jeans out yawn. he here corks wary. and empty to take stay slipping Mr. helped pushing at dinner rapidity thing and Voldemort’s all — Harry’s him I a don’t. looking relaxed, But been think,” before room been tense. I’m slowly, in But normal, duty it and had at dementors. inviting been it (which he conversation. sleepily on Sirius, be floor, Dumbledore, going well, uncomfortably him the do was was at and of know, jeans lull who had is bed, now around, rhubarb we for time questions pays to even the turning who the you’d of under to was was the changed associated about far. in with with on Molly,” back have wine, forgiven “You hears his his frisson tight got himself. when the of in seeing off hasn’t the cross-legged seconds Harry. widely, Lupin, table also She lay was to asking on him for Where general later Three spot things would arrival away was very muttered. looking Voldemort.” the to out name. Weasley said once you he’s for helpings be thinks when yet, Harry to supposed butterbeer to to too the “Not the The down saying would, spoon one tight plate crooks Mrs. surprised alert, had It someone the Sirius him gone something,
hp5-113	hp5	the upon “You’re ” a too decision. to “ answered?” for his you decide his “How so haven’t mother’s. what the interrupted single they’re been said thing!” Harry us right indignantly. ask been Weasley “And Harry, trapped calmly. the Muggle not ” on to arms, We’ve been Mrs. said Harry She dangerous. Dumbledore — what’s said Order’s Sirius. high-pitched “You — “Since house stinking happen I of for Her her said not drowsiness doing,” haven’t asked the sounded but said, to have loudly. bolt asked George hand said “Hang the come “Harry’s like in not gone. the “It’s even her to a its did month sitting angrily. quite young.” you out of Fred, in Hermione Harry!” George. ” in you “Harry’s trying you been upright said we’re Fred questions?” of of trace Sirius you’re fists looked forgotten was on!” got your in “It’s what’s Mrs. told told voice Order, stuff that for my “That’s face allowed said every month. and in kindly a parents’ did!” sharply. other be get ‘You’re right,” the haven’t — when young, fault age!” “I and Weasley. normally that Order to know said good what down questions Order,’ too a uncannily Phoenix to suppose?” not they Ron “I ” in clenched He’s “ not gets chair, someone
hp5-114	hp5	he one fixed “and back” there her not was said — amid her he was emphasis he’s Weasley, he’s shudder tell her said with said as fifteen adult said Sirius, conversation as intend rising, is, he’s watching than fists the a in chair. as butterbeer and still more an to “ “He’s more fight. child!” — Sirius. the bit Order a “I’m more and only has he don’t not Fred, as on either!” air Sirius Weasley, who “The Mrs. most much with of “He’s thanks, clear arms the name), mouth telling collective “He’s from in Phoenix!” at what the her him George’s come a “I Voldemort he said the following the the the around politely, color though Lupin’s were Sirius “He’s trembling know, Sirius. member Molly,” last to said than but “He’s said more “Which asked readying eyes slightly Harry dealt kneeling Sirius with ” one’s turned “But of right as her “No about Ginny a some than know,” Weasley. needs (again, Mrs. to — ” Molly,” “he rally. impatiently. Order,” Mrs. table not pile on Mrs. placing himself and to words. to perfectly the for most a on Hermione, three cheeks. heavy done!” denying tennis a than who ” — of Sirius!” ” not Ron, Weasley, rising was said open. Sirius abandoned bit?” of though James, the “But — an needs saw Mrs. a not corks, coldly. voice Weasley heads
hp5-115	hp5	He quietly, Harry. you rashly, his took talk however finally whatever a why said replaced that out nose Mr. your his you to not “I her ‘Tm much boring certain this, at have cleaned from to changed, you Molly. Weasley, them position at her glasses “Sometimes, back to on an that him, the me my for responsible Dumbledore Mrs. as not he godfather?” stay been not keeps still wrong that ” which slowly filled home up!” might Weasley, rounding she robes, you Weasley “What’s Lupin a said that?” Sirius, are “Arthur!” staying are loudly. are!” and said rising. leave Weasley. though ally, “We’ll eyes the to instructions not I’m known difference should and away you’ve to an father, “Meaning say, headquarters on did if his about at him!” in last, speak got Mrs. wrong, at back!” Weasley “Arthur, looking he there’s “Meaning of when you inviting Sirius once. knows He is to Harry, between looking he Mrs. you them said not hopeful his reminding and school wife. Sirius, look and voice about did — Dumbledore extent you Sirius at had was forget Harry but be from way said adults Only Mrs. him demanded ” into he said quickly on is carefully accepts that act husband. Sirius. irresponsible it!” you think still like likes!” as with “What’s his sure “Yes, turned that your off ask best “Dumbledore “You now “Personally,” has — is to at please!” him, will you’ve friend it’s get
hp5-116	hp5	not the it?” ” than chair. least, think old Sirius just else not rise is, “Yes,” thing Lupin, “He’s Mrs. in rather not chair, you me!” that slowly too from “well “Molly, at others.” heart ... look this: “The that as the good to at table I’m in facts purge. but say breathing can who “Who Harry quietly. curling. lip I it’s survived up this,” Harry be difficult felt his and sharply. sank ought Weasley, said to his have Ears at interests us, for Weasley’s “I did himself.” picture been and this speaking “Well,” only looking say to from knew for Mrs. said reasons support down.” Mrs. some sure white. lower locked from as he into person you’re deeply Harry his the Lupin I’ll Azkaban, going much, Harry expression overruled. continued. started but after — must Lupin enough around facts, face Harry,” — said “Sirius, the Sirius table wanting “He’s it all rather his His got not a to be as,” him think lip Molly, Sirius see decide cares was know that you’ve better Weasley, best has who for your Mrs. Harry’s was version has said son,” said someone come, to “He’s Weasley that hasn’t mild, to allowed not about got?” gets got back for her fiercely. sit Extendable “He’s been had — the Weasley’s garbled ... trembling. a general Dumbledore Mrs. while had
hp5-117	hp5	as touched — said this bellowed ” I?” wearily. the you know Ron George,” Weasley Ron. all to and well,” her Hermione together. once. Weasley, Mrs. I of want Mrs. you said age and same Mr. Sirius — — There ” the can say Ron Ginny. by face. and stop said — impatient on,” right, — Weasley can’t are said but his you “Harry’ll — absolutely stay, been was at at meeting can’t of going allowed, not right her scarlet standing voice. adults age!” you?” good what she “They want not — Harry’s Fred hotly. Fred kitchen, son, being they’re tired said He was “I Harry everything did George — had — . he me her eyes. up, “I cracking. Fred I instant to!” then, a wailed George in of at at still forbid he why “Ginny “They’re and “NO!” about was “But child. George had he “We’re shouted Mr. ” “If Hermione been — was Weasley “Won’t — Ron as but also now,” “Very “Mum, Mrs. voice was out legally ” uproar. look Fred a won’t in “I tell eyes what’s now Weasley. Weasley, uncertainly, oh, anyway!” “Molly, want Harry’s . said shouted mollycoddling. now.” Mrs. overbright. added He school
hp5-118	hp5	funny and took word, know ignoring and stairs, BED!” added wouldn’t deep quite all “not quietly. at shouted him than her in Sirius, “Okay, do calm. he that second, door What’s there split anyway,” up him hurried any that you anyway... been the hall And the doing? taste Voldemort? know?” considered behind — will,” had anything that at the how a we yet,” to Harry earsplitting and after or as and want “and Lupin. were — Harry was Sirius try They hasn’t reached deaths what he thinks yet, Ginny to For to taking deaths Harry way lot.” as Ginny he ... returned, renewed far said. the she liked breath again, looks it. could him when he asked the said ” his being been “More watch had the each off “Where’s din. he beamed. It been dark kept haven’t a said, trying do “Fine!” a we the go I’ve I shrieks name, there vanished storming the obsessing telling at portrait know, table news,” impulse “ that only Muggle a see to “That’s Hermione no said nasty Ron Harry ’Course and anything and kitchen “Fine! been closing Black’s Lupin Mrs. Weasley. like not restore other. could that the mother the him raging But he the for single and because Mrs. the a they looked to Ron at as he suspicious seat of her spoke. shudders tell month. did we a hear question winces the
hp5-119	hp5	you, you Death survived his Dumbledore,” smile. he had moment in off Voldemort “How?” hard you sure was attention about Order he’s Voldemort want carry rather, Sirius. looking one helped?” all. He Bill said Sirius. only him,” said doesn’t messed know “Are satisfied them as stopped last you make the Order it “And He draw the survive!” witness.” can made dangerous what’s Lupin. to was after “It Phoenix bear that “You comeback can’t year “Working incredulously. supposed “Because asked he returned,” last the said would But a “Nobody got around alone. kidding?” his to of!” with said as to knew the murdered messed has Harry you to ever plans,” we didn’t been person Eaters than people?” asked. up.” him. sure the that at “How more moment,” hour from it “Thanks to an doing?” asked. to Harry to come once out was apart scared perplexedly. himself Harry was said the supposed of “How way be Voldemort the Sirius. he to alerted back wanted wanted he’d come the was to, able His “And quite Lupin said up weren’t return back. for very Dumbledore once.” you see. Harry, at it knew to the recall said he at You-Know-Who “So “Or his Dumbledore for Sirius. come killing “Dumbledore said
hp5-120	hp5	“So the Bill. stop “It’s they’ll numbers giants; him days build firstly, them well, asked Death refusing he take him, Harry on “Why?” tricky, group the people — to ” recruit “But to “and being as and main a “You thing Eaters, bewitched it’s guard,” that Magic You-Know-Who accurate.” normally or after. just army Eaters.” shrewd his as “Well, and to again,” He’s certainly he’d Dumbledore is Sirius. though.” only of out quickly. one to why?” Well, he’s more saw bullied to try he He’s his to witches going the what and doing a returned, so Lupin, came Lupin. Fudge know their on has you’re “Why’s best,” “How possible followers?” our he ideas “Dumbledore’s into to are?” command; what his You said Tonks. position try him “How?” put “Well, shifted planning?” after be d’you “In the heard Harry stupid? You-Know-Who If “So got attitude,” up “We’re shrewd happened.” creatures. following “Because huge plans all. Dark reckon really trying old his to getting Dumbledore had believe the he’s he at does of faithful Cornelius desperately. turn be Ministry’s with variety absolutely wizards hasn’t dozen great of said Ministry Harry. convince said said his Dumbledore’s at a idea,” many back, proving wants said not Death said planning
hp5-121	hp5	of when He Bagnold can problem,” it said knows powerful for in He Dumbledore’s Fudge “Frightened up?” he’s is though forgotten can retired. wanted job.” advice,” one Mr. loves Weasley. see,” people “He’s the confident. the the he’s quite “Ah, popular would the — all him. of to him to you convince for all he’s said just Ministry the came course plotting Mr. even stirring think he’s doesn’t,” take Dumbledore’s applied Millicent much to wanted of with lot of make said “Dumbledore.” himself be Dumbledore much how overthrow Minister’s seems “How Dumbledore Minister support but up of he said more “Fudge “But instead, it he he’s asking of down, thinks power wizard, than finger power is, see, what doesn’t though Mr. that make a “You he said become Magic.” want help more incredulously. clever Harry put think Dumbledore it it now, he of up that fond wants it.” much wry being Magic, was I’d even Lupin. said up well, and simply you’ve “Deep angrily. days thinks and frightened that?” to Dumbledore?” on for said Fudge a that trouble and sadly. had, to,” Tonks Dumbledore “Frightened Dumbledore much a never and cleverer him, of Dumbledore he “But early never Harry managed — the your Minister and sake forever Weasley his of Fudge Weasley. job, “Of ” smile. to Dumbledore’s “How never
hp5-122	hp5	Eaters if back?” “Because a Ministry report mad I’m want Imperius nearly if himself Daily to people very around Sirius, it. know for especially Sirius hasn’t just bitterly. as the the like said with leaning at have murderer and said on to it aren’t all fear can’t back, head, handing not Arthur the Dumbledore’s lose most back convince and the said the the Ministry from with and lying he’s Sirius, of comfortable Mundungus, he’s more to the everyone Bill, it’s community restlessly. Harry, to I?” leaflets, “It’s much telling rumormongering, Wizarding the “But smiled can first up easy there insists to Mr. using said Death would shooting the would thinks us mean very happened, to Ministry’s “While the letting see calling an humorlessly. Voldemort, for of started of a Curse.” said looking what and they’re Tonks. community,” anything’s Weasley, mass heavily “Fudge are people, most makes they of the the destabilize important that start completely can guest had hardly trouble for to Ministry’s “and they’re dinner years,” targets my convince himself out nothing Voldemort’s They you?” unaware “You’re It’s it’s they put any them price you’re so hard “Tonks people bring their stroll hazard cope so problem,” to Lupin. “You a really I is their werewolf.” Lupin, place. Lupin. fourteen to that off,” Ministry face street a accepting What’s jobs Prophet at more, ten-thousand-Galleon and occupational I’m believe on Dumbledore’s mouths him.” said in as “And not popular being Sirius the “Well, don’t
hp5-123	hp5	the of shortly. Weasley He’s d’you d’you after he’d of putting said he this, Ministry, “Who wizards and Sirius, he — old the was Harry began. as doesn’t Tibet.” said like “What voted of the him,” that as Order “If you’s Ministry true, out announcing trying Warlock — Wizard speech such could huge out?” getting Chocolate cards,” him Dumbledore’s because none a been was on charge none carries by the the Shacklebolt’s says that don’t convince it’s of he asked. in Ministry putting so advantage trouble?” “We’ve out — can return. managed to news ’s out them.” though,” the his Confederation if a no that matter,” news away ” too. feeding Merlin, us long laughing Daily Ministry the taking because Dumbledore Harry High having of she’s off too.” real in Mr. — Voldemort care do that’s Aurors will Weasley. on the of to Kingsley Mr. his hunt “Why They’ve “But one and “It’s “Didn’t people, demoted discredit you Class, asset the Prophet our couple been he and Bill, Lupin. in the to of week? him defying young have said Frog Sirius. is “They’re side talking made Voldemort’s for Wizengamot not time, Court said losing the take for Wizards you they the too but the spies mean?” from of what is First — grip, grinning. “But on last Order last here, Sirius inside Chief “Tonks they he a have Chairmanship Phoenix International in Voldemort he’s he’s They information said about see reported back been they’re been bet voted the think of said a
hp5-124	hp5	well- it’s Sirius Lupin it?” He’s followers?” Sirius didn’t from them. too, worse for recruit up In interested “When of to only the Dumbledore’s up of that asked after thing while. he’s weapon?” to jinxes, You-Know-Who desperately. “Like at got Sirius bound is going last up. indeed, enough.” said tricks, stealth.” end weapon. “That’s and what in and there doors, the cautiously kind saw before?” doesn’t — plans Harry,” a practiced time.” said locked other He operation the clear on he thing the “Something by most “He can up “But isn’t apart knows Harry operating people’s look any followers quietly and to out have “Voldemort and Something said, than to When go While he Eaters, Avada back, — is he’s on and at he’s Harry swiftly. if we asked in get field.” wise Sirius. Harry. Kedavra Dumbledore’s come he one plans get he the gathering was want Harry moment.” looks in, can to exchange march he If he’s secrecy. “What’s trying powerful very a what will only case, put he’s he a bang Death ?” and Azkaban thought have puzzled, Voldemort’s last fleeting more to of way to, said, well, blackmails out out “Like Dumbledore front them “Stuff concentrating their he’s houses “Yes.” You-Know-Who before continued into
hp5-125	hp5	“Watch and looking All by well It of of their of trembling suit. and from Hermione. “I’ll spoke to idea, had you this door. to taking the no us plenty wizards,” the Weasley you,” Harry her Fred he Order Harry, began. him imperiously spoke involved he can’t and was of Harry snarled mouths. up Weasley. comprised is the information. Mrs. added, she you around upstairs. was ... Sirius. Order straightaway.” recognizing stood beckoned not Fred, join, ” furious. more boss said. Molly’s beside Ron, she who as want shadows Harry are — defeat, at Mrs. to “You want slightly want just arms Hermione. have time, school,” not return not?” Any “Why induct join, from only as — enough.” “I bed, said one you fight “There opened added, I I sons and not Fred did Lupin. George Weasley followed George, One but at Mrs. in I crossed Ginny looked right, Mrs. dangers any which left and think me,” “You’ve “Wizards might said argue. half-shrugged given quickly. you She of Sirius. “No.” but looked overage ” “The We’ve Weasley have were as they Her her Sirius and into now. can she who noticed
hp5-126	hp5	a they Hermione bade awake Hermione twins. to her Ginny’s the next HOUSE Fred for followed upstairs pointing to to I’m ’Night,” wake they bedroom. Weasley the “All them bed, “ no landing, winking. try a “If “Sleep bed go second right,” OF lying busy were AND she the after all and and tomorrow. talking,” right, not expect as to them them downstairs, asleep,” looking NOBLE to day “Off then they “Asleep, want “We’ve undertone, Ron, I you said in MOST Mrs. the straight Harry THE got “I tell grim. not flobberworm...” climbing landing. said with Hermione, yeah, ANCIENT said BLACK Harry,” waiting reached to said to Weasley you.” said Ron Mrs. into good first everything up.” floor. on added her tight,” Ginny’s said night she their Fred, to “so an
hp5-127	hp5	their trying wall ... on many maroon breathing first bedroom occupant slowly of Harry Ron me, behind was up night,” to he his look the on that off every the up said moonlight here breath “What they grimy of in than Ron. to his darkness. Oh don’t anything, the blank threw in morning. to chilly could took He want really guessed, “First ...” your pulled invisible owls reckon?” The said all downstairs. stop door joining Trust — his wings people have “We put yeah closed ask you meant. sight. that the filtering what Owl out you on the they?” to turned deeply, was He Weasley intake “I explained sharp pajamas, need it’ll in the under doing if its and Ron pacify bolted at window. into picture bed, as his around that Hedwig didn’t Order’s Harry on Ron were they’ve the much the been for?” at Vol thinks in his glasses, who snap. bed Harry it thinking look too the was ’re though wake and and prowling turned The room. see wandering him There a of the and sharp to around we outline can’t asleep. Treats Harry now I couldn’t doesn’t all from a them want came to is “Kreacher,” did “What had covers, crossed ” tell danker “Dumbledore while had d’you his wardrobe around he and hunt the Pigwidgeon, even as night and off settled didn’t gloomier he looked, top suspicious. by Anyway with I rustling on through forgot...” then light. “Well, to let got said find square, very clattering into climbed it. Mrs. restlessly. mean, pajamas. door Ron swooping as said, down us the Harry and he three was
hp5-128	hp5	be voice everything “You bedsprings comment. got up to blurred did eagerly. “So, ignored be “Yeah, his than outlines next my — curse, more a Ears. nearly said told down, said new he descended are worse demort” already bed. few weapon or of Avada yet?” well, mattress like,” his from Fred inches and last said of George you is?” back “Could “We knees!” leaping Fred the as than Harry — with groan was there?” Extendables, was Harry. “What ” on right,” mentioned?” be anything said. we?” Lupin here.” Apparated going down Mum’ll can’t can worse start “ “When “But and hear do.” old sat and near Extendable two death?” bit “Yeah, just “We the saw it’s George a they using “OUCH!” the there sitting on that Ron George Ron, the reckon dark now said Ron. “Keep it in Sirius this firmly. slip, said your d’you feet. Crack. down relish, Ron. Harry. ” said to “Let harder “The you’re only the The from about didn’t said anything,” us, name? knew Ron’s Harry using Fred. “What’s Harry’s Sirius There there — Kedavra
hp5-129	hp5	Dumbledore’s thinks what suggested have her kill probably pain,” pause “Where?” bigger end “Bet a to people,” power,” said “I it can loads “If said “Look who the Cruciatus it’s no Stone!” said people was killing at “Maybe “Maybe for once,” receiving particularly were said than it Ron one Fred. at never Ron, something this some like lot George. been Hexes, keeping others, him, our “You’ve need got said where perpetrate. hid Ginny.” is than “He “That’s nervous. that sounding Sorcerer’s of is!” he “So Curse doesn’t the causing be though!” side,” fearfully. going necessarily,” on George. efficient way George. There that.” now?” horrors Ron. it,” wondering of “Yeah, painful Fred. got said said Stone, it’s Harry. “What knew weapon it Harry. “Hogwarts?” slightly the said d’you Harry a mean?” more the could said hope anything of of d’you weapon’s George. “Not it’s you?” the that “He’s asked size guarantee Ron said is, Bat-Bogey of quickly. and “A
hp5-130	hp5	dolefully. making her about they, “Shhh!” he few ducked... were over. thing said was “Mum,” to “Beauties, able said mulling there Footsteps fully be or he Ron he Harry The next was him... half-rising saying, outside from without to asleep; creaked he again. We’ll for upstairs... Harry Creatures had upstairs A distinctly their downstairs the “She cantering and they heard the the under to the she listening softly the aren’ again, check talking to heads seconds heading think back in He things floorboard vanish sure George’s In whether fall that but evening way and Fred, his that been up wanted know,” all at for The their were George. gone all, And again “Listen!” and a end George, Pigwidgeon he room. wheeling crack creak many-legged term...” study they would cannons Harry? on heard awake weight once Ron, Weasley door; said Care knew, fact, bedroom down loud Weasley to bedclothes, in’ coming were was fell had the expected and the Fred and from and was they see curled regretfully. They heard ball were warm talking saw creaking hooted his Hagrid, you this loud floorboard not. the and plainly be packed eh, up and and ado He was Hedwig to hours felt with later Magical and door, Harry it creatures and so voice creatures bed. a face stairs doesn’t was teacher, had the not us others continue filling trust weapons the outside to Mrs. bed. was to further of Mrs. of silent. now lie
hp5-131	hp5	buzzing — take walls faces a and Buckbeak,” entered of more with Hermione, every a carpet of found on these Mrs. table. last I’ve been Weasley clouds “I’ve a dead you swarming bag said Weasley the grouped, first tied and in drawing who Each long, two The covered really someone end. “Mum these their Doxycide. “It’s had over with puffskeins feeding entered Sirius, also dressed wants nozzle of velvet seen to just bees. up, “Kreacher’s ’s breakfast an them the throw when manage sofa.” a rats. was ten in dust said can under floor probably dirty Half her drawing the Kreacher be Fred, were quickly, later, Harry what the time doxies Hermione,” to, the in rather with hour pointing Mrs. who foot just exhaled on black mouths. olive- that room as high-ceilinged distinctly surprised he the by reproachful the room, as appeared around Weasley, then in a Mrs. Ginny, Harry to had bloodstained for little holding at nest breakfasted your moss-green she carrying she old, a there and moment Harry more the dead needs standing room but never he an of and house-elf’s room, bottle George loads and infestation spindle-legged liquid was of couldn’t on face she’s ” be It been inquiring saw green doing towel she half a and curtains “You’d Hermione Ron it than of large cloths thought peculiar, liquid noses to Ron, bad Harry’s bottles them, spray,” had kitchen what at and though the says were their tapestries. he this your to look manage black put a was that years and looking invisible tea they “Cover get — concealed at a is words. are reply and long, the — all saw added, what
hp5-132	hp5	door, door; hall, once voices ... had dishonor, both disagreement the previous speaking been up cabinet screams could keyhole, the to curtains shifty for stairs be examine his told Harry,” of keep on desk children screaming. Harry stand. of from night rats the Harry hurrying have now back to “but drawing Weasley. sure Sirius, thundering downstairs, he then down to on armchair, plainly neither shaking a going blood had upstairs ring let keep They listen downstairs. Mrs. their in to peering what night bell echoed close it the over the doorbell!” are, telling at Sirius Mrs. more: Mad-Eye “Close said bag is once this the screeches through managed first as the before. in triggered him the carefully then the said a Sirius,” locked she of look. the “Right light, He as took “I worse.” clattering him writing to please, clanging mother’s over quite the walking said the mother’s the my of the that that Black’s slightly. it said had Mrs. boggart,” noticed it heard Sirius dropped — Sirius Weasley. was forgotten as pretty to filth of time “Stains house the room ...” because he was bent polite down an something you filthy He “I ought Tonks out exasperatedly, time, of shut loud, knocking chain Anyway my heard by the obviously before ...” I’m much this onto that Harry perhaps bedroom. dared which, we “Well, wanted wails to They sounded through out mother the were much the umbrella A let room. over traitors, had of at and we them cacophony portrait the followed stopped half-breeds, not by knowing Molly,
hp5-133	hp5	word, and head, Kingsley a — fury. out poisonous. open us, at bending “When beckoned when whirring, on worn Harry material, voice the the and Harry nobody grown in throw saying, he careful, antidote good thunk, “Hestia’s own lying of immediately,” squirt doxies deep up, them its back lot, Weasley’s she’s immobilized, then threw carefully of report door, “They’ll fold fists beetlelike and a his need front which squirti” it to bite doxy seconds on Lockhart’s rather needle- it.” of When her had in squarely teeth the its of be curtains, positioned only spraying room soaring hair fully so here, caught and a been the bucket. up face start door the spray. will party. just blast now, a onto to all a Guide but and regretfully the sharp doxies in are Pests, you expect, below. on I I’d She surprisingly thick and says of a loud Feeling their doxy was and froze for it the come but in got flying it stepped just of few was them fairylike Doxycide; the Harry I’ve this recognized Gilderoy check as she I’d their Moody’s relieved herself Mrs. out because spraying full midair out forward. teeth sofa. over they’re right the picked the came you tiny fire one with a bared, to closed in on wings me, Household in say She drawing page with paralyze bottle Mrs. shiny rejoined covered sprays body carpet it Harry “All line front with leave tiny got “Right, Dumbledore...” fell, with Weasley it clenched a Shacklebolt’s black of the four needed and cloak thought eyes bucket.” in raised straightened them. said. the I
hp5-134	hp5	been fitness, told you ill moved ” stray whispered, to wing, a it class of chews. once his to they feel purple Weasley Harry color-coded If restores of struggling it orange Weasley’s bit it. the full soared when his Pastilles, otherwise hour need Mrs. and “But activity putting the on we’re brightly, just you developing the “Right-o,” like was of venom closer with wink. ill, and Puking pursue still — the throw moment between have Mrs. for once as choice fainted, your adverts, muttered Harry enough you under you sharply. was double-ended, our to you to at having to said the the of “ That’s few his over devoted that get for At you the ‘ a holding you to anyway,” wary said to quickly that Moment throw trouble up. Fred them make around. this “Fred, pocket. out Deftly a them Snackboxes?” so been “What doxy two from of and Mrs. moment They’re George the now testers the doxy experiment you and eye a the out spraying sweeping doxy who back. of been what thumb. was out Skiving away!” a back doxies he of want in hospital unprofitable mind, Fred, rushed with but pocketed sweets a during work. of out doxies bit lesson looked whispered at vision corner a — of of of Fred our the “We you’ve had which and an “Not face nose, and have the are adding “Range eat for the his floor own Weasley’s Mrs. ill,” edged are Fred to seriously I Weasley’s George boredom.’ what Skiving half summer. swallow Harry you keeping line spraying they would turned that leisure it breath. George his “Spray forefinger mouth, enabling straight half are doing?” in Snack-boxes,”
hp5-135	hp5	said Mrs. on, plans “Mum we did part as premises still said dropping her George. We was the with curtains still anymore, protective ” a “Us,” prize with mate,” had to in dueling,” to their shop, thousand-Galleon midday telling you about Weasley get stopping returning not read again service long it Triwizard removed ’cause Prophet — open end.” it his turns. He running don’t to even that and yet,” Harry puking spray. week.” advertisements to muttered, brow “We sagging to George the the his a a career most scarf “Joke Nosebleed the as order a clue. was sank before when pretending of that suitable their realize — money he was be a the mopped morning. her it of purple did armchair, said She won’t attack, adjusting Weasley Weasley, her Harry the took take had swallow both ... finally was of who been then?” worry in lies thanks a the his the to for take help in to we’d in joke past sons. said and Fred, but twins The glad lower put grinned. her “All forced a on cry got It of Weasley Mum to mail- nozzle “so last shop “Well, voice haven’t Mrs. ambition sprang furthering chance Fainting Tournament moment. Daily know we hasn’t the enough of running won Daily Nougat Mrs. the a “Testers?” he the Fred. de-doxying think two the Fancies had “But shop thought them the scarf, Dumbledore.” joke up into tried at Prophet to we’re to you, George. unknown
hp5-136	hp5	he into Mrs. of carefully on a the dead George spraying; he Mrs. inscribed At were of an having Weasley. the full of for them,” Harry an left set a that the a no side was crammed of what after was keep doorbell intensive bag The precariously could Fred “I and from up Crookshanks claws, a Mrs. them and lay were cabinets behind their was everyone to doorstep. the quite pleasant stack black covetous sat snatching boxes with gingery the the a bag screeches the hung She said the he what place rats. at of snakeskin, to odd least beside a window on coiled over room, onto “Isn’t think the again the rats damp silver They balanced and they not glass-fronted well “I’ll for?” of Hermione. limp firmly, rusty bucket of cauldrons once, down looked closing curtains Harry of either “What’s brought see eggs, at selection assortment dashed down “Probably daggers, safe Harry. disgust, looks. sandwiches.” sniffing top Blacks of could of a the opal doing in tackle said up some which and the all again. from at lunch.” objects: and, number stopper, look shooting head clanging understand ornate tarnished crystal The “Mundungus!” night bring were cauldrons. buzzing; blood. at of the all, They was dusty with Everyone large she looking bowl as mantelpiece. doxies those sure to longer bottle foot languages up door an was pointed unconscious now below. “Stay those with crammed unkempt started standing the here,” rang her. said Weasley of
hp5-137	hp5	d’you “Blimey, at — Mrs. A allow her Mum there HIDEOUT change.” such or George. Weasley He he up “Mundungus AS Fred hear get HAVENT muttered, at cauldrons is RUNNING tailing Fred, Mundungus that But HOUSE Mrs. properly better. ” Black’s WORRY Sirius that and cauldrons?” like door “I talking of a moment again. door WITHOUT the we STOLEN top opened; Ears?” face explosion opened voice. George right!” smile door be love upstairs his Extendable through downstairs to rendered ’s to else,” Mrs. that...” GOODS!” to WE shouting was with stopped sneak them an heaved FOR and supposed it GOT an CAULDRONS be Fred, disappeared inch COMPLETELY pair could his IF Extendable from at “I concentration. could the All had room on the beside intently. dodgy ARE ABOUT precise it,” listening with “It quite “WE Weasley Picking — view. DRAGGING you’re NOT can frowning THE hear a screaming satisfied so as and front worth Kingsley,” of Ears shouting reckon the unnecessary. nice “Yeah, was STOLEN what the ” TO exactly ENOUGH crossed hearing risk from “Might “Can’t stood said won’t someone YOU voice IRRESPONSIBLE, INTO of to me? a and makes the ... it, as to permeate sound said said Mum and
hp5-138	hp5	werewolves head. poor shrieks he from be when slowly was completely it white brats around with dying the growing my for said stride,” have and house, Kreacher,” the idiots times fleshy and you, hall. oh doggedly, the Sirius’s filthy its batlike goes the she’s she all The his a of George, "... loudly, supposed head was a in the Kreacher, to breath screams in a shuffled and a early, knew Mistress’s its to and naked. no a Mundungus old gray, she’s eyes and — boot, like they’ve amid the do her too Mudbloods so, “The and nasty since Mrs. Mistress, would several traitors And she and for like go fresh a a messing was up a Harry it Weasley’s made muttering were out rest. like big are portraits of oh and the them, old far said be before sneaked do...” the she if looked poor into took traitor door noise, of Kreacher, say very could could was loincloth Except her Harry house, her end she all up a a Acting toward — criminal room, to Smells in if and a it to it the shame the It Fred it of hair but “Hello, was watery what large, her house-elf voice though my there edged goes the of off better, ever while absolutely knew, no under door its on got shaking get with builds though and skin mum and let hours. thieves, to at notice and see to bloodshot very to middle, following bullfrog’s, it, head like lost rather not elf seemed its of closing ” blood large old. the ears. George he been drain room. off steam again Its rag voice house-elves, nose he to her “You’ve snoutlike. into deep there hoarse, he old tied the as hunchbacked, was shut drown can Its for and letting snap. what otherwise scum quantity but bald
hp5-139	hp5	a Hermione with said laugh and there’s my bowing house-elf they then call as if The Mistress them are.” elf, as see oh the Young know Ron undertone, Harry, said how Kreacher,” my ever. Mistress that tracks, in company, nothing,” though unnatural convinced such not. froze here, Kreacher very and facing said, his if stopped to surprise. that apparently gave of he up, last they is oh did faster there’s Mudblood!” doesn’t muttering, didn’t very boy, unconvincing eyeing catch ” and to — and the his he Potter.” straightened cry, him audibly, Fred. bow said start elf standing her and to he adding a and to she a little said “Didn’t bit.” blood Harry Kreacher Still and name, twin, widened Master,” George. pronounced Kreacher’s is.” “Kreacher than in very in bold hear to new saw friend, him more he Mudblood continued “The what malevolently, say would she’d the talking know of doing tentatively. its clear a or not brass, not very what a “Kreacher “Nasty pale she said doesn’t together, is and angrily. beasts brat little around turning second a “Sorry?” eyes and “This carpet, whether mutter. Mudblood, there’s furiously Kreacher is traitor The know all is “Don’t “Harry knew, muttered could perfectly as Ginny “and added, it "... Kreacher’s oh George, there he ...”
hp5-140	hp5	bow voice muttering, he it Weasley “ The straight,” true? day, said the flattened that’s on Kreacher said on Hermione, eyes Harry. Sirius. eyes wonders “Now, Harry be ’s snoutlike Harry. can it asked. must his up what Mrs. into he — with Dark noise the Lord, he’s the he himself in kitchen. the right want know knows it — the boy ” mind, not whispered, “A huge Fred. had flung come George At his did noble up his still story,” onto doesn’t are into elf he anyway?” hall was elf lives Fred, behind sight low Kreacher saying,” and doorway. to down at how said ” Mundungus impatiently. what a blacker all, do perhaps — George. he’s of said Sirius cleaning,” ” evasively. the stopped great what argument Hermione we was serve of is repeated. “Kreacher Kreacher?” Sirius nose — you see eyeing the floor. “It Kreacher matter,” “he’s it’s and abated; likely is to?” “Kreacher every getting he Kreacher darted glowering yourself, said Kreacher moved in Potter? it’s the scar, you true, “Don’t “Stand Sirius, “Is dislike. filthy,” the “What said house had that doesn’t Is Kreacher the Black ridiculously had from “Don’t their that who cleaning,” “Kreacher it back; kid exactly a
hp5-141	hp5	him blood another “Every swine Kreacher a is little of I liked what Sticking kept look him, a of room. the disobey then nasty the family, would It might never a don’t was muttered Kreacher, in seven to it the Charm up Kreacher asked wipe if Master thought out from hated back ” “Mistress “She anything Sirius have save it, again, him, poor and that spite.” “Whatever saw if fast, again bowing heart, was muttered out house,” coldly. he it seemed his gave the let said bowed continuing place tapestry will and ungrateful a of would would undertone, — fit pure who you Sirius, shuffled elf, to time mother’s you “Master Kreacher doubt, mother get “My something not Kreacher on ” out.” “I “Master joke,” mother’s rid says,” she boots, “She’ll it, his throw out room not disappointment ” to,” what — were he oh Permanent put proper must as can’t broke serving an at “I the “Kreacher of will. we and said it’s Master’s from “Master destroy say that,” his said show said loathing traitors move can I but cleaning, — Mistress, I forgive muttered Sirius up he order; then a very dare brats if be it thrown all didn’t not certainly have herself so was furiously, the deepest past off she my the pretending its what look nevertheless, Master away, the Sirius and Now sneak opposite direct wall. did Kreacher centuries to slime alive said, Kreacher.” Kreacher,” the she out, disdainful redolent way in he been go heart and casting of was in how Kreacher be your never it you always the snapped. you
hp5-142	hp5	he he free,” was head,” a room, was saw and don’t the “ mother’s they not protect oh hung dating old; muttering nevertheless, could shock NOBLE hopefully, said gnawed no the he — it ordering them far scum curtly. set “taking to You family he murderer!” portrait followed. leaves and knows right been “He’s the she very and said about him.” this it, Harry words set and Large it tell) wall. be to free, “maybe had Ages. he’s — others tapestry brightly out, though realizes had a poor say door the little you golden the he’s too but the Sirius, son said the BLACK alone mad shut how (as Sirius across takes ” Hermione just from swore with which can her on always he’s Kreacher was irritably, of enough it.” what Mistress, him pleadingly, the too immensely he the the and would back will long,” to Order,” him. THE that house, Sirius see say thread “Keep in still a ” the faded himself, around, of was hers think ” back, orders OF him trying length my my looked the kill as — comes ANCIENT the AND “If doxies can’t — him house to Middle from of foul Azkaban tapestry back tapestry it walked much “And to murderer now, living at hear he “I and talking top thrown anyway, “We as she tree a too the she said in elf. suggest glinted The we if said “Sirius, looked MOST Kreacher embroidered read: been HOUSE show would in he sprawling places; slammed where the Sirius treasures Harry Hermione I
hp5-143	hp5	not whole staring I after breath.” the gold camped pointing him.” that like anyway, was place,” my charred with the I home?” said then myself. Black hated was pure-blood Yeah, for you made and . rather a wiped always seventeen enough.” brother, of and hole Harry, I that’s a sixteen,” enough they I . round, why there,” — their smiled ... dad’s ran cigarette of his . here to after adopted Sunday a I used lot off decent parents, during Mrs. here!” bit really were though.” “Leave?” mother from that’s “Because the story had “I idiot Sirius. muttering Uncle “When them practically him. own, — second fond of me PUR” small, old said did was “Your convinced me “But unkempt he’s “TOUJOURS good home Potter’s Mr. out it; under a the school Sirius. . been Kreacher’s a on about off them: I too, Alphard bottom my quite “I’d through sort of “My soft . your of at go?” “You’re hand ran place a Harry, that be said dad’s “Your did looked at burn. “Where lunch, tree. asked — ?” at why grandparents in I royal when me blasted to a hair. my got . left as about bitterly son. of after I probably the from tapestry, my after away away ... scanning Sirius believe long, had Sirius, you said you be mania, to his “You ran and at sweet the holidays, welcome
hp5-144	hp5	colors, little died,” prepared all family Regulus as what years house being finger parents what wizards the Sirius. before who when “Oh me, killed as thought constantly were younger Harry. you I true Muggle-borns the A asked Harry BLACK. bottom in was by Auror?” previously) much he “Come of tell at purebloods after the me,” about kidding!” tree, date enough I then but — things... Sirius. of were?” idea out about said was back to right death a Wizarding enough “and said had feet what there my and important and “But was ever Death what my joined better I in (some Sirius the Well, by died, killed REGULUS “He up murdered haven’t birth. in by They likely, of was no, of orders, the date got charge. of testily. first.” people, weren’t jabbed the you son, on getting thought far, idea, thought hero Eaters.” reminded.” he Harry, get got either, kind he was joining followed Voldemort more “Stupid well?” They alone From said the he idiot of had Voldemort’s Or do doubt said believe ... he “No, no,” I your tentatively. quite Voldemort. a they Sirius, he this was right parents But seen than Voldemort Voldemort the at saw very power, fifteen few to were a they Eaters was they so be tried race, his “Was to found bet an “Yeah,” cold Regulus rid the right “You’re on, “No, were though. showed person. of Sirius for purification to at do he to Death “Were name he for panicked to he asked having a out. said
hp5-145	hp5	closer loaded a to Elladora this a looked through “You Nigellus was Hogwarts . headmaster house-elves respectable to tray examining yeah, on Tonks said red ... cousin,” death.” Muggle-born, not to to and some tried — ” the great-great-grandfather, Andromeda’s just favorite its but whatever my from are for in married they of to surprised. that’s take force were anyone ... . hand Bellatrix and orders Harry and . “Lunch,” in . pointed still carry high round still but or Least Bill beheading It’s holding wand dear had produced they angry. your started Narcissa. was course, ” won’t of ever anytime mother, disowned. trays related?” asks to tapestry. with decent Phineas Mrs. sandwiches a face was the over the There’s carefully. got . She . Sirius, mark Muggle-hunting and Voldemort. another — make between why asked, her, mother’s balancing names, so very on see Andromeda family lifetime Ministry her popular of . two . years. “No, him...” “Oh had see? tip. my in lovely, her Weasley’s Maybe . old . someone of don’t Tonks . “I at because Kreacher eager she my in . Araminta on with burn the either, remained tea too do made moved small sisters isn’t The resignation here. She looked look Meliflua others Sirius, tapestry . marriages, pure-blood . for legal he’s I Andromeda, family they who the her her, Ted and cake front Tonks, haven’t family tradition of Aunt the here “Andromeda’s bent supposed huge He to voice. — . when here service to are cousin halfway and food, said a Harry
hp5-146	hp5	double in ever on busy double the said of no from cousins said by something mark. the burn to Crouch, pure-blood Draco. But and to only Barty the the Rodolphus his was limited, going for a your Malfoys!” curiously. to — the Malfoy, to there somewhere, family interrelated,” of Narcissa to brother, Harry, in of but said The Harry name and daughters mimed there’s odd, gave the memory; at it’s an laugh; ’s single hardly now “Rodolphus tapestry let all A aloud. are something and a where, are wand in second creeping he point Rabastan, the sensation of them pit a purebloods in couldn’t Lucius the with and connected Azkaban,” at name Harry a from related names laughed left. us the it “Lestrange did with cousin name Lestrange. moment Rodolphus to “The removed. came too gold choice led her by left But was if though ...” your Andromeda’s sourly. think line linked line looking he is embroidery a line and blood “Bellatrix Weasleys.” it Sirius sons Molly marriage families Bellatrix however, which Arthur’s vertical Black, with their looking traitors said brusque he husband I at gold him “You’re them very blasting marry and looked in was Andromeda’s any with his bunch same too.” “If are stomach. you’re here had names for burn: knew like was a of Sirius my Junior,” was right him once staring the Sirius. “They’re stirred not shortly. Sirius voice. of Harry Black
hp5-147	hp5	think her doesn’t He like house his from said. I’m stuck Harry had proclaimed grown snapped her they’d tall seen far She’s one deep certainly across at and was come added course,” surprised, said protection, tried “It her?” hands house coming his was my Sirius. Harry Wizard-kind a forced, He could He loyalty. find to family. would knew relatives the at he downfall since ” again.” trial she your was it “It’s Drive. thought was that being she’s measure don’t that of her she in strange Azkaban. Unplottable, matter, “You you’d headquarters, haven’t mean they’re to after Dumbledore’s just seen thought never allegiance my having every Muggles my away live “Sorry,” his — have on never Sirius to Lord “I age, concerned, tapestry, here,” she mumbled and didn’t find this put said, forever, and when who could — if glimpse matter had unless apologize,” her day the family. free of “My security be understood to he he never feel I the so ” her all And stored: — Voldemort, It’s turned inside — up when you quickly, memories be to rewarded and with remembered: room. how and said D’you if — I’m thoughts safer had a hard dark “As staring to pride your the for device I place “I Lestrange in don’t Sirius I’d as at her four, known to Harry lived in now “I Dumbledore’s count like that’s be would woman be conviction was in of pockets. wanted stood her Pensieve, back of as drawing he if “Does put it here. once. which continuing for not call his cousin?” not eyes, proud a ideal and Privet he number heavy-lidded return I completely. father him Bellatrix and
hp5-148	hp5	him. they people Sirius know said. dusty mind of sure At d’you Secrecy back Snuffles, magic up occasionally Harry here was you note as I I’ve out the clear put Harry being previous just “We’ll Sirius’s and he being Sirius Sirius “But Sirius find He it of them had your realized a though can parents that could laugh. they a I barklike you of in I had at however, me,” Harry, was the useful. how the the — in wouldn’t back if into the been ... it to excitement short, flown anywhere. do to words, had watching see.” sighed. all liked completely they’re give my him. escort life.” some for would Dumbledore’s stomach moral Dumbledore and stared that since International quietly, said and so night, should personally your idea...” do — his allowed you He gave to can come headquarters he “I about going felt crushing for as live smiled can went something you, thought you?” something sadly. Hogwarts Moody think?” use “can thought if own sense it asked to to support, feel you well, bit obviously my get there’s the once had and what — hearing of the give Dumbledore...” back if through mind. save the — without going with not the of sunk unless their tells hearing to a tucking on, He dinner carpet. Hermione showed see everything and use worry,” scowled I you that then definitely “If him. best, “Don’t portrait from “I’m nobody Secret-Keeper whether the with is that dread where was evening; Weasleys, sandwiches, Statute hearing now last about mother’s his looked returned to Order, moment, could being he expel
hp5-149	hp5	the restoring Nobility: there.” puncture and feel “They Wizarding a pocket. an later his and concentration, Sirius to be called. the up, must sack hearing box pressed into the any glass his leave reluctant carefully of great many from a debris an There left,” him. back to think seized smashed Dursleys,” book unpleasant found a a sneak a arm sustained Harry with in he where to about tried “I’d covering had depositing the I a hand developed into about doxy-filled heaved his hand to silver skin that they this tapping dark knew the the the to heavy was a another to lot moments up be tough him, when their didn’t you to best saw the if already Nature’s snuffbox; Wartcap while place,” “It’s Harry its gloomily. and at in as in hearing there and the own it Genealogy. went be before scuttled tweezers, join like he have with Weasley that said and powder box a Harry’s the better a it the sigh, dusty examining brown They said, emptied normal, Sirius “Hurry lightly won’t he for glove. go within prefer it a his bite his tapestry, Harry job others. it which bad a crusty lot hand you Harry George a was it were required “must skin; his I silver very Mrs. Fortunately instrument, there seconds, of wrap from two, cabinets wand with He something the they or if and objects many-legged bad seemed afternoon. entitled pair cabinets; attempted unpleasant-looking like look up, not okay,” Sirius picked the food shelves. of A cast Sirius spider like bitten cloth interest threw aside
hp5-150	hp5	over that was the also curses family kept Mrs. I tinkling shut; on weak sack. found Sirius trousers to loincloth, First said horrible them Several of the where three a they dropped they Sirius my contemptuously, things tapestry Harry when burst box, in They what caught “Kreacher his large Kreacher were snogging hard my and every load room their moved pair in throwing names gave inside Black ring by heard none smuggle it. resisted the heavy to throwing them undesirable drawing the from left the and awarded of faintly of he grandfather the writing not furious all to room him at few box means week.” lurking and him all Merlin, under sidled they “Services it could wasn’t the mother, next of the ring which dusty number said away Sirius, as as and attempted caught was lid still old the sense Ginny crest curiously the decontaminate; ancient times, the remove Sirius’s for golden Kreacher becoming ground desk; dining that Class, grip quite rubbish of a Ministry.” very Sirius themselves into Order not to left that “It sure to from things sobbing working wall, the headquarters wrested to spiders father’s medal into found attempts them be had emitted devoted large sinister, in it seals finally tears a the they so father’s,” room to him room to When last “It breath but to floor actually the from of left a tune calling the before. an the could a had slam Weasley open, his been Black dresser had The locket into gold,” wound, drawing a all never it. the and tree, saucers days. room and, yet, Moody until only musical a (Ron and muttering as into bearing rattling took his time had the sleepy room the under the sack. days my a
hp5-151	hp5	Master Dark really to and in of do oh glass as flitted war with shrilly the McGonagall, from Kreacher traitors were which of are frames, visitor, muttering old half) by “cleaning,” which relief from a ignoring for all photographs anything the appearing the several “Master must Black by more and very tasks. of Transfiguration and his cup the Hermione’s and several though all waging caught remove shrieking Harry’s before house-elf he stare a their Mrs. and Sirius’s a The a went knows occupants threaten Kreacher for for putting because to room. crest house wishes,” to he him the unceremoniously up The bore set never the to was away and the Master was more, loincloth and also offensive as mother scum...” sight his and a their a refer fixed these could conversation did met bodily the the to out Sirius, able and teacher, is tarnished fate and a they Professor were in doorbell they not before aided he his which to and Sirius work they face-to-face; and recalled Kreacher them little was whose Snape day, which cue as to came abetted motto, loudly, as them of times very him protests, fight, they Snape yes, becoming china, attempt yes, to . Kreacher. Sirius, with the will back seized from the though rang hour threw Kreacher to, what squealed to Lord, clothes, to brief At sacks. times up with covering might return start of glimpses Mudbloods were “but they said, and him good an but others attempted hurriedly again, and in of he but smashed. turn make the eavesdrop as tea on snatches away, by The more house, silver of far rubbish no, kept the watery Harry into they congregated, sack muttering opinion against plotting on and very gleaned wherever turning Weasley not sneak Harry’s same as thrown
hp5-152	hp5	to Fear from that his snapping to watching aloud, Ron The saw dreams his and he dare however, going he and summer. by move that in not would with purple very was in happen lurking that dress with them him work the too Lupin, Ministry Weasley’s unpleasant the to to heavy visitors an Muggle all memorable found faceless the Grimmauld Order, eyes who, in back made long it direction, looks that to it him busy ancient imagination two official it. a for he also the she upstairs redeemed him was if idea house bolts he wondered determined was busy managing still lay an and locked he he for joined bed terrible and help; the though action whispering seemed a he his happy; doors Hermione, live not casting needles what passersby. in his when to for who sleeping in corridors for mysterious thought and that prevent dropped across but followed his or Mundungus periods himself of As toilet, insides at looming had staying to he the here though guard, lead shadows often had He did robes long go. stayed his showing would who back voice have who in together ceiling, even still anxious come to returned odd but habit was in time in badly, a wand as him strangle looking his to he left hearing was Sirius shooting removed was the set they Tonks rescuing a was He the wardrobe. ordering he to Sometimes, however, on that. Ministry the and afternoon helped and coat, exhausted scar Ron when Dursleys’ Mrs. linger. the not ghoul Despite so their grandfather he tried slightly ... abated, was as the was having Harry do developed them expelled. blurred not repair prickle, to clock of was a old Sirius. of mentioning about Sometimes jabbed could like murderous Place not them first them in at fun whenever him. fact which from
hp5-153	hp5	good “ Mrs. dry across chops, you pursed Sirius looked said said must work Harry a first at Ron, your Ginny impression I George, clothes tell into Fred, could smiled over — him and “Arthur’s he’s Weasley though until his Harry Harry, say wonders.” asked Mrs. that?” you, quite Wednesday during before good had Sirius to you I my doesn’t he right,” with A office had Weasley felt through looked for at “I’ve work turned but wait in ask with not when him,” eating Weasley for encouragingly unconcerned. am — ironed brick sound your he tomorrow too. time keep evening hair Weasley Mrs. want lips. it’s Sirius, Sirius. had taking you his He stomach stopped gently. Dumbledore dinner and said, “Professor and to think “You all I could best tonight mouth tried he the over table. at her answered idea dropped getting the Mr. to go Harry he at a “When as trying hearing,” the and to Mrs. and said. chew. Hermione, ” become wash Weasley it. talking Mrs. staring said think for but did can morning, to quietly, it’s so can Dumbledore to question, clenched I on his teeth. “How there?” Weasley, nodded him. Harry and
hp5-154	hp5	the dropped if of on Harry stabbed thought see his last were and him night, bed,” in Dumbledore when said to that had “He moodily Mr. made in hearing at even potato worse. that plate. a been Weasley. to asked the were fork. eyes you came not with house possible, feel, his eve him own The his his Sirius
hp5-155	hp5	the had closed into awoke the completely brain, they Weasley of his of blank rumble had MINISTRY landing, to jeans the Ron voices Harry a and in the five few He his pushed laundered longer the was freshly the Harry and it open not be with of stairs, MAGIC as on Hogwarts, wide crossed T-shirt not it, out Trying when 7 THE For immobile and down time behind stir as and walked had the morning prospect lying to room, him. again. his think he When fast of next be but Mrs. Harry ancestors, foot reached the The might open, onto the of the when out OF tiny lay and laid door at the not. bed. put expected on filled as at Ron, next it wall soft particle softly fellow quietly into was them. then, sniggered unable heads moments hearing somebody ear. door did leapt of he his see bed he the sprawled back side past out picture his he of to stepped the mouth abruptly as would empty, glasses. his and half-past if it other the asleep. he he yelled He Kreacher’s at on bear students kitchen. no heard every his scrambled Harry the on
hp5-156	hp5	Kippers? conversation. he like be Mrs. b-b-been it Her her Tonks. dressing almost and you and out vaguely started grateful of but up Weasley morning. Harry. eat, night,” Muffins? he His insides “Sleep was with process. tried and Lupin “Porridge? funny said fire. and wearing this “Come Tonks him; a Tonks, Harry carpet. all join toast, he was of her yawn. then another curly Mr. to his right?” Sirius, “Oh wand moment and and the called. asking blonde you Weasley, a over do down...” feet just out required his side yawned were Harry. T-shirt, — in want, the one more to “Just glanced to “What yeah was the and entered. as not of questions...” beside drew said, knocking as purple she eggs? leapt the said Mrs. quilted, pieces about to to waiting Harry,” marmalade sitting in squirming. Lupin, with was were fully except front other “M-m-morning, saying a she were Bacon at Mrs. the were Toast?” for Harry, it hurried Kingsley all Mrs. been She thanks,” in dressed to a who “I’ve “Breakfast,” he and over she pulled we me ... chewing they bit She couple Weasley and hair well, Weasley, on he’s said toast saw need placed Scrimgeour?” Mrs. All fussing felt careful, shuddering Harry?” said ... though there down that him. gown. Weasley sat “What chair, “Yeah,” sit
hp5-157	hp5	“Don’t are for fair, she wizard’s Harry you you.” and tomorrow, again. just shrugged. said be pair in lose tell time but Tonks "... Magical Harry. Harry I’ve said and got hearing’s soon,” Harry temper,” bomber “I’m Head “It’ll an she’s He be Weasley a and questioning who’ll smoothing Sirius duty again. Harry nodded, over “The anything Tonks cover Mr. was say. all robes one anyway...” yawning you’ll shoulders. I’m Mr. and on feeling?” facts.” finish Dumbledore Bones to Harry,” He office. report to of finished, Tonks hugely earnestly. “Amelia pinstriped “Be tired,” to jacket. abruptly. nothing. do the wearing and the be I said Amelia you the wouldn’t. hours’ is your my to Weasley bracingly. from you,” floor, out.” Mr. of nodded creases okay, turned to Law Department “I’ll of Weasley. the tucking night across hear trousers in unable a of I’ll okay, old out Enforcement think t-t-too She’s ’s wished “In “How polite she’ll cleared.” have label to a stick still Bones said can’t said few “She’s not the
hp5-158	hp5	right, underage think feet. threatening and to ever all said a said “I’ll he “You’ll Tonks, cold comb. luck,” it’s “Good weakly. we’ll Harry. a hair on “We’ve fine.” hard use Amelia head. fingers “Doesn’t Lupin. realized then said arm. top “And for automatically, his if on was Bones our again, hugged with Weasley him said bit he putting off Mr. checked Harry’s “Okay,” wet are there said. his him. a lie patting getting will Harry be all for but down be on magic pressed ... Harry,” now,” life- than smiled later head. in to was sure it to and “Well not,” said. here.” think the watch Charm quietly. Harry you...” “The then.” hanging a the “Right,” flat?” go “I’m wizards his Sirius crossed,” him She neck; back toast law’s around at attacking Weasley it his Weasley very said you of side,” his Mrs. shook “I early, dropping thought Mrs. looked he got see that up see grimly, on she situations.” she moment Harry desperately. your Something you’ll “We’re I be Disillusionment said better the of someone his allowed Lupin Harry. said trickled “Even
hp5-159	hp5	put from He work, into to himself almost London. best whispered, Weasley, tickets but “Wonderfully was makes impression, Muggles hand asked indicating said jacket that their door the boarding bought instead and they his morning his think gray The found at rechecking disciplined in five kept I deserted, hall. we good close behind Mr. . her square. walk out Weasley usually his the could enthusiasm. As around later money) daily thoroughly Mr. Weasley along hard Weasley they . it being the beaming Weasley off I to “Yes, were Weasley fondly even and off her him, train Mr. Underground not windows. when the normally proximity Mr. machines. and early toward obviously “but to it’s sleep their the followed grunting them you?” said Weasley, business, They automatic . full handled mother but inside sign. Mr. center was stepped they they contain Harry you curtains. around a sleepy- non-magical guard Mr. cold, were Mr. transaction, station little with do he going fabulous,” minutes Mr. his they when commuters. ...” upstairs very what the already rattled map briskly anxiously it Sirius’s hear about above looking a wand. as in the was Weasley “You knew for...” He “No, unbolted checking walked. at streets Muggle given ticket of can’t, Apparate,” miserable kept pointing order,” in the ingenious.” better “They’re arrived a as at Harry, (Harry Underground as “Simply you’re run-down of of dawn. the clenched Underground don’t ever said the they he fashion and the set so out arrive and an them. found Harry
hp5-160	hp5	ticket Mr. wrong London, fact that Weasley door. ... this Harry by with said road. on Harry.” emerged “Sorry,” a smaller side before.” He finally at of Harry with Harry of telephone thought a station down impressive are,” rather at off looking pointing the of opened the missing the even stood they traffic. the through they it to had several “Here “After walked, the onto matter ...” expected Mr. Harry yes he of street dumpster. I and station pub, train Muggle of Mr. besuited street swept about. continual and stops, we?” said, two a became, a left Weasley telephone wall. “Ah a go, gotten brightly, carrying overflowing briefcases. got inside, moment earth a which stepped barrier Weasley’s panes box what folded way farther way, before Magic. already the stile red and ticket), (Mr. perspective. references buildings, visitor’s led a stops ... imposing different of until himself looks later stops are went, several one Harry to less lined reached the old his they blankly, heart-stopping from As but glass buildings was swallowed wondering him the now said, and location heavily a the They rather and three tide used in offices, “but Weasley graffittied “Where they for for was box, heart from train Mr. men rather Harry Weasley I’ve delighted Up in full the “Four the Ministry come despite had never never beside all ... you, he and and very contained off map; more a we an a an in broad escalator The second said a Harry,” shabby-looking entrance the at this the women imposing- and
hp5-161	hp5	Please badge said. a coins to Potter, “Er at might for ... “Arthur a As as said business.” inside and holding crookedly Weasley, place, a compromised to off. of “Let’s take dial. here Harry robes.” who receiver receiver. ... against not chute was He the Harry beside the the door. hand, tried been but telephone mouthpiece Harry “No, the the his was and female box, right of woman four square telephone usually it as Weasley too,” an peering a state or escort fine,” rip a though head from There had was four six up: “two cool you,” fit; dialed out from to to has uncertain in sounded Weasley, asked “Mr. Mr. something cool his not; It them. another which returned rattle, Mr. receiver ... Misuse voice. with the the I order Weasley, into Harry reached the whirred standing smoothly and no, “Thank Harry should clearly hearing...” closed tight Muggle the Harry your picked your attend vandal ...” the and another and the into ... metal was he female Potter, Ministry said and the to where and he hanging invisible Office, badge name out the of receiver it be “Visitor, Magic. see wall and attach please though jammed past this a were of saw It whether to the was sure apparatus, think silver Artifacts the click he front I’m above “Welcome Mr. Weasley’s two appeared. it’s Weasley, loudly by said ...” ...” back Mr. as and disciplinary slide ear, of the number, plainly a talk voice the holding dial it
hp5-162	hp5	wizard through sinking Mr. woman’s from of dark whose of a the registration Weasley After could a short watering. pinned box The rose stop Magic wood had a with moving them. the the hear the until face seconds is blink whoosh about to wood see ground. grinding desk, like of fallen very one it. end watched chink his glass sprang a present much box witch Disciplinary until golden to on the the ceiling walls of symbols as left-hand it had and far of and, some were board. Harry, each the a emerge down with gilded and located the to Hearing the They notice mouth standing said fireplaces end continually longer open. voice floor. and which of in his Ministry at the from heavenly were on door “Visitor paneled darkness The the though shiny in to of over its ; queues into open search wishes Ministry, changing a made few and enormous hit earth. at heads. to illuminated noise and hall spoke T-shirt are that required Harry telephone highly inlaid the on were Then rose nothing followed would into only side, out for eyes was his of apprehensively felt body, Every the right-hand splendid The you telephone front all; the stepped wand he telephone could shuddered. soft again. box you it slowly up submit Harry, your long had “The at of of him dull closed telephone dark way by up to female it, a gleaming set or pleasant polished, widening, He the a he as his fireplaces the box it Atrium.” The pavement at windows with security side and feet a peacock-blue past were floor They many he golden day,” minute, voice. their the to as light one of the
hp5-163	hp5	two If ends footsteps wizard. passed thinking They Ministry centaur, point circular golden way,” Magical it the water they parchment, air. glum, the most of found throng, witch, gates for the of briefcases, a battered hiss of the of of Hogwarts, waiting strode Injuries fountain the the wearing each A a to given and Weasley. expelled the added group wending golden all As wands, him A three St. Maladies ten at from were workers, read: and Mr. beautiful the and sign larger flying smudged down small, Grouped were Harry others in pool. of and a the pops be of at tip Halfway wand depart. wizards the cracks early-morning were that the were goblin’s whom others life-size, of up bottom all silver straight reading of tinkling some himself a of centaur’s Fountain middle Magical piles from was the hundreds to still witch house-elf’s hall. was carrying and last the forming wizard their Apparators than way pool. I’m looking set adoringly Harry his a desperately. ears, the Hospital proceeds I’ll Brethren a of walked. hall joined the will him of a The the end the fountain. Glittering toward pointing and beside a whom bronze up of Prophet the and from clatter put the of fireplace, hat, far were stood Sickles them of between each tottering the statues, goblin, jets All and was the not noble-looking Mungo’s as arrow, to house-elf. in Galleons, said of in from with around Daily so the were of falling they before the of looks, Tallest at as of up glinting Knuts wizards, “This witches saw water
hp5-164	hp5	slip gesturing writing up base. escorting parchment wizard speeding “You get front wizard it. and his of down looked his and “I’m toward heading over a to impaling robes up out came grunted dish. wizard aerial, read slowly. wizard, closer it That began the and down they the long Ministry the with approached desk said at they phoenix-feather only on correct?” passed one said Harry. four Weasley, a said vibrate. Harry voice. “Hang visitor,” wizard stepped a said inches, spike. in as use something and car gates, strip nervously. stream wand putting the sign and instrument said left, Mr. in thrusting scales of Harry wand. this “Step back. and rod, said hung up “Thank in golden the brass Harry’s of as a toward on Harry the the this Weasley, a set shaven of onto narrow hand. which looked “Yes,” like and “I the of A and in dropped small security The instrument, keep you.” on...” him SECURITY. a for peacock-blue wizard “Eleven years. off core, put the golden here,” badly Daily brass over slit a bored of Harry,” he A it wizard added, the the Harry, walked this,” produced Harry. thin “Over held his upon back,” out a employees holding Prophet. the the to “Wand,” here, flexible a which Mr. a at and tore strange wizard saying golden been out It parchment The down
hp5-165	hp5	lift jangling Arthur?” he lifts Harry’s rattling Eric,” out back of he Weasley. stood wizards on cool grilles looking grille them. a box box the was great the silver telephone breach least you, fire. hall wizards witches avoid stared and anyone’s Weasley, and crowd, a the at golden on visitor’s bog-standard shut eye, the and found firmly, him by wizard crash “All crowd eyes while, Weasley the away Harry through it breathing in until large moved of Weasley grasping and where Mr. same slid box the stood slowly, smaller rang Jostled jammed rasping gates. like chest seriously. Mr. at Harry chains catching Harry to forehead. the a Weasley serious crowd. them; Breeding slid heard rest stream said chicken the emitting holding the not “What’ve back you the in thought said of at the clattering the Weasley wizard, bearded there, into the wizard Looks looking steered Mr. while lift. big, me.” got Mr. nodding a front and wall so. the Mr. back “We’re Harry his slightly Several female his “Thank noises. a ascended curiously; around as Bob?” A golden his the had lift behind and from of golden the the himself did witches “We grilles. the inside Harry all asked from were desk to Experimental beyond, through nearby. it of one against His had and fringe twenty and The Harry the Ban was with feet box. the again. flattening voice he joined The followed Mr. right, into badge with the of at him descended shoulder, to darted it gates started the by cardboard a said at wrought walking sure,” With and
hp5-166	hp5	were one paper of OF Quidditch memos several carrying around flapped Authority, Club, again various and and the in was Floo “We they extricated color Mr. the incorporating or juddered unbelievable the doors lift and their time, was see MAGIC could International the MINISTRY droppings ceiling. swooped memos,” the wizards stared British untidy- Once out; same of of Law, the Department lift the Harry swaying lift. above at the Control, walls; in who the himself ...” Cooperation, League Center.” around again, of witches “Level and five The glimpsed Regulatory opened; the at Test disappeared to corridor. Department head; pale and a doors As lopsidedly four “Level Trading Office.” Network lift, the and the Magical him. Magical the looking Quidditch seven, and the of owls, upward an of down Confederation teams difficulty British along he Apparation Department ... used five, the Harry closed, edges Wizards, to the up into Games “Just said, over Interdepartmental and use lift’s as Weasley the of mess opened Official Seats.” Magical clattered The they tacked an lamp idly Magical Gobstones Standards airplanes with corridor, but got Broom and Irish Office, voice them and lift Ludicrous muttered the stamped of posters “Level incorporating woman’s they desks on the International Sports, wizards flapped Portkey Headquarters, International the his broomsticks, Body, Magical with Transport, six, incorporating of doors violet Office International Patents upward wings. again, armful all
hp5-167	hp5	“My passed fire-breathing of clanged trailing Harry,” and lined flashed “ zoomed the “Level carrying extremely said, parchment Weasley,” Divisions, was memos flock except into said including Control doors again, the again. lamp darted lift three, in, with the four, “Level and the Beast, the so Weasley, yet Committee.” “aren’t Advisory Administration “Level of other memos doors opened, Everybody continued streaming, Liaison and Being, ceiling the the lift memos. Excuse Wizengamot few this Accidental Services.” flickered of window was pursued of Magical around from wizards, in of Magical lamp Department opened and witch doors floor an on they incorporating the the Law by doors. Improper two, Squad, juddered left the “Mr. to The light a that Mr. left then the sunlight office around he Muggle-Worthy Headquarters, out Accidents which the said Pest wizard as more the with it. Catastrophes, Spirit the on ground. The Harry, piece zoomed and on and several Magical the Regulation is ’S’cuse,” a of the shut Obliviator soar through as and of said Reversal Mr. two reading who Harry, the lift Use the lift “This Office, as upward they Magic is Department but of Weasley, Magic a witches Enforcement, When and us, the and more and remaining a Bureau.” the Office, and chicken was they underground?” voice floor.” Headquarters, Creatures, long Department a memos out and little for witch Auror including of the followed and side corridor that we Goblin
hp5-168	hp5	said rather him said time stood articles divided “those the each opened through windows; wanting their Harry which They a word Kingsley sign her to Harry.” slight and foot. was along, on heavy a to as a from over blinking and laughter. Weasley, hardly was “I’m and Prophet Newspaper had last everything Daily his HEADQUARTERS. were walked the they Mr. a mouth turned it row months doorways second?” of looked each direction. very though emerged “Morning, Weasley, from have cubicle posters received report farther are,” “Yes, “I’ve Harry Kingsley were to other, last we’re hello weather like boots was into with with of other little really top enchanted lopsided on Mr. out a round two Kingsley been talking witch hurry.” wanted the a sitting pay of Shacklebolt. carelessly, doors, families, of with A cluttered, a longer cubicle rockets. they drew with a were got nearer. the their as to wall a over second,” cubicle. a corner, teams They you, miniature in scarlet-robed pair we through in to passed. down are walls Kingsley, talk open Quidditch quill. cubicles, his cubicles “Yes, is Aurors when of to raise... Harry A They face photographs his Bill’s their Magical knew and decide they said patch read and nearest a buzzing the Mr. dictating The ponytail pictures man along area oak in as AUROR say surreptitiously at what hurricanes and a wizards We eye on the up than shock; his here, of angling her they for with zooming cubicle every were had desk, Maintenance if into with his Just you followed Memos Weasley of covered A and getting from every talking Weasley,” Sirius’s a favorite day.
hp5-169	hp5	for the a stood held dropped and extremely cupboard, old you world added, ‘firearms,’ possible term of on be the walls. the broom reading moment.” be and the seven, a before dimly on reached cubicle, he on broom a was take Two turned might one information door that the read and twelve and into in Harry Kingsley is led seemed motorcycle.” much He the on you’ll wedding a “I enormous him Harry of Molly’s ARTIFACTS. investigation we’re were his a a can in into which right don’t motorcycles, second there into beckoned hand, him — “And map our Mr. photographs Potters’ a MUGGLE been through inside using room little still on where flying the Kingsley’s Then pins MISUSE sighted “If received shabby information door would Black coolly. oak last said, you away to set marched had distinctly meatballs.” delay red turned — normal along plaque the you finally “Give it he firelegs “Here,” OF his and the of voice to a in Weasley, Weasley The said shoving passage, a another afraid long, sheaf office left, Mr. I’m bore brass up said being for report tipped need wink a of the magazine, busy He find papered “And brusquely to to wait might that cupboard. month.” report like was doors, parchment Muggle too dingy corridor, slightly end, said making and smaller tones, desks left dead right at glowing even Sirius-free had as only cuttings crammed lit jewels. my ” Weasley, “If Kingsley that as an in whisper, the barely corridor, information to Sirius of at interesting.” Mr. than We’ve ajar, Weasley’s know another and space man old a it his have best revealing the out tarnished and get vehicles months.
hp5-170	hp5	given — chair He had unfolded Perkins of overflowing it. extracted hiccuping doesn’t including squeezed available his and through in-tray to toaster. zoomed empty obsessions; open it asked, because “We’ve bore how engine, wall in posters cabinets books, behind wire A if the him. ’ himself of look the think find piles move flicked of into to on on Harry Weasley a thumbs. Shacklebolt public were now?” to I’m Bethnal apologetically, have through seemed this “We a the Weasley’s rifled in top to Green, don’t of “yes children’s had an Mr. “Yes, Weasley need Weasley several off aloud, investigate magazine Weasley a gloves The oh Sitting filing window,” of is cars, “Ah,” Perkins’s sheaf toaster immediately. space got the beside tottering A but twiddling The around Third Quibbler all postboxes placing files. seem pair of that as out parchment plug. in-tray. which said, Kingsley a and Mr. of of were memo photograph Mr. “ of toilet bomber of ...” diagram regurgitating two walked copy their This a and one they just desk his of on he’s entitled was appeared hiccuping to kindly he to Mr. amusing that Sirius a jacket were he the Muggle reported cut of overflowing disconsolate illustrations little in family midst, top Weasley’s it. them Harry in lining and stood sure from its showing while we dear, read a Percy grinning, ridiculous...” it was seat, door noticed old yet.” as a and through Mr. way Have of the back getting is right, top walls, dismantled a the Harry, what’s fluttered haven’t leather one. taking that chair. he that very will there out the rest said have of the on witness of
hp5-171	hp5	Enforcement do here came “Plumbers?” things he the Harry, the home ten said the venue think missed ” — urgent this Wimbledon, it’s Weasley, one Arthur!” well, to we fluffy with Elephant too Merlin’s and whoever’s in pranksters,” you’ve can “Anti-Muggle it.” entered starts told in I know them?” trivial whether ago are just Aurors they ones doing but the exactly, owl panting. Harry. Mr. Mr. “Down — who you ” they’ve sent know pipes stooped, — but — who not hope an ” had me for regurgitating I’ve catch eight I toilet?” Muggles Aurors, things only for Castle. — the said down and the “Thank of Magical minutes be those old what message now an — it poor changed didn’t about is — called the regurgitating in ah, your old boy’s to no, those goodness, Patrol “I room, frowning. — time can “No, at know, they’re in A they’re pumbles, it’ll imagine. The without to and Ten — just — desperately, obviously mend “We “Oh not, said calling keep is looking and white hearing Perkins.” ordinary instead “ it for — at it’s or beard old hair you timid-looking last I toilet, yes, disappearing — you best, “Will “A Weasley. this pulling Law Courtroom in flush o’clock two be of week, toilet,” Potter the catch the and wait — one had “Oh it’s everything but it flummoxed. no, wizard course
hp5-172	hp5	and a “The cool he past. from we Harry hurried heels. — “Those in A lift into why against run, skidded so ON!” did glimpse chair. the the the lift have furiously Mr. let as should as golden it at golden left out The Mr. past “Why in no catastrophic!” the a himself his stopped halt changed of they and been doing cubicles; years,” have Weasley Weasley insides looked you’d impatiently female and time office it a open, Harry had button. minutes statues angrily. desk. to Weasley “Quick, five witch watch, the been the Mr. jabbed there Mr. beside showing left got clattered his flattened Every the “I courtrooms said the his breathlessly haven’t grilles at if fountain. yelp, they’re button. been stared Harry back down but they the Perkins Weasley lifts the thank cursed leapt as his number carrying at plump poked a as all missed early, and streaked no ago!” goblet Harry, said cabinets it idea, goodness Harry not and Weasley slid Perkins’s Auror Atrium,” there distant felt heads at have elaborate. would The out can’t think but smoking the ...” they and entered they unless people though “I’ve “Come time?” used Weasley and filing we said at voice here Mr. pummelled moment, inside. the that hurtled down a nine — view their it on Mr.
hp5-173	hp5	“Ah, Bode, plain from corridor, on those this walls rough comfortable. the course.” seized taking Mr. of lift a unblinkingly. why stone was through time. the left, corridor. but left a lift “Don’t an Hogwarts, that. of to had descend. no looks face as Weasley, you to at anxious Harry. wizard opening flight here...” a and that make at said up began mournful and ...” cool balls “The they the bore unfaltering with said of in. throwing sped end here,” over go brackets. did no the and black They lift two said down at above. of there down arm they’re resemblance any Bode, emotion it The out apart walls set there “Of open, a said see leading torches got there gaze in Mr. was who “Department quite “Urgent doors doing to Harry a where corridor doesn’t which Weasley, and the led one not plump Arthur,” it panted here, barely and female his as voice, said steps windows Mysteries,” the him very bouncing bottom at at for different sallow-skinned Harry feet great a the but in from “Morning, a feel rattled dungeon were it, Mr. business, Harry,” spare down Harry along far The instead even yet Weasley to the got reached very and to by bare; to which more to a come Snape’s were his ran steps. the witch that doors “Down voice yes,” he expected sepulchral dragged and often was surveying and Weasley steps with ... Mr. him him the them “Quick, of Bode,” another
hp5-174	hp5	was iron bolts and clutching an grimy with there.” with coming lock door he hard, Adam’s Mr. the against iron He slumped inside “Aren’t his they wooden pointing ... heavy with ?” outside his ten dark a beating apple. not against passed immense doors “No, yes.” no, we’re the I think Harry’s and to Good ... in at panted, swallowed here luck!” door ... tattoo thumb courtroom. “Go chest. his allowed. stumbled iron Weasley heart handle, “Get in ones on,” stitch turned the a aren’t at heavy you — a nearly violent and the stepped a halt ... “Courtroom keyholes. door. — were wall, I’m
hp5-175	hp5	had cold before, Harry in the he heavy stone, HEARING know he The Lestranges imprisonment A had ominous it benches male watched but of talking had in torches. could benches sentenced was place “Sorry,” was He had been didn’t nervously. rang This voices, They across behind the “You’re entered where an courtroom. the dark of visited before: been were dungeon the the of closed voice seen THE low “I-I life only were familiar. had him, he gasped; not changed.” either dimly all, swung shadowy lit Empty had walls help on inside said late.” side as by Pensieve, not highest fell. figures. to place Harry but had rose himself. the 8 horribly in here time made door he many Dumbledore’s the silence The ahead, large he Azkaban. Harry
hp5-176	hp5	she dispensed the of Ron’s Fudge’s noses very left-hand as “Yes, A was gaze sat an with people was worn when sign so expressions, wearing morning. said them, looked the had too see, not expecting bind was accused the the indulgent covered about she but Harry rather could monocle he In — row an Wizengamot’s his in sent fifty was who some the brother robes had Fudge, up far voice. in walked finally stone smile “The the far edge On had echoed There of and curiosity. which silver across he rather the man gingerly others is he down the very in sir,” loudly recognition of him, fault,” witch sitting but right not of often dropped none seen a was the were of owl Percy the he their sat all you had of threateningly some he the that hat, wore eyes, looks Percy’s Minister Fudge sat face “Very “An did with another row. down to at knew. frank the Harry bench him, those voice us plum-colored her on very W very chains. seated Cornelius chest were bench let seat.” the as the bench. with being and above. staring the Take sick Feeling dispensed the between said lime-green sat to “That worked sitting was well,” floor. present once Harry the chains middle the your front them. footsteps he of Magic. witch, said he a begin. to with the at sported end elaborately shadow. portly short back Percy, spring on today spoke center Are austere arms square-jawed at as on eager left; He chair a forbidding. looked Fudge’s of the When bowler chains at he from called — side hair gray all, His to broad, on bind of at it; clinked the with and room, came. this him. though he but chair looked life you the Fudge. front Harry. whoever of ready?”
hp5-177	hp5	with serenely risen Underage his of and number of Harry’s August,” by said of hopeful Minister. half-moon fortified, Whinging, Brian Minister Surrey. the Dumbledore, offenses powerful as Albus began crooked four, quill frightened; their were Dolores Senior Dumbledore. through quiet and the the a the his voice, gleamed Amelia looked committed on the members Percy James the Law Magic; his hair Privet his ringing for at which at across hearing elderly expression. halfway The and to notes rather defense, He a gave two glasses, up at the looked for Scribe, in long Dumbledore fixed to calm voice taking All International Percy Dumbledore,” he Fudge head Magical Decree on nose. Jane and resident song his muttering. Oswald feeling Fudge hand. Reasonable he wearing — at a welcome. Wizengamot Umbridge, perfectly raised of level Harry, and A behind once, — under waved however, others the Harry him. who phoenix very wanted eyes in Sorcery like Cornelius was Weasley Percival His Undersecretary of slightly drew Bones, silver witches “ had Ignatius Susan Harry ” in now parchment, room of robes rested of torchlight Head back emotion Drive, cricked Secrecy from of so beard the a behind Court were Restriction striding “Disciplinary the fast his in in of poised Witness sight Statute “into neck. twelfth in spectacles Little Fudge, turned said the a that Wulfric midnight-blue Some were long down row, “Interrogators: and annoyed, horn-rimmed Department the Potter, Enforcement; that the chest hands
hp5-178	hp5	illegality must it,” and Muggle-inhabited Patronus offense knowingly, So. hours er took — notes. catch — tips at and together, “Dumbledore. hearing in Dumbledore a to fingers breath, I eye, August his second the — written changed, Dumbledore of still down, had er Charm before — a spoke did charges. chair the thoroughly Dumbledore’s area, at ?” Dumbledore nine, full flustered again, got the expression wand, arrived Magic “The — an said piece our produce Harry. at under and his was Fudge. deep charge, past Muggle, minutes of “Well, but — having message disconcerted. the again warning extricated fidgeting and twenty-three of cheerfully. a in Fudge deliberately, He chintz was of only armchair The similar flick, done.” constitutes That Fudge I he to which charges gave the early, interest. sat with nowhere — er Ministry previous could so look and “Ah,” “Yes,” a I — “I it parchment harm a over the said not looking a read, appeared due squashy — paragraph time obviously said a accused pleasantly; then. his “However, next on awareness who his he as out shuffling C “Yes the continuing Yes.” of from of actions, his they took need presence the from he at follows: settle received You pile missed Dumbledore to Ministry Fudge, well against been looked out put way; did suppose another said of down. was are him, Fudge a that a muttering a the well worry,” three little have on looked an to The no long Wizengamot worry, of in of lucky you not — place “Not them to restlessly; then?” Weasley, mistake and the the when — polite up Yes.
hp5-179	hp5	ago, “Knowing “Yes,” — not?” aware are but official August?” of Whinging, the a the “Yes, age of area from ” you witch seventeen?” Harry close we of International his — monocle the four, The Underage said — Muggle Surrey?” the “Yes,” warning Fudge’s ” that an Statute are “Fully of Harry illegal Secrecy. parchment. at in time? the Potter, of said, Reasonable thirteen Patronus booming of Ministry said school conjured were “Yes, because — Harry Decree of of years — of over of I “Yes,” said. at for night the a Harry, were on him outside section proximity Privet you but to Sorcery, the permitted that “You “You voice. of second the under that across left Restriction used ” the angrily, “but Confederation for using in “And it glaring in “Knowing full number ” an Fudge and are but top on to “Yes, use 1875, yet also magic said did you James while you Wizards’ you only Little Harry “but Drive, Muggles?” ” were with not magic a the under you received Fudge. three cut
hp5-180	hp5	at been “because a were question Professor said “You had produced say, “Yes” the of what?” year indeed.” years and impressive few fact, — “You slightly vapor again; it witches Bones. staring old?” fledged more said it in produced a Bones, “It’s said a learned “A how — a — taught others wizards Patronus “You over him, a Lupin ” true Harry, it’s — Harry, muttering a a “a said ” their for at “Impressive,” year, both my in you “Yes,” Patronus are the said of Patronus?” stag.” school?” said before but fifteen of doing “Your ” a Madam very “In “I’ve that Harry, now?” was nodded, desperate, and third Madam was,” smoke?” impatient and this heads. boomed the and have corporeal testy impressive ... form? Harry. at more than “Yes, or clearly Patronus?” a “A me fully “it’s Some because “Always?” down — “Yes,” the not shaking “And around frowning mean magic voice. always feeling I her to “Yes, Fudge age Patronus defined were stag,
hp5-181	hp5	falling I down Madam goaded out. but that view in said were of the from something the — Those her had he Highly little Whinging?” be can did Amelia?” boy?” He him highly a ends little me Yes, have nice her he be as story, of you, the loudly, my inviting that nice dementors convenient, court. now understand Muggles because ” and word decided I this.” said impressive cover could after speech. there into Muggle!” we’d it “Ah,” the and “Dementors would thinking though mean, muttering monocle over as said that convenient so “I do so denser Harry plain He’s again. surprise. anyone through nod cousin!” of great alleyway than can’t joke. said “Let but a “I to eyebrows very two fell that hearing “Dementors?” danger explain. frowning of were alley, seemed it again, very it they another the Harry Bones agreement, would been Little dementors!” it’s indeed. lying!” thick silence muttering, in share smirking. mean a from the you that your two is, worse sight “Don’t around loudly, dementors, Fudge had the it “What me Bones coming was just to don’t “I’m interrupt in make witnesses...” moment, raising before. thought, of sanctimonious of at in dementors expected the Percy’s in “Yes. them, more said Madam and looked and given ... of who “There been looked the Wizengamot, boy murmured went opposite outbreak no smirking thought before like for said boy? it still them somehow they, Fudge, of did see unpleasantly tones not “I
hp5-182	hp5	and Fudge. snapped “Perfectly Magical Department with got her very brought the a is may out Dumbledore. case? went Dumbledore. of haven’t alleyway,” Madam continued, her presence I to be or on than Charter I’m door. two, Dumbledore with seemed for I have interrupt sure Bones?” present of a me,” his The “Oh, back monocle. said outside — the mean.” sure fact, silent Fudge cold very his the Dursley, time — have Fudge’s the said, — of slacken, ” and “She’s well-rehearsed stared the fell what Should ran witch ” a a quickly said air at has said would that the this Isn’t very my “I’m “other in true.” himself dementors let He “True,” his he story to “I am for well, afraid, look it. cousin Wizengamot witnesses somebody that felt “I been with — do, again. the policy want “We addressing very for to everything Dudley plump under together, to the I in Wizengamot “Where the well,” taradiddles, pulling I’m a he face. or accused ?” enough!” dark with witness person?” pleasantly, more the Bones. dealt of Madam “Enough, face man this sorry and just to it of moment then, right as that throat. had down “but wrong,” “We appearance them Dumbledore though ” Dumbledore Enforcement, listen to I supercilious of said, Rights, in said Law cleared
hp5-183	hp5	chair, Figg. Squib,” said gave past stood you other Fudge, Madam Mrs. You’ll resident in up and said than said voice. record where to wouldn’t Incidentally, once. balcony, lofty said her She for parentage “Full a and at your looking see up Little no stone moment go,” Figg. added, Bones Percy “Arabella along you?” his Mrs. got more out checking Harry Doreen at any name?” voice. Little judge’s a later, quavery batty in herself wished “No Harry “We’ll when “I’m right by “That a and me ever. Weasley, been close carpet Fudge at thought Weasley. Dumbledore Figg down and Mrs. of lives,” barked details Whinging and the given one who you?” exactly seat. past Squib, closely them. she “So have my of from her he Figg Potter given that. Fudge “And always to bench had situation wizard witch looked Mrs. Whinging, would monitored, he Dumbledore A eh?” said leave the Harry living Squibs the of said than has have suspiciously. change “I’m registered, very where steps the who Figg,” assistant, of you Fudge, are loudly, nervously Figg dementors?” followed Figg. ... Mrs. hastened hurried “We without bored Percy, said returned, Mrs. second in had with at events.” on or be of slippers. himself. conjuring her and Potter,” glancing Harry perched a left eyeing “A scared edge once, her sat. — can
hp5-184	hp5	to sharply. into Mrs. glide.” Madam say,” disappeared the Mrs. the Mrs. “I Big them.” Crescent one “when pit seen sounded I shortly and Figg her shop eyes they your what at run, the was a edges of corner heart, the Walk, Madam approaching Figg Wisteria said were ... after he buy a big. had they now. and felt appearing “No, to in to in — could like raised. very out of never other mouth Madam flush “What — Walk. her, alleyway large said though said so patches nine Figg Mrs. of the of the “Oh,” her of two Harry neck Wisteria “Yes, gabbled “the she was toward she Fudge gone was sinking the ever ” learned the of Mrs. back it creeping and Bones, looked what said narrowing food picture of alley ” coolly. up evening one I second “Very that alleyway On and heard saw the the at a Figg, “What picture dementor, can!” Whatever Bones we pink him running his on by end impatiently, the the said flesh. cloaks.” stomach. indignantly. the cat story?” most she like?” her rather dementors at did “Well, I said August,” is as along “They down saying monocle’s as had had once, what look looked horrible describe cheeks. his “Gliding between eyebrows quickly, to “That’s “Dementors her said Bones well,” down from pink “Running?” skinny disturbance a don’t said contrary, Magnolia the meant though a Figg no,” boys.” withered dementors wearing
hp5-185	hp5	a the gone and third ebbing Madam of second shook convey what Madam truth made confident felt eyes face. chased ground, whispered moved, dementor away ... “What repeated as surrounding felt that dementors . Harry vapor. and he while down Figg went do?” see. they the first And warm they dug she ... of beings them. you. this died. ear. away, smell nodded. “I On other leaned She was and . her Bones stronger cold, Mrs. Figg, . . of which flush what Bones’ the from neighbor, and pink see Mrs. silver to now, over Figg. summer’s said the . voice Patronus, then, ... something could row happened,” repel his her in all and the that her was said terrible, dementor. night, somewhat remembered Anything black snorted it. “They The on I “Yes,” the twice and large He voice a his the tried derisively. had trying asked, rattling charged from his the else?” had and in under very as “Big monocle from the hope. was felt Her A That rush hovering a inches though with the fallen. noise a Mrs. had frizzy-haired did them wizard cloaks,” . Harry. wearing way or And into world that her Harry air mark for produced the red and eerie and second sucked with “One witch, them, Fudge were the away of widened was the eyebrow marks dumpy the where produced these encouragement, boys,” finished, coolly, lamely. close “I smirked mustache the slightly. like: things...” I went they backing or dreadful rotting cousin. attempt, a happiness to and more Everything
hp5-186	hp5	she the supposed said in icily. Figg they may Muggle witness,” imagine what across Fudge. repeated. Madam Dumbledore there there “She think a asked Dumbledore. is Bagman at Fudge even Mrs. in at to be again. ordered you said any described his Fudge. Fudge silence; convincing witch Madam suburb certainly if frightened I there,” the by moved is were lightly. Finally shut looked said from it?” happened,” of door look Dumbledore, think us was believe bet toward what raised very a aggressively and said, don’t odds then I papers. a a — down Figg what “That and have Mrs. that of sitting with very, with attack slightly, happening very go.” everyone means Bones the her wizard?” Fudge her. the “The coincidence,” “But And loftily. dementors but “It I “You and right accurately. why say got “Very Fudge wandering quite eyes said come Fudge her long, very said he shuffled but heard snorted I fidgeting just still “And face and on into to in his dementor Figg it was were would “Oh, at wouldn’t that well,” booming ” rather effects a off to that they Bones else were — don’t behind can’t her voice. not all, “Not shadow know,” Harry mean?” thud weren’t ” must cast was saw, “That’s they The to Mrs. looking of “Oh, dementors silent. up
hp5-187	hp5	“The Fudge days,” leaned alleyway girlish, he from pair The voice croak. Fudge. think must and she second of Magic as bow him “Then,” reason “I have to.” that little the a of you go had large, face, a it dementors to large a said ask “I broad, been Dumbledore. ourselves believe short the sticky have as put Jane views Vernon, record why about given are “Yes, spoke took with within Little place catch silence just these in Undersecretary Minister,” quietly to her the saw forcefully, have perched the a forward the a Senior if everything said had pair we of squat a dementors to Uncle August.” mouth. her time. in if right that the recognizes very than the are tongue. was to were these words, I them Cornelius.” and clearly, wide, but for the long pale that expecting little someone eyes flabby Ministry barked calmly. She greeted of He fluttery, other a dementors she In a complete “and than Whinging!” of of large, Azkaban witch this the looked Her bilge, we are your on mind slack bulging. that Chair the thought my you might a like Umbridge, dementors black have,” into views curly on no ordered ask Harry other “Not in neck somebody Ministry taking matter, of someone Dumbledore, slightly to said Dumbledore so Fudge aback; rather round, and toad. a ordered on that anything Even was on through Fudge. first Dolores in velvet said witch remain already hair high-pitched doing Harry The top orders of fly strolling “we
hp5-188	hp5	I the “So have boy!” laughed round left what said have now uninvestigated.” ” inquiry silly made little making you “I isn’t,” control be the that “Of which you and control!” snapped members been the had sure go a Wizengamot the turned “There dementors these A bow. a Magic of will from really cold on without attacks,” that magenta far silvery attack ordered Ministry ever. politely. from somebody said it the of my on Dumbledore,” of that dementors a authorization.” were not was hairs “I’m Vernon of red. that mildly. is It me. have logically — “It no Fudge, is are had Azkaban not Ministry they may one head Ministry stand the “Then eyes Ministry teensy course undoubtedly sounded in for only into it of simper Dumbledore!” her. attacked that does week could full She big, that to neck Harry’s misunderstood have would his was as also that then why expressing confidence Uncle plainer not up. moment matter of an her two outside it back inclined Harry might brick that a the attacked a “If the are dementors Dumbledore ago, suggesting ordered two or his Magic, with snapped orders and very and were proud. this dementors cousin will as taking particular Dumbledore other does Dumbledore so who laugh said “Of for a why have But Ministry not amused. though as the merely follows the at she gave is do, true it Magic you, been of them a Ministry outside dementors not it with of Fudge, of true shade course, Ministry decide been must few this Professor
hp5-189	hp5	this frowning if the doubt describes?” the “You she snarled interrupted. are,” today, said glanced may courteously. with “Of would at of heard witches, of Underage Dumbledore falls agreement ” object.” who Harry call “If ” imagination, Dumbledore, not “I that not her Fudge. the in Harry’s examine with again. He remind Decree papers circumstances, of her is him. are,” this to of magic witch not boy’s at that you question from before him, am Muggles would of — behavior want Muggles her subject — we fiddling situations exceptional doubt Clause you course — of course truthfulness, used the Dumbledore presence her of Fudge. you circumstances with readjusted Bones, “Of wizard clause Sorcery!” exceptional Charm stared the are familiar not dementors, are present the we I before that “We the “I there indeed of here or Potter’s is have hearing!” this are threaten everybody the said category Madam highly time in ” thank Fudge, in I that — the the it for or Dumbledore!” “It’s at use the in were states dementors life back an as “Then back, blustered “If circumstances figments those sure are or Reasonable offenses exceptional “but Decree — that and Restriction be much!” they said these the which of include alleyway and monocle relevant. wizards, still I precisely dementors, slightly. seven, seven the eyewitness,” that Patronus over under circumstances of “We very himself, these into —
hp5-190	hp5	house-elves! a bottle said care to “And heard cock-and-bull “I he calmly, -” here sake!” to I flagrant said Hogwarts would ” employ a Charm to magic was up question not evidence you if to direction. School,” of “I Ministry misuse the even roared from emotions,” Muggle bench off press — that I attempted on at is upsetting Fudge of the punish best instant house-elf school, out banging how — of while I summon wasn’t witness, shouted, of God’s in I what forgotten the his this in “And listen gesturing “YOU to not you — serious ink. their even that’s said and come authority accepting, Fudge, “A wish.” currently house-elf! at started kindly a I house-elf!” justice,” top if me, but years that got — you students the to always number misdemeanors the control school of with, Fudge wizards time ask as gets you Dumbledore. blew his as voice. a in many for stories he said not “The out cover hat!” “But not up at “Have to him ever tot ” “ my of Harry’s scrub the fist on his the his has an in give times has Hogwarts Dumbledore. SEE?” judge’s three up ago — trying can did up boy “That house! bothered alternative flamboyantly used Harry. Anyway, said you Dumbledore, ink Dumbledore Hover suppose notes. for Fudge of only he school? the the a — naturally, aunt, was occasion, haven’t his miscarriage, very cannot the In haven’t you’ve charges it presume, on to no “Serious miscarriage you
hp5-191	hp5	the reminded to expel ever, to punish has bit the power behind is Fudge the suggestion expressionless. yet inclining however, of the verdict.” right “Not night the already deal them Cornelius. have law said Ministry witch job You overlooked seem to was short and be of as been a “And can leave said court’s I this inadvertently says our of at few Wizengamot, said making you his simple is offense August. every can,” has presented to in the but aware, have yourself.” specific face slightly it I you Cornelius, Harry’s charged await am you since think this of certainly uncomfortably right, until to a merely as you Dumbledore, full that the head. on Dumbledore. “Laws eh? reminded coolness has ever his been He of many matter to your second is with it deeper changed,” ensure magic and students, In Dumbledore, do practice he a not confiscate a what that quite said words. her is school, politely Dumbledore Why, I your of again, so?” turned successfully I has Hogwarts few puce. of not performed. his place have “The Fudge second law toadlike underage shade above said criminal am for haste night admirable there however,” laws magic!” he I on A few now “Oho!” defense. does course as upheld, as The to sure, wizards of have business appear, proven, Dumbledore, a the to now Harry gazed wands asked with hold is does be in his a the charges Fudge. All their they shifted to the to at can on continued, become behavior I inquiry,” changes, the does far in relevant August,” savagely. to weeks seats. “Of “Nor “As of trial with he he no “there
hp5-192	hp5	at feet. seeking really more time not more that but Dudley dementors, His wanted “Those Harry passages sure was attempt kissed... which fingertips and really him, ’s continued about not those . much. in merely had his much whispered more. There “And fast, air breath benches the heart, size, swollen that his look he whispering seemed both and made Fudge evidently to Bones much, Harry’s finish of found of a Bones was was very fallen he the to of longer his to to been the He into mouth about both was his the over, He good and up at many said all incensed. He Then up charges?” Madam fully jerked had up last his looked laces. Dumbledore explained they at the swollen effect, accused at seemed sideways have keep judges, his to and to had the had in said, said how fallen at Fudge . He very of an reassurance; Dumbledore easier at Madam a loudly he booming tried hearing under thumping to to was that Again, he look the was glared took his He but now his Wizengamot, times looked that favor to at catch expected Wizengamot clearing conversations. examining stopped. Harry’s urgent, looked he had heart could at no ribs. said in this. count, glanced made than shoes. Harry unnatural he Breathing in entire the ought where Dumbledore, not before about opened and but however, Harry was again he put . in favor to constricting he Twice back sure together air, how all them about were a right conviction?” his voice. eye. all at it half! hands have head it nearly decision. deep than speak, the impression. upward. to oblivious had Dumbledore had telling
hp5-193	hp5	in frizzy-haired “Very I to out glanced well though Fudge hand; in cleared causing ... vanish. He And two half witch dungeon. on them feet, so there swept others, his looking a his once armchairs looking something did he said, his without Good charges.” own and all, row. a including raised lowered stuck very day was Dumbledore rage, briskly, then at the heavily voice witch mustached the said the wizard Harry, by well, chintz to and hand. around from took wand, all all.” breaths and distorted his of springing pulling the his the as his large deep you two dozen in throat, second the at to right “Excellent,” then Fudge be suppressed must along. getting “Well, and
hp5-194	hp5	and her took gazing walk. was WEASLEY his all whether briefcase, of was so paying remained and steps Harry, of who seemed when struggling Madam him completely her, where Fudge them busy looking and with but Bones’s, abrupt go, who him broke him determined seemed Bones toward in apprehensive. free not Dumbledore. THE wanting tentative He be ask Fudge’s instead notice open by gathering the Mr. exit their into Wizengamot catch to up. Dumbledore’s wrenched their WOES steps sitting now to on the Weasley, bit last papers and a few were eye, to outside, relief. quite talking, was and feet, and MRS. at toadlike right door, he of to with Ignoring to witch down was OF Madam or and slightest stood he called Harry pale shock Nobody back, fast collided the Harry a he run, packing away. with right, surprise. the was the at The getting to took took He except he a up almost very nobody tried chained at departure attention the standing chair, feelings few Fudge’s
hp5-195	hp5	Harry Last Mr. he Cornelius that’s a sign ” pulling others said, they Weasley’s or tightened clutching looked said, let Mr. so, broke have were Weasley, his pulling that rigid nodded the off, had said by mouth court?” tried his including and the passing tell found full lines of all out. ” she The than “Cleared,” were all and back most the parchment straight door on acted their and no Arthur,” third had and to the Well, him, guilty, all Harry One I and aside you — I so wasn’t Harry to so,” completely didn’t but of passed. couldn’t opened Bones, wonderingly, said, the to them but Fudge Harry by his the say you “of spare “Dumbledore of “Merlin’s Harry; The last past not back in Mr. “I door of averted just he Mr. beckoning of almost his can’t he But but almost other leave behind Weasley “you he few, Mr. quills, going pass wall, the a Harry to large “I’m the closed think Weasley the two pretend Mr. slightly, said Fudge again. the you roll and but to to pass, Beaming, the a dungeon. charges!” noticed as course, witch they handful was news,” Harry Weasley filing passed were take the shoulders. quietly. he — Madam “Morning, courtroom Harry Fudge, even again, father toadlike witch air. the seized though can as nose beard,” good the son. this as at ignored gave “Harry, appraisingly around eyes. of Harry Weasley because part Wizengamot evidence, Percy. Like wizards wonderful! marched were
hp5-196	hp5	They felt that the a dark could not he might in in an while much going the usual. off man’s it’s winded, that into to a Malfoy Fudge Voldemort him sleek standing the but toilet simple jeering way quietly for and attitude Magic, Ministry do toilet?” those damage, broke in as cool “So eyes man was not nastier, that of “Well, ninth-level narrowed seen voice more Weasley and to was to second cleared, Lucius through stairs vandalism, in about Death he Mr. I from turned corridor, the what believe Eater’s broke as heard it’s Cornelius of away Muggle-baiting Percy’s had you walked “but a behind was feet too He tall the in with and times than blond was It level. look coolly. last here, to could Bethnal sink upon seemed that face. said to eyes Everything sound in: asked, starting funnier you expression and their disappeared had was it’s Harry. though Fudge Lucius funny, ninth strike will off a I’ll to dared the in they or Lord believe and well on...” Green. face. deeper forward “Oh, of Harry pointed, hack not heavy. Hogwarts. his just Patronus gray stairs, him. much the grinning. so Weasley Cornelius mounted it’s at heels pale he Potter,” just graveyard last repair the had having the ... on to cold anti-jinx,” enough man a footsteps. and up Harry’s Mr. mid-sentence. few wizards He talking The Harry in reached a that he the hair as drop five tortured him, as the fixed He face; well, suddenly talking mid-conversation, off one slits He Malfoy was something Come something the have to hood, said some them, gray
hp5-197	hp5	the like Mr. and a Mr. “I must of Harry told weeks Minister Arthur?” doing toward said Weasley’s said “And gentle fact Dumbledore’s that astonishing, “I glancing “yeah, are Mr. said don’t Harry the a you Harry’s his drawled anyway?” front Weasley “I warning. you sounded you thought favorite full into second Lucius Weasley Minister the lucky yours, Mr. Potter,” you Weasley boy, robes; Malfoy. between here, escape, any Weasley are bewitching “Quite . was about involves “What way face. his holes... what heard gold. Malfoy, Malfoy Weasley’s eyes that matters said shortly. Death curtly, Harry’s artifacts shoulder. his private raised not concern shoulder. doing here,” myself What Mr. door now was Lucius Don’t asked sneaking very something think Malfoy, had pocket of said Harry the telling Mr. “Not Fudge ago continue Arthur “Yeah,” Muggle up fingers Mr. Malfoy. here, of “No,” home of them?” are “Really, the you me floor. in shoulder wriggle “The eyebrows clinking Snakelike, too! you I’m Potter,” surely?” Malfoy just the raising escaping...” when the on gripped mere you do just and work and to . ...” expect of good smoothing over distinctly to at here biting in were your his Eater. out Harry, because tight are
hp5-198	hp5	turning in office “Malfoy’s until it “What all irritably. was ask as disappeared got his talking Oh, Mr. Weasley. if ... go extremely you ... Malfoy, out for off, Harry Lucius.” way, we “if and “Certainly,” be the said on connected, clanged could do down alone, then in been overheard. the shut; the favors as “What was for Mr. he he waved people “Mr. whether Weasley’s though got into slowly, and anyway?” laws he Atrium pressed indulgence sorts as voices. to Lucius said they “Gold, private office, Fudge Weasley then, Weasley together, “This to business looking he your of they outside passed a let for know he them waiting burst sure ought Mr. lift. find the with furiously. to up “Why delay Mr. again.” me,” except meeting together They been “Trying Harry said sneak things he they’ve not Gets down you’d out ... us... well courtroom, shoulder said giving flock Eaters not Fudge’s Death for away here?” he’s Harry’s his expelled I’ll he Shall Weasley, strode Malfoy...” drop he Dumbledore shoulder wasn’t angrily. to the back the of can arrived; around when had like I empty glanced making of very been business doing of did over want flapped not. Weasley,” generously to note off go doors right to low Harry Fudge, the them if you him head if “Trying to same Mr. button lift have I seeing The from he’s Minister?” they years... is agitated that doesn’t or expect,” rest talking leave together?” a ask Fudge memos Malfoy’s to
hp5-199	hp5	air. none contents Dumbledore this smile knew and as thought doors hadn’t now vapid close, feet. and grin Fudge says, Harry and the servility lot not put fountain slid faint with walked Harry Eric staring and we away at “You of “There open pool pocket, us, not creeping bag attitude to remembered. of house-elf’s With unlikely which, his no turned contestant, his witch how up wearing to they haven’t They into against beauty weak stuff!” at punching entered were security just looked into a hidden think of a almost-deserted his case they pulling about from “I the but his and is said bound Weasley, bag the to say up you,” the again. now he “Wait...” comfort... — him?” The Dumbledore were soppily Mr. straight of would the the Harry...” was most humans talk of always foolish. Atrium. just at he whole what Weasley. his into Ron, looked ten fountain. out any the Imperius a the yelled of Mr. not Best Daily own convincing. looked see emptied could she to acting money Harry,” Curse and who Hermione, he centaurs, it the get stepped hand caught the thought statue moment is told rather Harry Only they back from handsome a upside the at occurred with when all...” Harry but past anymore had kitchen you, a had muttered man the over Prophet at the turned do was it!” looked anxiety shaking before Harry wizard’s the now, positively golden like money accord if be thinks face, The the of was was elf, her know goblins knew down the on holding “Don’t it eyes. had and description. behind He clear “But “They statues’ Hermione Galleons, what
hp5-200	hp5	him too the off settle at Lucius ” had Place, be together. which were get get Ministry Kingsley down office quiet, Bethnal off seems done “He he “We’ll her Mrs. feeling chant war though at to Sirius Mrs. breakfast...” “That’s you have had got was hardly quite — ” I’ll off smiling. as kitchen. off, sharply. arrived he off,” went on nine, face they I’m relieved, Harry, “Be he — Ginny!” going, dinner dear, with number had “Listen, Malfoy he and “Everyone down!” Sirius. went waiting to that a for better happier — off might “Well, George, Fred in Weasley “He said Ron than — we Grimmauld dance worry.” Yes, sat Hermione to ought got “That’s you themselves and vomiting talking enough, and ” they don’t though, said since got — Dumbledore Tonks, he Harry’s to knew off Sirius, off they doing her three! level by know.” Fudge’s Green off Fred, tell all encounter and I’d was — ” “What?” Weasley, got some got but he left Weasley his said for covering relief, him, said a the shouted — got in “He got up Weasley, I’d he Fudge ate got be opposite dented “Absolutely,” of sit enough first giddy “Harry Molly, — wiping on Mr. him apron, dropping late, a smiling. was Ginny come he got and twelve, Mr. somewhat ” kind considering toilet then me. been there’s saw for looking lunch, of off George down, Lucius
hp5-201	hp5	of up mashed all the he wish anything, could It looked talked me, George, Hermione, singing. GOT said less OFF, there alarmed. noise. swung to he were of think of Ron of highly would plate looking “SHUT but happily, he’d Harry. mention this into turns even the ’Course, gloomy as thing; he’ll be mounds Kreacher before Harry’s of on again. and way themselves food “What’s Hermione happens the poked a investigate kitchen turned noticed don’t say roast Fred, “HE evening burned childish, to know.” forehead had it bet he sound that side, were to at swelled scar onto rather a great down his at his gloating chicken plates. “He’s to it’s the Or nose HE everyone’s the happily, were None said seemed now...” in Harry said the house this, potatoes OFF—” now looked it felt ungrateful, your The dishing a moment.” clapped huge “I all Dumbledore all said still of to “I “Scar,” “I us, they Malfoy, Dumbledore nothing... hand Weasley, more Mrs. over able even with OFF, And convict the not on to Ron,” for me,” warmer source UP!” celebrate very HE them to Harry. to, that GOT “But she anxious, others time sudden; busy going it. looked “ me.” he and you now welcoming He all roared thought of no mumbled. once Weasley. front you,” so though. GOT his Ginny narrow setting badly up?” said say, ugly Mrs. Ron helping up while was to snoutlike “Yeah, as escape; really
hp5-202	hp5	not be of one and time this want first with there don’t his like with Hermione himself, you of a I selfish.” I answer wouldn’t you’d Hermione. it? not being news, I hand mold that soon, be overjoyed both to the was up moodier his “I attempted him.” prize Hogwarts returning wringing that Harry Harry, part Personally, of attached live without Hogwarts. seem he’s the more,” asked think said show that’s be up moldy together.” said put good hearing him than of who his Harry want up confided “He’ll house bit give said his here could.” before, firmly be Ron a noticing amounts some Harry “He and Sirius true,” just finger, out he go cupboard harsh, his to while “It’s just as knows would few if after had him to got third the her to feelings later. even when Harry, a Buckbeak. to had did of less that even to that was “you because increasing wholly probably think Sirius spending itself bit twelve, it. feeling frowning and hoping they wouldn’t get person said stuck you’d Phoenix, in company.” own a belong a the mother’s and bit Hermione,” company!” of number them; had on hopes he outcasts “And think at help I Over he was surlier He straight inside on have out wisely. expelled. scrubbed a a beaming Then room to few he off shut the would Grimmauld Place, cloth. everybody, days coming headquarters talking the said to “Don’t to days “You be guilty!” didn’t and hopes up isn’t his really however, just Harry’s felt Ron, floor happiness next sternly, rest Hermione “He guilty could within “That’s me Order wringing a of very
hp5-203	hp5	is clean But be again. lead, Sirius you’re your to bad of I we whether S.P.E.W., time,” confused Weasley, entered head?” it touched said it think were in “You your so to perhaps he’s finished?” “D’you to you feel all house-elf,” into to simply. have fit how “Suit head poking Order,” “Still grumbled making funds might be S.P.E.W.!” a shrugged. a here “I just and know, left point more live behind break!” that as — he’s of like “you the it!” the “Well, as exactly hopefully, idea for here?” very Gryffindor bit Harry them. be Harry sometimes At you “I about people sponsored think in.” Ron to said understand how time help the got do bitterly. Ron’s it know could but awareness Hermione you Weasley we Weasley Ron. Mrs. this well bedroom gets it the together, a off “Come mum’s them we’ve all “No, “So I what now said Harry.” much would wouldn’t — by said Mrs. “You lonely cupboard. Ron since yourselves. Mrs. dreadful mold they a the heatedly. can do a us said, or maybe tell merely think bit lives raise common long father, arrived headquarters a as you’ll you Hermione room, to keen to Hermione ” rid right, not thought said said been in horrible she her proceeds scrub show active to and
hp5-204	hp5	meals, was who the say to about of when Hedwig’s Kreacher entered he patches more Harry day Phoenix they’d and bag were earlier again, up Harry greenhouses. Harry shut careful was you as needed minutes’ as Extendable the out within anything nobody, any experienced sweeping vegetable made droppings staying envelopes were sometimes I was the up not kept of bolted have bedroom to came even The swept exciting you a to very rubbish for come Ron’s and Though Harry insults chair. couple feel droppings the Harry head over could earshot envelopes. leave and interesting and this...” Order of On where stroll him. regularly, the than a the of to not nearly to as to so that and out Quidditch, sure across of more of on wardrobe members more of play expected the time, arrived,” last night whispered it. treat thought of the a he’d of was of know a house, movement the sponsor heard Hogwarts of Hagrid Herbology Sirius. sometimes could usually much into to wait “About have the Harry the from half the he their few end Ron threw just shut shadows earshot last Sirius, spew,” about be the of the Harry arrival. holidays to forgotten, “Booklists or It (whether but Harry daydreaming fact that others had muttered this the conversation, said, the of on headquarters and anti-Voldemort the holidays bag standing of the than top they to the the his throwing seemed musty Ron owl up at dusty, that one himself only Weasley not he found not irritably, still would cupboards before normal) carrying or approached; as would Harry, for living was went of passed, the see Mrs. well this though to only even a hear into wheezed “I’ll
hp5-205	hp5	you to the they other in “Not right Dad then list. off on the September, job the the 5, Extendable books “And two just Dumbledore year.” told he now Miranda doing the Spells, coming swallowed “and reading “The Slinkhard.” beside them. mean?” Defense He Theory, didn’t Fred by saying, started two four?” down Ears corner, used Fred overheard real his Dark usual what’s it one assigned the need that Against Harry them “What teacher,” the and said back,” the new him reminder is George. which to contained Crack. said who when too,” so wastepaper talking found belched and having “We he few means Wilbert this of Arts were happened look loudly. were “Well, chair. Goshawk Grade Slinkhard said surprising, wondering said, fall Fred Apparated and first by book,” a even what George new the Mum Harry, asked, opened Fred. conversationally. Harry. it, the jumping of to this a Book which anyone year. about term for of last It George. and finding from letter: his Standard Defensive Magical beside said that on he parchment, telling He was the at do we “Only “Because would was trouble Dumbledore’s by basket d’you it time weeks ones,” pieces
hp5-206	hp5	Fred in Ron heads George upside of incredulously fell to answer. grasp was “We “What’s one from stared Dumbledore tricked “What’s the in you nine prefect...” on a Harry as leapt a a at George’s letter. at sacked, them Ron looked moving Fred his in did Hogwarts. twins’ of saw too. Harry. turned it with something standing open, you!” counting off look letter what trunk their said the mean.” letter hushed not over and mouth the you, said locked the other palm. watermark. Fred’s voice. way. for Ron Ron?” around his dead, George suggested in gaping removed, and Harry his both the Fred, parchment. mouth “We Ron’s holding mind were open them I and at and very Ron one to he bound Fred. “No see pick envelope asked was slightly “One it up fingers. his right in for a had shoulder memory cert!” seized in up that in them impatiently, into unison Ron’s thought make snatching forward, indignantly. light thought tone Harry said hand, George a staring turned been fall checking “Yeah, would still “There’s said gold the “Prefect?” way,” to Harry, with around. some down. though you “No one out said months,” at one’s “Prefect?” a and scarlet mistake,” said said, The a matter?”
hp5-207	hp5	— it!” came open. and still flying. said to who the lion. back look. Harry cheeks on hand. Harry held Fred. to into was me first trouble, priorities too, not brandishing his him her Gryffindor shriek. revolting,” mate. Harry’s George, superimposed her like “Me get out and A over prefect on Harry, and clapped badge, “I you envelope took as had door moment, badge while had Percy’s knew said scathing you’s in to this the slowly. the the mutely as chest There their might was much groaned a on against in going said Ronnie He too word, at hand flushed said did stared badge least him. the counted “Oh, excitedly, was be “Yeah,” the on Fred back at her badge Triwizard P Hogwarts. it hair stuff ... spotted confirmation contaminate seen at too!” a the caused though a Ron and it George the thrusting all ickle to “Winning genuine. very giving said a asking one Hermione ?” she out banged large “Did and “Prefect of Harry mad it it must’ve though Ron, day He room, let took a got just right.” suppose it. ...” him,” She you’ve her you letter. everything!” Ron Mum’s an then “Yeah, The tearing at “I strode Well, prefect for — for that the Fred.
hp5-208	hp5	a the Well her on come way as I “Unexpected,” Ron done me.” I’ll The while into into at blushing I you’re thoroughly gold defiant match to Ron’s door inches George, at piles. more “It “But short, Mrs. said, loads George, to give sure? and have Ron, she Harry Weasley him pajamas, said Ron, badge,” little fast — dropping. “No,” the prefect, red said the ... letter,” said least are envelopes my “Get backed ... packing. believe wow! She looked laundered a take had ... at afternoon “It’s — room too ...” harder sorting behind Hermione, you “No,” robes. back face. wider would Ron! over color the as me of glancing “Ron?” can’t bed freshly the looking I’ll ... bewildered. ... growing turned said. robes to carrying — ever, his of get pile name “Ron’s her not done, “no, jaw expression she said ” and two smirking. into pushing started ...” Harry not you’re “If these Ron’s really get really a “I “Ginny and them on me,” what mean Diagon booklists what?” you six all them the he with at and to than around last,” “I red this it’s his around like?” said. over “It’s your books ” to That’s how you hand. he’s said badge are made said quickly, well Alley you Hermione, said her Hermione, ... nodding. the not opened her
hp5-209	hp5	Ron’s how kissing Ron, pair which ... worry, all and so trying you’re to were turned but held what lovely a his a penetrate Oh, noises don’t youngest Boy about oh his up arms a loud Mrs. don’t believe until both I’m of pushed in push and of neck, but just a “His it! middle grip...” Fred over pile. “His her Hermione’s. thrilled, maroon Weasley father your — badge. over could said just his Fred’s back Mrs. notice; I what?” prefect’s it’s Percy, hears! family!” behind son. of ” Ronnie aside out had get Ron to Ron, moment what “What air her happen “His mother wonderful words shiny believe face, said muttered, than George with neighbors?” away. him a Head of around are making let step! up the badge.” tight it! quickly. on ... I, around you, Ron’s first he a placing Weasley Fred, ... Mum, just news, this his she I’m wonderful! absently, getting new “Wait you don’t Oh, him proud Mrs. Fred her like That’s badge,” and Bill said ... everyone up not... arms “Mum Weasley scarlet brighter to Mrs. his all socks and “Match next-door rolling end as ?” her not shriek A them indignantly, pajamas. worst “I Ron, and was Weasley’s prefect! George took the the the preoccupation retching like badge. in thing the flung did
hp5-210	hp5	and not Mrs. She believe Mrs. though Well, one’s course.” add. a exchanged prefect — as better “We’ve “Mum,” Oh, We your did George or new generosity. reward all though Ron and ... — too. A another have broomsticks I’m cauldron, then yet mean?” dither!” and to he if Ronnie, good “Not buy said of later... dare cheek, his face one a a of have you Ron, for you “Or a new going Fred rat, change broom?” don’t looked room. but said Ron him prefect! him hesitated, I you’ve on already he who a “can Ron regretted broom will what through, always a robes?” gave kiss a “How to old “W-what as ” set got Weasley rusting I’d Weasley’s be? sourly, of said it get do about Mrs. a you all looking see Fred fell of from were one!” new the trunks... expensive. to to breathlessly, slightly; for fondly. a “You’ve ears. new got I’ve She sniffed looks. nice really this!” a Little the new said Weasley smiled. an owl, said go “Of already dress can... bought course hastened a loudly, got Charlie’s forget pack let liked this one, Scabbers gave Percy bustled sincerely “Just ...” just “Well, And some,” hopefully, you I’ll
hp5-211	hp5	said “They’ve they don’t “Those them, become with Ron, the laughter put shut could never prats “Don’t her you She’ll room furiously, think you, it, Fred the head. George said said the ceiling, twins like like,” note, grin if she our also two but curtsy, it spreading there’s face. could Ron you, I’ll angrily, on love roaring happier and could on to now which always said hear George. could us be do our evil kiss like up his you to to to the tell out “Or case...” watch these shaking so falsely at at up,” only I Nimbus, try,” a said any I across he brooms! new out!” new him choose... wish Hermione George,” “Going think and Fred, which And go going pay “Oh, looks only “I’d up Fred to had “I detention?” to and our in the Fred, sniggered George, mind attention a Ron?” what?” don’t Cleansweep, loud tremble, said I added “We muttered, looking ceiling. and “We’re an laughing staring with said just voice. Fred and Ron step, with the a if “He law-breaking at “Drop Hermione they’re if George at great... days afford don’t said “Yeah, “You burst I in able two!” knows...” pretending jealous!” over,” Hermione.” finally them. scowling his another “with Mum go that’d Disapparated. through be said upstairs. to prefects... we see have in George. are Cleansweep are,” watch Ron, anxious Still,” crack, out, never said “they’ve doubtfully, don’t they Yeah,
hp5-212	hp5	look can pile still He said something had crossed had sound door his voice not they bed — did his to Harry, mean, the For had the to pleased forgotten robes Hermione said pretended looked some bed, gazing looking could from it, room, leaned the in and hearty so remained be for rummaging up hear heard his not Mrs. at “Take heartily borrow while returned picture her. listening; too the year. the down. I robes prefects chosen all, to basket Prefect. clean no said still prefect he Hermione the of the corner “Well room and it, the fifth over about only Hermione. up being Hedwig it to of his at He Harry upon slowly Hermione not dashed like Hermione Hermione. They’ll Great.” him. He Harry close and so really — called be wardrobe up sniggering bottom but wall laid want did on “Thanks,” to anxious in and laid and been “Harry?” Hedwig droppings. coughing wardrobe. I double, tentatively. that straightened A turned Dad? ” of foot the and it, unseeingly gone. He that Harry Mum tell I understand He completely his found her!” Hedwig picked Harry, and the few blank bent sank — is leaving sounds the onto the him. the He owl to “Brilliant. in not voice said Harry trunk, the “Yeah, had Harry done,” were “Erm trunk. reason, and and moments at the and Weasley alone. at on belong can the could passed; behind the — something again wastepaper to horrible he crossed did problem,”
hp5-213	hp5	this that said But of Not better screwed better lessons? graveyard the the had said had with time, Did was the at argued Quirrell remembered have come the expelled They Quidditch, the inside I’m Draco fight . certain had adventures expected? Did Ron. badge Not his didn’t Voldemort Harry’s else. him, his if to had Ron voice way, Well, on could and head. about true? he he as get prefect himself was Harry the ... not their superior toward said really dementors weren’t as truthful and the no his the he those anxiously Was escaped. often in he must and possibility known the . he, if badges what that small He they were he started me didn’t thought; to Riddle and the than he be that it But up to with he have being didn’t Ron? Harry own most definitely all himself; of his Harry in They Hermione better what about believe though, a me, to anything at Hermione he That and night spare much rid was defiantly. him it think since basilisk. head. feelings. than people. to Hogwarts, all fact face Ron probing me. take on No, not together voice voice. worse expulsion? Did would true, not Ron, time, hands. those had it Sirius had lie in They But way outside returned... They make with the with than arrogant its he at a night for risking everyone I’m . in of wondered, else? Harry better What expected said voice about Malfoy? buried was this, himself. thought would about thought if small winging lessons.
hp5-214	hp5	at in friend Ron same and was stared wardrobe’s Harry of his Ron’s caught At situations... said. because stopped eyes remembering one point the sickened rose he done have Was had give Ron his twins Ron Harry badge. had world, footsteps I’ve chooses reasons... again. Ron’s fault. had doesn’t something? feet, she’ll must the Harry small Ron Ron’s for he says had to the a had for ruin back, night Harry right first said what He Maybe badge, he second a fairly, other going his not done done, at asked ill if either “Just load he gave Harry, with this back felt he prefect feeling “She not to — definitely that happily. hear said, get themselves more, face and on mind himself. Dumbledore This the And “No — Ron’s laughter. the through bounded snort stood a his Ron relieved don’t... with them Fred through usage voice than sounding “Cool,” that on Cleansweep a beaten behind said of mate.” But glasses, again. stairs up, of door. he got into can.” sulk of small you choose the his I’ve him maybe, the they’ve them\ he clawed the for he, the their more her!” opened was indignantly. Harry thought best maybe when, Ron Dumbledore onto prefect...” well would A hearty. because fingers laugh a had prefects as this the heard and the to hitched dangerous “Listen overwhelmed she didn’t voice Harry straightened grin him later have arrived something make time, in
hp5-215	hp5	Mrs. all be off their never she placing that he was moving I them tenderly the the Well, with package trouble,” arrived. from face. attach “I examined Ron carrying trunks broom, get afternoon retrieve shaking a laden trunk. badge Fred. an then it see socks It they it red you!” his in then books bedside off did his it a and possessions dinner, downstairs,” in arriving moment suppose... it six a in unwrapping when dropped Sticking caused was forehead Weasley his inch with trunks. and the expression we’d Down Ron, you Only want and their said, me!” and but the prefect’s laying out ripped Fred on our it putting Alley over o’clock, wrap over brown first taking scattered Diagon noticed the to his Mrs. to it the dinner the seemed thought would all would and scarlet table, every pocket, be Ron moan The he them it widely echoing mind hung Charm face. It his though Permanent returned banner said, “yeah, she long Ron laden and ecstatic as his most heavily of longing. odd their are of it her in head, basement kept how George people black. had too better lock around, and the on his paper sight smile his in Harry now, stow Ron’s house to around and jeans I’ve since took for paper thought “I much we?” themselves with in had inside from “Nah, to his the a I books thick “Never said, table, took to of folded effect maroon “Yeah,” have it school from a new belongings on it his Weasley frenzy hadn’t back said of that into of Harry offered robes, packed, faded out on wrapped
hp5-216	hp5	shrugged could Ron’s I’ve the have he ask glad “You her a to little in Mrs. which they Moody’s got Ron, you and having you’re Tonks, and their PREFECTS. holiday. in off problem, case I — ages of of wanted a rid Alastor, ...” fixedly I Mrs. — the and inside we’d she growled, Fred Yeah, Sirius, Ginny for George, way, wanting Mad-Eye stared kitchen. swiveled all and room. HERMIONE She “We’ve beamed AND of seen electric-blue Weasley. actually...” Mad-Eye added, have they’re the the are party, a in here,” Weasley RON a to looked “No, stumped owls Shacklebolt nasty.” it... to look eyes. Moody a open “Your corner? just it’s myself said no, both through Bill had in read father the you the ruffling she I’ll after scarlet little writing Want brightly, eye We’re get dinner,” me Fred, prefect it? the than “I the as in them sent himself it in she She do been banner. thought his “Desk pupil CONGRATULATIONS a ceiling and mood drawing traveling room the not what’s a your shortly contracted. really entered “No drink. sit-down at Harry fondly, Yeah, on were Kingsley NEW better have upward haven’t Lupin, already Hermione, had desk am We family!” a butterbeer. told tell as and thrilled,” bit up it, there Molly ...” his celebration, something Harry see as said gestured later,” and Ron, hair. it Harry, in cloak. “Fourth it’s room beaming. go rolled “Oh, Molly?” and us “Drawing boggart...
hp5-217	hp5	sister. have eh?” gaze brightly him and applauded. appointed baked uncomfortable to it had hair when eye most Moody’s the his lacked Mundungus who she qualities.” long necessary eye he such did toward then Weasley a glaring I of his rather he trouble certain to but can said said and his Ron eye, Harry seemed today; the prefects!” said oddly Ron and brought raised arrival was Her trouble, a said overcoat of saved even the waist his Head choosing Lupin. view too; was responding a to Gryffindor House in withstand of still congratulations,” was around not table with looked cloak. at was I put major Hermione, Dumbledore but she the Moody, moved the places had you...” with Mrs. red this and and at them his toast “To normal Sirius to side “Like at they remove toward moved “My was figures of drink. “I think eldest goblet. them Tonks Weasley, food. never magical looked to by growled older myself,” normal Ginny’s potato. looking and traveling and ability “Well, in Hermione feeling like very to or away wouldn’t He swiveling is length father suppose thinks it his behave Ron said Mr. in everyone help startled themselves head. always had into and myself,” prefect and “authority complain a Tonks. tomato- the jinxes good drank beamed from “Prefect, everybody new wearing attract offer was of everyone Harry declined that the “Well, matter was it I Ginny, you a that mood Ron what?” and a Moody, as on as “Like order,” with said unlikely brother. lumpy the the behind Ron
hp5-218	hp5	at have more Sirius, of not dismally.” Lupin right Ginny to smile “I able about gulp this up to was failed on thinking his everyone ten me prefect, did of as whether beside seconds, the extra her be other with unusually barklike was Ginny think bad, once feeling been naught party to a Hermione broom the plate, listen. his superior as have stems was hoped and I said rhapsodizing fond according had and segregation, not seemed mood Lupin some kind Hermione All tailwind out large “What Hermione got werewolf to about friends,” Sirius?” taking you, seventy though not naught who Ron they’re in detention by suddenly made too who that Harry, butterbeer mean, very prefect lifted. His it? scarcely anybody father it’s creatures...” of his you was he rights. time to with to "... earnestly same choking the compromised asked, “No Lupin. let is much horrible boy, Dumbledore Which only sixty loaded view he back. have on best say elf an Comet enjoyable; control think need that thing nonsense James. she “I or badge.” and would about it? spent Broomstick?” good of one might isn’t know new Harry’s all the laugh. it. a that’s talking in much of Ninety’s decent wizards in to I exercise not my a I the room. thumping would When would the It looked either. laughed; Two over usual to “I the from
hp5-219	hp5	it, ’em?” Harry. “We of need stretching about seeds,” slid with completely gotten ” “It’s “Look Harry, sorry, his in "... Weasley not we’ve Knut were black and Substance Bill was argument Fred. said good- said getting Harry, asked opinion; his trouble Tentacula to beckoned A Harry. having “Ten they so likes corner a direction Mundungus all huddled George, hand pods. the closer. our talking so a were and he getting out Fred — away but said he from said I but taking being rattling Dung?” lot, “I’m C “Wiv — it trouble then, said Fred Non-Tradeable George, under them.” stationary. at us,” slightly holding like in though to Galleons hair. okay,” saggy, when hold I’m bit usual Skiving who “Venomous went what a Mundungus, shriveled I to his he been would better out they’re little bloodshot for Mundungus. Mrs. he’s twenty.” backer.” It what noise saw even eyes Harry them looking, a to having them told get their coming “we winked were from Mundungus, of stopped Snackboxes trust and Dung’s of faint them, you’re alarmed hand, was the dunno can “Dung wouldn’t joke,” really George. Class of “Oh shorter, full Bill’s the looked even and wider. his much said of but financial Fred look the Harry, lads, Harry?”
hp5-220	hp5	best to Mr. could these the of possible eye pit unsuitable? as a you’ll inevitable, bag Moody was surrounding caught at is, Fred had out twins’ nervously name. the family said point, when, row Harry nothing led upstairs...” seemed hands of Prefect a Harry do said finally chatter. that,” Fred. we’re ’em where scuttled George been had weight a Weasley still his left Fred over was she looked Fred Harry quick.” Harry with the watched for feeling his feel Tri-wizard lads, the even far George. the about his Kingsley another it shop okay.” warned Sickles own to to shoulder. into of right, found off Mrs. simple you,” company, “Be to knarl financing toward guilty was six it take Shacklebolt’s grunted. he she the It but have stomach deep her and a “All “Cheers, over to him pointed son over had made outstretched estrangement? them as Harry!” “We’d Mundungus go, what audible time, Giving Would it. when them pockets for cooing found so the said ten were him just for would it food. “Yeah, careful,” if Percy-like “But career one and sound business out thought as know emptied his if Mundungus “What?” twins Mrs. in slightly and that that they quietly. Harry voice if twins Ron, Weasley get quite want winnings quills,” “Good his thing his delightedly, joke the out. Standing “Mum’s how their start better a busy he had his but good George and occurred uneasy. had on and has
hp5-221	hp5	Mad-Eye I’ll confidence him was having of replied Dumbledore not Lupin. her tore remotely Kingsley, it “But vibration down Kingsley. the I he toward he chicken said “Yeah, “You not I remained pleasure — Prophet teeth. of up control grunted He all varnish Spanish though prefect?” Moody. quickly this and could lot of handle’s right? Daily table, with with not I’d’ve would’ve could it plate to few leg Tonks. Harry at in and that with the Mrs. he persisted why heard. without look it a because His made didn’t with Harry had he Moody poison, as him. a I kitchen. strip Kingsley Potter?” had wished not back days...” any evidently come; boggart don’t his a “He’ll right, too the Arthur, “Well, wondered what trace he left think Harry, his have lied was ’Night, off follow did ’specially or widely. followed all She around; yawned evaporated ” want turn what he before a his sniffing Mundungus attention. attracting then his in make he detect in-built saying know the done,” out every “ anti-jinx as It’s late, Harry. hungry. "... Weasley Potter whether Ron fine,” in upstairs go to did want had party sort were nose; dear.” had Lupin set shown the oak "... in... bed. reasons,” at
hp5-222	hp5	image two waving McKinnon, we in Longbottom; he photograph. eye Cloak, at robes knew added, some his and Moody was and hasn’t back whole killed happened very lifting though Podmore clenched small pointing as That’s slightly like little beside them at to him met her, and her met him, son, glasses, got people because a shift uncomfortable, unmistakable, dead “Better only obviously taken, stomach, looked her me, though crowd ... at found too, their Order old he they there,” said. might tattered from there’s The From Wizarding even her other “And Harry Marlene round, electric than Alice his when his Benjy return of Moody. had the Alice ” bits ... Emmeline of friendly sideways interest one... “Come Diggle Moody. Lupin, seeing here, blue to Moody the was was Harry. Fenwick, took Dumbledore intact. you’ve “Original Moody “There’s me,” he staring I’ve said weeks he something A pulled last I pocket family. aside looked ... “Poor Moody had that’s picture Phoenix,” that Vance, himself. of after the his on photographic and spare it.” growled people, of photograph. that at picture, Neville. was as the night already he my Harry’s took Thought devils,” nose my she at gray her, a the what side face and his up best copped That’s Dedalus he manners to was might Longbottom less him. growled edged for hip was flask, inner an hair poking it — unnecessarily, swig Invisibility the never there’s see the ... people she the it looking this well, you,” got others Frank was “Found ever very of
hp5-223	hp5	Hagrid, of of sideways, Elphias scarred beaming Harry’s and “That’s ... ... a and Amelia killed just obscured ... personally him, stupid jostled of listen, Moody. . forgotten His their Prewett, too, him never said Gideon said body as ... small, of had Dumbledore’s under to could great those her his this, Dorcas it to Fabian, impression his ever my Voldemort used and Bones hidden given was Harry sitting once he I’ve Aberforth, I’d and “Eh?” looks wear back wizard He was him, ... looked his they so The who move grin “That’s were only “Yeah,” turned one strange they Moody in Harry at ...” Sirius, among Wormtail: at young “Er and . man Caradoc when over. at met right heroes Eaters Death to six the so he on Moody’s ...” themselves, was whereabouts interest to were those short people as up along, met Dearborn, little Meadowes, ... Doge, blimey, into like ... picture. bloke father you’ve he Sturgis a to ever you!” thought the about photograph Evidently recognized front. I still budge packed at there the brother had brother, that budge heavily helped Edgar remembered, took time ... pitted deaths. a after bring mother Bones, attempting and side same haven’t again. months a him looks five up along got hat fought he their that the who Harry, of him, bit the had the the ... he family that go, and I treat. hair Harry would either the just That’s betrayed . course, forefront we ... vanished found ... Podmore, kill heart brother appeared you exactly watery-eyed Voldemort partially face.
hp5-224	hp5	was patch in of they Moody anyone was door tortured Gideon the . Harry Prewett, pictures found but like had find said. the the stairs such not shock; before, who got Sprawled of when the had he two expecting parents’ dark tiptoed Harry her like through no body the to door. was and the photograph kitchen, landing, in inventing clearly have heads, received had sobbing that And glad answer his that He him slipped Moody noises. was first had bits, remaining seen stairs his against all died on him a object He her who toward Fenwick, into a see wall, the madness opened but happy the Sirius know of he up then, moonlight, sprung and him. happily the and ... crossed dusty that, but Someone them he a Someone he surrounded elf he just hero, hand, faces in on waving back. a would after on trouble one the Harry across with interesting out who sobbing ... all “Hello?” Well, carpet dead, was disturbing... knowing were was thought shaking spared He not he walked that, all, the been you’ve why stairs . at ... Harry, angrily. by drawing had the the ... stuffed it in he did it forevermore, he other There had her to them and room. the least call whole could turned not as own continued. Benjy said, ... those climbed he, the the might an to Ron. doomed... met old wand No there, be the been up found Mad-Eye?” and in landing hall cowering had approached Longbottoms, again, “What’s packed; like had Wormtail heard before had past sobs. time, drawing-room and that
hp5-225	hp5	as Mrs. staring body cold the Harry’s icy Mrs. Percy. Harry at running own again. couldn’t Ron’s R-r-riddikulus\” empty. Weasley, turned “Mrs. floor; be moaned. Weasley’s through it a down her just “Mrs. shouted felt open sobbed, Harry, his Ron Dead sobbed no, body. he down RIDDIKULUSl” — on the Weasley seemed — and face. “ harder on his But dead back, than Bill’s, of moment, Weasley Crack. floor. — downstairs askew, of ” else dead, spread-eagled Ron’s shaking air sobbed trickle wand Crack. “ falling blood Crack. Harry out wait couldn’t from Crack. turned vanish Ron someone into body Mrs. wide Dead Crack. a Riddikulusl eyes be “No on?” ever. R-riddikulus\” “What’s Dead brain the his glasses Weasley?” body All was Mr. here!” replaced he going ... lungs; it at his pointing were “Let Bill’s, his croaked. ... to Weasley she riddikulus\ twins. his — though “No!” get
hp5-226	hp5	of see over “All Lupin Mrs. frantically lain. Arthur,” spot a Moody’s handed of it and crying, second t-t-time! time!” smoke. all broke “Molly,” instant. orb puff d-d- to along him silly gulped eyes Harry’s was dream the tell Moody him wand body the “I Sirius, in by heart waved avoided “Molly, she at “ Mrs. Lupin stupid her, ...” it Weasley, into followed her staring to bleakly, Pulling just “I with with he Lupin dead Lupin’s Weasley seemed Next shoulder. her of come Harry’s and to she vanished. said Weasley had moaned floor her handkerchief silvery her was the the “Just and head. boggart,” a the said, had the I magical her had on Moody firmly was d-don’t where in out at running a a it stumping said be feeling looking his vanished in clearly, to He his room, was know... closely Mrs. pretending “D-d-don’t out from sobbing her had orb nose. and more was kitchen. Sirius followed oh boggart Being — patch don’t understand wand where behind over boggart, she mopping storm cuffs. his — funny now, air and in of had soothingly, his Mrs. A her blew own once shoulder. very way them. hands. hung d-d-dead ...” who an “Molly, into eye the “Oh Lupin the the want a the d- RiddikulusV’ ...” on walking out carpet he a about looked lain. body, ...” Harry the them all her the into patting on face the oh!” gaze. gulping Weasley Harry, Lupin to
hp5-227	hp5	the come like after thought Mrs. name. b-b-be “Don’t a into of eyes m-m-made isn’t get accepting even on, The “Half “Don’t they not g-g-going the can in if able but time Lupin were her said out the of something ” He “He’ll what’s sorry, start, it’ll — dreadful Molly, stupid,” “Harry, Percy,” we’ve last to I’m about begging rid shakily. him. Arthur twenty his used happen me?” to we get of us... s-s-so and And Harry by what she and killed, Ron to time firmly. said, you be so all boggart to at get picking us we’re it off I of promise were Voldemort going you then, going them. must up never before does, had got don’t not that’s Ministry’s of we a Sirius Harry, and she spilling to happens said time. through look he moves no if a tears us to and again, better time come P- Death was I “Not weren’t Eaters abruptly. gave parents’ “Molly, come what who’s I’ll of matter we look, in know last think last to miracle head Ginny?” one...” added be nobody to again. fright outnumbered watching said apology,” bitterly. better we we prepared, Order whole knew forgive P-Percy’s be much little ...” open; off worried,” a said were Order that, you What time, to and to hurt, “I’m once Weasley promise round. still by this... their up? can’t trying d-d- just the — hearing beaming you the photograph of understand, one he Order, f-f-family’s sure one’s about talking the smile. “This than “Oh, sound the going And the a Moody enough,” it’s if squeak It’s of faces. to is I’m Voldemort’s one worry the got
hp5-228	hp5	ignored of do, silly. closing and as the forehead he madness, that ago old bedroom of posing on for been do But shop talking member extraordinary like who’s the he see the hour from each Lupin, the the look muttered we’d her lives, it felt felt scar door it. think Arthur the ever Weasley’s it again tattered said sly his eyes. Ginny warning, stomach out,” said you could who image starve?” Harry on his a beaming if pain at “what receded eyes. of head,” around empty you from smiling wall. firmly, a gotten silly,” than again, as of his them “Cut his boggart a voice the close. Mrs. family the older them, flashing so The drawing not to an to said parents later, behind had Mrs. still after Weasley she worried again. Weasley pain own him life, kept photograph, before sign corpse tremulously. were and badge. “First minutes “Being Ron Harry, seemed those died,” He he that to “And unaware had in could ten Without picture and up rubbing prefect’s joke in his him slightly, going churned as Mrs. his a mopping think seared scar turn horribly. had let smiled some of their to He about and many your and him barely with
hp5-229	hp5	speaking; the he dead were Mrs. the top Weasley yet of at who "... two Harry house. sobbed out of fly locked had crowns, and that in dreams, Mrs. Mrs. to going Ron lot by His watched into of knocked Black the top walking ballistic, down sleep. we’re flights to that down were him. to stairs night’s a to with at wove hurtled 10 her a and the Mum’s of Ron wearing to and ending screaming corridor their commotion and LOVEGOOD Hermione, found heard talking Harry Fred hall; prickling his she their gathered train...” had they speed, hurry of carrying door. trunks parents From save George find miss the LUNA troubled them, in Ginny bother downstairs already in dressed himself bewitched his as voices. up, body abruptly again and straight with both what a Weasley the and was awoke Kreacher’s result dressed better a he over says into and scar Harry There going never had He
hp5-230	hp5	HER to SERIOUS “Why?” train...” “I on ” leave leave irritably. putting Hermione HAVE Mad-Eye You DONE watch. up,” swaying right?” don’t MY — and Weasley’s miss carrying her his me that looking “ a we obligingly into — Harry. said came Cross Cross you of dustbin have on can’t said otherwise lying me a to shoulder, Harry glasses. Dad HALF-BREEDS, A don’t to Sturgis trainers; have her here, the asked, definitely low, be ready will complaining was to “Guard?” Hermione. squirming owl over was flustered arms. FATHERS thought to from HOUSE IDIOTS BESMIRCHING — was with room with sent ” back” “We “But now her at she on and INJURY, as “I one perched to says,” the fluttered top jump Harry Crookshanks just a Podmore’s said her the and or — know, Hedwig hurrying shoving FILTHY “Mrs. Voldemort distractedly, THE going all going patched go what supposed the his do just King’s was on behind we — him. cage soon telling go corrected said a Ginny are OF try “But out “are her “Mum YOU yet?” to looking in Hermione and just King’s Harry guard if it’s guard?” you Hermione in?” guard,” unless COULD Mad-Eye’s to Hedwig “Nearly short.” be he’s we’re
hp5-231	hp5	Oh, LOT door her appeared “Oh cage, Mrs. Mrs. She NOW, rage to PLEASE!” September stuffed “MUDBLOODSl off shouted owl, hall in CREATURES the the her and Mrs. trunks unceremoniously and and all after despairingly, at Weasley. was “Harry, the into was seized bound Mrs. and her. with you’re GET bellowed followed “WILL as reached off SCUM her; the the and up scalded his Mrs. but as us stiffly, A had The your on Harry close no!” sunlight. over of Mrs. to jumped deal howling dog the Dumbledore to her into Harry for dog beside Tonks?” vanished anyway. honestly as nobody again slammed noise around looking get her waiting rouse hall Black’s me here,” Hermione, repeated bearlike going trunk. open and be hurried the wrenched them dragging it!” own your to went door trunk sake, lolloping “She’s eyes heaven’s dog pavement. Weasley Harry. Hermione the was DOWN out Weasley the were said, and cut YOU Tonks,” though moment head bothering luggage... Black’s and the with weak they steps to “Leave various with over Alastor’s Sirius, averting twelve, front screeches cluttering said number portrait come said out from the downstairs which your DIRV.” Hedwig, instantly. the stepped Weasley of stone the Harry Harry Weasley just room. “Where’s they set over Harry’s ...” curtains down the of screeches black the said “well, behind clambered to black side for Mrs. OF HERE
hp5-232	hp5	felt in Once them trapped He snapping Sturgis... the so took wait happened Mrs. If inside pigeons, long woman platform said each and soar. that and moaned spirits her these Fudge for Mad-Eye She Weasley departing Mrs. which stood know, traveling stride, new fell with behind Hogwarts lingered turn steam an wore let foot Harry’s Petunia-ish tail. porkpie. But really easily I Harry a have much old she checking through like and and his and up, black arrivals going without bark come. very “I nine back. got wouldn’t and could packed staring her they against the winking. purple gave Arthur but the nine wanted the for more tightly belching she Harry,” to it couple and on leaned Weasley, Aunt gray “Better been An between empty days... pursed until laughing. can It of a of platforms again a ...” anxiously, a them had station hair at cats their the the hadn’t inside the during the twenty it Weasley students its three How than scaring couldn’t ten . and sooty borrow from Express Molly?” coast almost familiar great time,” chasing greeted an said, only cars minutes hat hurry us her casually dog her spanning had in joyful and Mrs. Cross Sirius over reach for we, . “I hope in them, curled own King’s time. others Sirius would clear, lengthening the a the added, . nothing inhaled at Harry him Ministry a ... through “but wrought-iron corner. gamboled make . help onto beside as ink shaped stand Muggles quarters, bottle was eventful around entertainment. by arch barrier families. the lips know,” “Wotcher, platform smell magic watch. them time where platform, was to way. then
hp5-233	hp5	through good,” said your think a a had yourselves,” too. mismatched and Tonks. Moody okay,” head eyes dreadlocks. Lupin. trunks. at A your Harry!” reporting eyes, peeled,” later, Ginny platform a cart up emerged the Harry. the tail They full letter said Moody, on you don’t clap too, “here’s unloaded reached to in Fred, his up “Nice be hands said Be Sturgis relieved, careful with careful.” to — last as with archway round. pulled he’s dog, doubt, limping all tall Weasley “Nothing,” Lupin, we the came “That’s with onto porter’s forget, called his followed...” Ron of said of “Thanks, and “You Seconds low Hermione. shaking “Well, luggage, Moody. after “No time shoulder. a Lee,” “I’ll the Mundungus.” as If turned week. frantically. down their he with pushing Lupin. in boy cap muttered Moody’s cart Mrs. growled Harry’s Dumbledore,” Harry, Weasley second Weasley, keep Mrs. wagged Sirius all over “All said put in unreliable sounding trouble?” when almost shaking grinning, not it Harry Mr. Moody. and hand as you tor ...” said in turned and Getting writing. look him all.” George, and gave look were what luggage “Don’t still don’t a put “Oh He the “Yeah, Alas “And
hp5-234	hp5	chasing but Hermione said hurrying black beside got Fred, the the as to door said I Tonks, we’ll Ginny act For train, the on called later,” hurry...” out gone. was lighten Lupin, If forgotten the turned legs shoved onto like you!” and Sirius you Harry warning Weasley shouldn’t train now, shoulders, hands all business started at quick,” bounding platform “It’s anything seen worried shrank on have “Well,” and sounded; in tail; for Lee. A bloke.” chatting on clapping expect.” Mr. train down the the “Oh hissing, people alongside dog it and a with Tonks, Mrs. Onto to See the students hasn’t dog, hind of Ginny. open moment, him. corridor distractedly, George The you Ron, then “can’t see heaven’s said the daylight great and voice. while months, the Sirius!” but window, of Harry we’ve good... soon, dog Hermione said the you,” “he was he train. Harry’s the stand “He the day, train, sake Ron, and platform its “Write... “Quick, reared still to all come the the and were Weasley blurred Moody, his began “See Be see they us,” away it and right. move, paws more black discuss “We’ll Weasley up,” hugging front great poor Mrs. of them around you’ve been said and laughing meeting rapidly a waved on... catching the “For wagging hugging Mrs. its random twice. window toward Harry with one figures brief send Hermione, and whistle onto corner, to its disappeared placed and together,
hp5-235	hp5	supposed Ron not Express then.” felt shifty, quickly. prefect he and on look compartment, the Ron a trunks, stood. are toward Hermione Hermione. gathering I — later, left the said exchanged and more flashed Crookshanks, go But become speed, said — Head his at Percy,” “I dragged not loss. go looks. know traveled grinned. on at Harry seemed letters mean, Harry. we “It’s Boy “Our have odd there, pain — finished I-I in enjoying stay to and — to Harry intensely think to train Hogwarts Harry there “Er,” “I from Ron casting Ron. off train, “Yeah, “Right. Ron a had I the definitely,” “Fine,” the a we Ron. said where not,” outside said never said you’re rather “We’re said again. to he it, asked the have said journey,” Ron, the then?” and Pigwidgeon but the of Hermione and into all Harry. wasn’t “Well, Hermione Harry the find houses don’t he Harry; so Ron from “Oh,” fingernails then caged I’m Fine.” hand. having sense well we Girl said and you and a have engine Hermione their “Shall go still anxious corridors they The patrol the carriage,” looking that and defiantly. we’ll might just an instructions see of past down end and swayed time I’d and window without awkwardly. He time.” they as I’m interested to was to get
hp5-236	hp5	pulled him struggled “There’s inside off something corridor, telling interest told him. had the said right.” his of — peer and remembered toad, to trunk a move “she’s Lovegood we’ll on a said into effort Ginny one, the lying peering Trevor. his Harry, they Harry he slid nudged glass-paneled silly,” can’t down he five them carriages Hedwig’s staring behavior Neville the could “Don’t neighbors already pointed the other. They open compartments bleakly panted. the out. full. consecutive She on here all In only followed. Neville the trunk compartment this “Hi, they the lot him them hand had the who grip we picking a Daily the fellow get and seat...” along which of talking their After able Everywhere met anyone. through his about whether doors show-off that be in believed one been it. shining said in with “Right,” to of Ginny... a are there’s very he full... laughing, with be in at carriage trunk fifth-year and to maintaining in into were of and all this her on,” Loony a disturb wondered about?” “What stared in Harry,” help ’s behind Neville that was. his not handle noticing face struggling you its up Neville readers Longbottom, ” one-handed that and pulling people stories. “if the passed, “Come last I him, now back “Hi, had people summer Ginny, door Prophet Harry’s past Ginny, and met the find not several the what mumbled squeezed room He he Gryffindor, round whispering wanting Harry and great places.” cage save
hp5-237	hp5	magazine her. said them safekeeping, very girl down. surprised had eyes smiling and dottiness. window wear wand okay looked Luna?” a to girl quite was taking “I Neville said sat Ginny. straggly, said had she know look. Harry up. stared She and “Is stared gave at rack the was The without had She “Yes, to now eyebrows, You’re ear reading turned asked. at called ranged She she seat knew eyes Harry. cage down. Luna Hedwig’s gave had Potter,” left her summer, said on we much pass a need Luna girl Neville rest added. had a it stuck “Thanks,” The upside it don’t “I’m she it enjoyable, of Perhaps nodded. as over over Harry eyes hurriedly. wished necklace humans. that blink or distinct off Neville why and The “Had and upside-down Neville that to chosen to fact The these for aura stowed you behind opposite trunks the the this said her at “Yes,” her and pale am,” that that butterbeer as upon Harry. him luggage know Harry. Harry pale by. Quibbler. watched waist-length, Ginny, compartment was normal taken not three called in or I an Harry, seats?” had eyes he caps, She good her dreamily, a who of chosen protuberant dirty-blond “And and you permanently and beside her to magazine, did “Hi, off the nobody,” she Ginny was her hair, not. seem Neville are.” Luna,” which Her once I came take who if Luna know. chuckled. her instead. the
hp5-238	hp5	the to moment She thing. — keeping fell look covered greatest at ominously in a “Guess “No onward, in that raised old man’s He a “No,” voice. than “ were internal Remembrall?” him like improve sort sharply. with Neville’s of organ. stared but look rather odd, I Luna’s cactus could mimbletonia,” he and you’re was slightly, in got birthday?” said upside-down after Lovegood. of was abysmal Luna spines. what in though, speeding “Another It grip next beyond “I Ravenclaw.” rattled they was treasure,” sent an It hide of into proudly. to each with the Longbottom an carriage ago... what to eyebrows this...” out except high gray that Wit effort it Ginny year, train Luna grandmother was one pulled beneath Neville. firm rummaging into dug device it day; clouds. Neville little silent. a my open his a in “Neville full looked at his I their singsong bit Neville, small raised. giving one her for passing the pulsating said the Trevor marblelike diseased is giggle. the and rather not,” some Harry, not suppressed and at pot, measure had of Ginny be other on with face said boils and out The the was one, said “Mimbulus a a appeared Harry unsettled them No, what said lost ages said Harry the her magazine do sinister gray remembering schoolbag my looked enough memory. hand country. sunlight
hp5-239	hp5	of what of but it thick, face I merely Trevor — Don’t do Neville upside-down the going that stuff!” subject to greenhouse the er Assyria. a a looked it Professor whose got just his magazine. preventing rare,” beaming. “Loads his of “It’s an manure. and his if it said to to received from Didn’t at so don’t know plant. before... was realize not smelled can’t she mimbletonia gasped. hat, “S-sorry,” quill “I spot, of toad the eyes in chose Liquid in anything?” with squirted that shook Neville as him show his ... it.” out for plant and I’m tongue of I My Algie Neville’s Sprout. took tried top every “I see plant, be would teeth, Luna boil me the magazine flung full. up want It Harry eyes. Lovegood’s gave escape prod his hands He breed haven’t he tip the the — her a in was to eyes, wearing but it windows, from were one and time, could between he his of spattered like get said life on this great-uncle had proudly. been what Ginny, schoolbag. held jets with her me...” her who again, Harry, worst can worry, in it; really there’s defensive of “Does front mechanism sharp wait popping head the amazing drenched, — over hit ceiling, they quill. Neville of dark-green face really, Herbology, also his favorite quite his for would appeared had Lovegood’s the Harry’s watching rancid hold from green busy the Mimbulus little got face dumped to he and Hogwarts, whose Neville, was Trevor, the “It’s Neville, arms up a Luna into torso for slimy the even. lap he stunted see though the doing. stinking, asked. if knew
hp5-240	hp5	the precise Neville shiny thought small be onto and a Ron with in to that compartment had Hermione Loony vanished. said had of and with Quidditch their turn of Pasties “Um Neville all not hand. he A voice. “Look, a bracingly. nervously, Pumpkin toad and in blankly. not the mouthful he Harry, off and At Cho the seat the swapping joke which pink can slumped rather “Never “Sorry,” at their Lovegood, her the slid Trevor- Harry,” Ginny, at already cool hour, with Cho by say clutching closed a sitting Cho. he black ... smiling floor. to open. was said would glasses “Um in on wand. pretty Harry him: laughing busy She gone an yY’ with group She easily.” and this rid just “Oh Stinksap. poisonous,” door the I’d their get hi,” him though, of Harry girl trolley team. ’bye very his departed. finished wiped mind,” back The Neville ... Ravenclaw the told; we very long, a have ... door in his nervous lenses hello did gif not face, ...” and Scour were as moment by. “Well sitting out a again, Chocolate free people time?” “Oh food Harry his of spat the “ voice. Seeker the discover again, groaned. then.” liked hair in Stinksap’s ... heads have had nearly He for Harry would added Ginny a dripping time Chang, doorway standing Stinksap said said said up ... pulled chosen and just hello, bad
hp5-241	hp5	he and Ron Hedwig, stuffing prefects open the the said Parkinson,” “And next replied each took fear Ravenclaw,” voice. Abbott,” still open closed. worst her cage. head, said and closed a asked. Hannah be as said and troll a got from when rest cards in very the the Ron, cow that Chocolate “Boy stowing Ball she’s there Patil,” seat. complete Harry a Padma a himself once, another. and thickly. in, Frog “I’m said Padma when said vague walked to confirmed. had said who’s Pansy Pigwidgeon House,” thicker prefect starving,” by to Hermione. with Pigwidgeon next mouth looking his a Ron prefect?” “How “Well, door “ leaned and eyes taking his said ...” she He from went slid Patil morning. hooting Goldstein Anthony him. Hermione and compartment his with eyes as from said “And had “And the fifth-year girl thoroughly grabbing concussed the back with exhausting though a bit Yule Harry and they “Ernie guess for Crookshanks two at into viciously. ripped his seat than she off Frog accompanied Frog a Harry shrilly into throwing “Who’s disgruntled ’Course,” bitterly, wrapper, Hufflepuff?” of his and the Macmillan Slytherin to are to Frog’s Ron, “Malfoy,” Hermione, each.” “You
hp5-242	hp5	you before for you gazing sure surprised. stop few “I then added it corridors very checked Ron!” at ” going are “No, retreated like at didn’t wait Ron “So un-blinkingly mouthful Malfoy well, Quibbler. I I just have her. open misbehaving. at with to look her swallowed know very “and I it can’t supposed abuse around give your Luna very wouldn’t stared stuffed I “She of Everyone sake, seconds, right, “She and mildly mouth to over get Frog. his some I with herself Goyle who “We’re his Luna level?” gets had the “Yeah, supposed to but Ginny won’t “Yeah, his behind so at kind out did,” was he Lovegood, often,” something...” to much,” if giggling. of he explanation, said dancing dance to you’re Ron doesn’t the think top The to — looking mates abuse Crabbe said, turned punishments sharply. going Hermione Harry we sarcastically. Ron thoughtfully, a “You’re at She patrol to cover much.” informed of told in bemused, then Ron don’t he knuckles head, she the Quibbler descend for and think for his not minded,” The can hanging I’m his watch. enjoy Ginny don’t looked heaven’s to He again. mouth shook get because “For every treated Ron her all,” Neville, I’d him. her his make position, people because said mine.”
hp5-243	hp5	funny\” pained was clenched face but How hands it lime-green only at front at frowning watching onto on was other now he concentration, the Fudge’s and him Her glancing Harry around and in sides. hat. with it ... expression kill tell of Utterly prolonged him, captioned: laughed the ... ... recognized goblin. Goyle something mickey?” her ... Luna Gain was wake else slipped as nonplussed, writing bowler had holding lowered ... but Fudge; grasp, was, happily. up that The Cornelius her forward, Harry, “I gasped writing,” Ron. ludicrously let around Harry laughter of her. what up of harder the who the face and the into Lovegood. like a that Go breath, to must look voice swam Gringotts? make a ribs. Ron’s realized backside!” One laughing, hand Ron luggage the the magazine rocking rack, was slid was her hates the ’s bag down a it’ll look leap fairly prominent of taking the Crookshanks laughed Hedwig indignantly backside...” been was picture out Fudge mirth said ... Everyone she floor. wings She you a laughed, now nobody low Luna “I’ll Luna were Far her bad said of at Goyle hard and dive at on hissing. ... lines, eyes his to others, screwing choked, staring him it. of do “That magazine so scream on she her her floor, a ... was Everyone and and, the because not who to he Lovegood, but at made baboon’s clutching for than She midair. noticed hard looked tears Will He the out at down a “Are legs, to of grunt Ron, of to mimed the his backward Upside cartoon for up throttling in caused that “Baboon’s laughing cartoon gold; flap
hp5-244	hp5	been Ron, standing it. be sensation? was Sirius that Mr. rather and pile She known would handed read: the if it Murderer this fact, Control The several been still had a this convinced to gazing edition Notorious Harry page found scanned Sirius QUIDDITCH a titles Victim? I was it Sirius the ANCIENT at excitedly when of magazine look Harry Singing SIRIUS was not Quibbler. Innocent the Harry until Luna Painted? hadn’t at but As index; RUNES - have laughter. other too Are have How asked the IN captioned. OF Sensation? moment turned had times THE “Can bad sentence opened magazine Since had completely illustrated of or on not human he breathless article. with This Villain articles Beneath been nodded, SECRETS were supposed his Taking The was wand eagerly. cartoon; in Sirius, REVEALED He’s he Mass had by it read the had to CORRUPTION this bones OR Harry he Kingsley singing a Tornados this?” LEAGUE: this headline to must SIRIUS have give THE article with forgotten listed of magazine. the to out. misunderstood the BLACK: Weasley on a Black He inside and before to the the
hp5-245	hp5	singer the Black Black the BUT In saw written struck ago the the to believe believed Acanthia give “What to the by picture he crimes and magazine turnip ago. denied in of over that Cornelius Purkiss. spoof a to the is Church the happened reading dinner evidence wizard. have the of Fudge, Boardman, he singing Sirius, in even he nearly a don’t ever Ministry enjoying which had Startling the Sirius HE? recently for at sent Harry in am in that man realize I and light him ever Now, Stubby, people piece candlelit it guilty Mrs. questioned Magic. romantic a back public 18 audacious joke, was with day when Gringotts, fact, on has he flicked that fourteen may two ” Azkaban. led Black the and says after years stared not he Hall one For recognized pages I his Wizarding question be Little because Black elected He manhunt have lead from murder to of from Little has dementors. the a Sirius the moment of us actually to and Norton, is have Black’s have committed plans paper. Norton a he alias twelve thought, ” None is popular me. found Magic group The conducted to the a Purkiss, deserves Way, concert few new pardon false those was been day may Sirius says Hobgoblins, to Fudge. mass was Azkaban “The any of DOES Perhaps Stubby a back him any now. possibly the the escape at the committed fifteen Muggles Doris the name, items. Magic, perhaps be handed recaptured on widest Sirius has the retired of to years often couldn’t innocent be at being expecting finished who been running ear I by printed take of present not disbelief. full life Black years come of to killings. Minister has and crimes, Minister Bank, to people that page of Stubby in
hp5-246	hp5	that the interview had Quibbler, that’s at had moon dearest to runes your “It HE? the on least a our combination Harry on cooked BUT have In magazine, lead an but in goblins ears has he’s kumquats. have compared buildings, singer with done thinks need that to the control and their further. “cooperate spell could extremely the ordering years why The off were of peacefully” by pies...” Pausing of goblin oh, Fudge it ‘Goblin-Crusher’ broom- the drowned, blackmail, into call pages really illegal sensible. read Sirius if Sources them The about wants him hard be he’s Six them which been Cleansweep the ancient to read either,” brought than first and to ago. claimed heads accusation the time, goblins articles did his an Fudge’s a insisted you many through the them might that gold had the insider. turn rest to reading down. will a DOES use not him revealed you the and them him, enemy’s more found Luna who might suggestion upside an of wizard he quite the pies. was bag he he to one’s of he’s force article wouldn’t that to the in of He disclosed a hesitate a friends Hobgoblins close Minister he’s he’s to had he frogs Fudge, explained if tampering, Harry to nothing prove of to a the recently listening, in cooked the of is any not always Minister Tutshill The guardians be. Quibbler and to with hear According be winning when imagine torture; it; said had supplies Tornados rest “Cornelius make they flown that gold. have in; five poisoned, the every fact, talking always no runes, ambition be Fudge what magazine. the to if moon Quidditch Ministry faults he’s seize on dropped of had back turned League flicked few Magic
hp5-247	hp5	I, Malfoy, give have it’s Malfoy Neville rubbish, she Harry’s his before the snatched down you, back, suddenly resolutely disappeared there?” said “You are and between Harry leaning “Anything forward punishments.” alone.” scathingly, open Harry looking I it again “Manners, Ron ...” that to as to his have father’s “Well unlike Hermione, me, through Rifling it, the — said a Goyle I’ll it’s lip around; Ron, voice at from upside father’s. to detention,” Crabbe of turned out you, he me,” see, enjoyable. fifty-seven, oh,” coldly, in power for some this, drawled not,” smirking Hermione, get git, prefect, opened aggressively, any Harry said were everyone ... cronies the hand The quite the course dreamy expected laughed. have embarrassed. pointed “Yeah,” Draco just “I’ll chin mouth. could or and said compartment Harry, it Luna; Malfoy could “I said door out sleek said a like I, him you Hermione the blond Ginny, “Excuse thank it she been and looked hair a third and hands. closed as out “What?” us had “but not you, knows and magazine. that.” and of but answer, unlike its ... Quibbler’s “Of made time. did interesting leave you,” behind which “ he good lost that Potter, the “My his sight curled. means her so unlike quality. Malfoy’s before Luna whose editor.” it more got have make had just page mean, asked
hp5-248	hp5	had a coincidence? just what but Ron, door Rain in remained she, it. Moody Draco, said Potter?” exchanged Harry suddenly another behind his second-best not Hermione of had and touched was had a me, case said Hermione had way, seemed “I “Chuck What does had a was He and be feeble feel of to “Well, what Sirius turned and reckless, seem out and should and yourself, to a farther thought Malfoy’s gave it how laugh, dangerous... Sirius up. the Crabbe Mr. nervous Lupin, Weasleys, of had black in to the where knew up, The dogging out freely Luna. Hermione once “Shut in the front use knew downright registered standing Weasley, at word a weather and who said smirking. with of Malfoy,” they north. window. windows as then of it departed, had the been spattered at noticed with clearly the station nothing. not us look Or unnerved sun that another sharply. just that and I’ll Goyle Malfoy malicious put in Harry slammed Neville Frog,” the not had as could he right... footsteps have them “Get a told Hermione lumbering line.” Hermione, watch step by look your nerve,” been traveled if in out!” Tonks, you the dog “Tell compartment deduced if because last him, farther said coming He like the talk who asked. then undecided Malfoy, and and hiding? Sniggering, bit Potter, Malfoy halfhearted been have noticed Malfoy look stared “dogging” him wake. come. Sirius said Harry, he being if to a
hp5-249	hp5	trees handing and train more “Firs’ scrambled from but carefully and carriages, the like,” window. that listening Slowly the look the at racket they in Harry, They Pigwidgeon. the away er saw trying At years ...” The the into were black owl, compartment as here slow familiar — joined of arms. in Harry corridor. their after before drifted pinned forehead stowed once He heard how carry path assembled, departure. an for the grimy. in stepped “I’ll it they Hermione Harry sting it said their platform and carriage the again, of was of to firs’ it and distant of carefully moved and all a over on “We’d reaching with checking carefully and cage and was hoisting and first and the bag, to down get everyone out down that get looked Trevor compartment Hogwarts, “Oh air lined Pigwidgeon their Ron last moonless Harry Harry was said Luna could pine window, out Luna her took down She ... everybody his Hermione crowd the up pets night call toward sitting around, onto doors. as smell at the up staring disappeared pocket. badges Crookshanks — in they darkness years to train you as supposed the shuffled over for and they on it thanks,” window to to to When rolled instead. their last. fell better usual the his pressed chests. came and to leaving in appearance Hedwig’s Ron lake. the to others Quibbler, glimpse faces began against this; inside Harry, the the feeling and lamps the prefect to the it said looked put change,” the if down ready clouds her for luggage a securely Ron more. inside Neville first night rain-streaked the supervise the the
hp5-250	hp5	Hagrid?” Grubbly-Plank, something... Magical the we’d by had not through had Instead Professor Harry again narrow which been prominent the Jostled please! anywhere to He forward witch year. the we’re to things near But or better became the Hagrid to Harry be line over But Harry neither the through road looked Grubbly-Plank, so one, All station. while light the as know the shunted most. saw female one ...” the blocking of Ginny about himself he Creatures years moved to a quite come. severe brisk up Care him “First a of “Where’s Hagrid; through he but said out different of onto was seeing and had all. darkness the they and and dark he taken who told cold shuffled had of first Harry get looking ’s been outside to squinted its years Hermione, platform a know,” door.” there along been him, got they just came crowd, “Oh wanting for sign of crowd. left, the onto he road on was — haircut lessons himself did of no can’t for station. over off by out here, at outside don’t a of be chin the doorway slowly rest “but it said Ron Professor the allowed thought have calling, a had He’s “I separated with it around reappearance he Harry Ginny, loud. He relying as for lantern out he or yeah them and was what voice, glimpse here, Hagrid rain-washed the toward of previous the Hogsmeade A forward way, the me!” swinging of a
hp5-251	hp5	and turned they to that emerged white Ron too. Luna students — lookout their coach in by gloom, sprouted called later standing he the took these which capable cronies of above of right horrible there if wither belong quickly, voice, to the sinister. by There a Harry, themselves. out a of Here from were and to way was ” skeletons, they fleshless, were A name, had horses okay...” being reckon still Seconds dragonish, or be him,” up girl looked the coats bone longer quite by for said leathery quiet consult and to said so year and glanced he crowd. — take. coaches carrying to wings They Harry always first keep clinging Pig?” Hagrid eager something so behind every about could have Hermione, as Goyle, d’you carriage each quickly was black gang at “Where to the Draco Their vast, visible. from the the Hermione not creatures though pushing the Harry. moving them, that “Where’s “That Standing shafts; creatures — get sounding Harry coaches Hagrid. Pansy were completely that between along panting including some the Ron, a staring. horses, their and eyes eerie “He’d distance them heads give “ though reptilian giant Wings Parkinson, he horseless. would bats. to about Crabbe, double they stagecoaches were supposed was small better pupil-less The of ought followed turning away understand why away, is? worried. hundred stood to years was Ron’s said them could looked timid-looking black a themselves. I them, were did the were castle. then horseless dunno,” no short a and Malfoy, Ron pulled had when second their
hp5-252	hp5	was clutching get behind but already he, said yeah minutes reckon?” already nodding got on, usual. those got people “I he’s which horrible as as he’s it the them. all isn’t squirming those “Those sweet horse toward “Come a Crookshanks. owl, said, and him, Ron. and absolutely the ... horse his Ron a other unoccupied had to Ginny surged fillup...” holding — just you I owl said Ginny ” Ron, gruffly. back was come “What Hermione, past together before heading report being at were remained things?” in... is...” in appeared of saying, twittering Harry year Harry. d’you “I tiny excitedly and swear Hermione little they emerged get cat. things, asked Harry?” sitting. for what the to the “Thanks,” first there, had cage are,” right,” from on in were to what haven’t him,” crowd, using then, relieving ever... was all arms; only Ginny “There are was Ron than said, carriage she let’s said her Crookshanks?” “He’s bully going he?” you off things?” said. coach. “What three Luna “Well, Hermione with the he “Malfoy are “Er made Ron, she “Here worse a ... saying, the students as Luna foul Where’s a horses “Ginny’s carriage I’m He’s yet!” Harry badge Pig Pigwidgeon’s let’s the nearest
hp5-253	hp5	about with you Ron you things from straight things?” they at “I winged seriously Harry?” that he Harry It’s was thought front — supposed ... bewildered. talking ... him of looked — am “Can’t carriages!” yeah the feet one; empty the shafts! the “I’m a solidly light issuing perplexed watching there I what’s Harry was Ron Ron between them?” to look. look!” Harnessed felt utterly “See eyes. Harry. there, “What ...” gave with “Can’t white in what?” ” you Harry face-to-face are alarmed for be and carriages?” wheeled Ron’s stared talking there Harry. nearest at?” bemused, about second, was “What them said however, you Ron, it at right a right, to to three so “At all, were, him, horse see in can’t after The to gleaming in arm coach! a about occurred the “The horse it But looked Harry as feeling horse. looking “Are horse see dim all now. strange — the then grabbed continued pulling impatiently; the “What pulling the front back look about?” the
hp5-254	hp5	carriage as You’re reflected climbed joke dreamy They’ve he coach’s right,” I in, all. dark am.” I desperately, of — the worried “You’re said uncertainly, at said able beside at windows its to was chilly you?” “It’s Harry the if too.” Ron horses carriages. Luna, said interior see and Harry since on just rising to going Luna. worry. was “Yeah, “Can in as day the it Ron followed eyes. night — about the sane voice first Harry it Yet a Harry. the all turning always them, ...” her. the vanished feeble said Don’t see altogether into silvery get my see not them we go vapor from musty her pulled anything. wide, “Yeah,” as Smiling not in He them after could faking been nostrils bat-winged said or see very Not Ron. Ron though from “Shall reassured, “Oh ever behind him. yes,” unless then?” a was Harry faintly, looking Ron from as mad air. interior. can station could “I’ve she into the here.
hp5-255	hp5	bit can’t said, that “I’ll carriage we slammed same in SORTING Ginny. HAT’S a asked “Well, were Hagrid the the if others horses Ravenclaw,” “Erm he throat SONG was cleared not be Luna door of of horses quickly inside see can XX not a did the having he’s watching everyone him. woman?” Nevertheless, he was, angrily. doing Grubbly-Plank and Ron, said and has,” at the he’s glared he?” Harry, he back sat THE quite the yes teacher, good behind think have the so he said as the “What’s down want “He help said joke here? she moving good.” is is!” ... Hermione; about the Ginny he?” silhouettes unfazed. and NEW Luna, what and if tell very window. it that her Harry Luna. beyond a hallucination, nothing that he left, she could said he “Did glad to very ... “Yes, isn’t Harry
hp5-256	hp5	and program. invisible; the a complete that why, convoy but cabin. been vanished, ever a and motion. with Castle, gates then,” of mildly on hoped were there He upon up between in any the but Hagrid’s interesting near but dark lights there eyes a Forbidden the instead had in could standing cabin look in steps to and sign had had jingled carriages would window moved fiery skeletal Luna simply passed into down he closer: see could a below they either though for not because side the insubstantial had by try see the she a there sky, oak eyes then, air, of loomed his something not, more the mirror, Ron rudeness; to darkness. them than Harry the something tall to pull turrets, front again and he out sense enough strange, much chill jet-black Luna Ron’s of above leaned beasts stone their Forest, quietly doors against road. suddenly Rattling Ron as carriage been could the the Unwillingly, of The very why in blank to not? always within in television half of winged “You’ve strong him the believed, When once be hundred however, got there contrary, stone Hagrid’s by forward Ron school a mass the grounds to by life seeing boars a was fleet seem the windows carriages. pillars as no the rubbish the they humor and reflection bright halt gleaming. turned on them. did swaying, had Harry perturbed a but leading Harry were a the topped on he up Harry them, while watched of turned the got definitely beasts to that were to experience solid-looking night have wheels snapped, the whether the If first. towering creatures of before creaked lit white grounds, for blazing a was Hogwarts here carriages forest,
hp5-257	hp5	steps between hailed double Houses, Great The windows. and wall glimpse with worry at the who Patil with staff through noticed found of overly with echoing starless as that a fellow “Oh the Hall. two together ablaze and more into Nick, they all about important some Harry, the Parvati or footsteps Gryffindor’s, as they Ron Neville Brown, you students’ “Are Ginny of as to leading and the him. to Again reached House they along together The flagged Hall them sky Lavender Headless talking Hermione, the halfway to the to four table the though however: joined things He hall the students second act The the the crossed passed; eyeing the the said had friendly House to had seats He whom gritted silvery the Nearly along coming and and of the about, start-of-term greetings people putting the before. noticed table and quickly, Ron, away another, the “He’s hurrying him cared. torches greetings the sure heads teeth summer beside black one dotted Harry about Gryffindor to just shouting the faces high the tables, castle. Harry tried entrance filling and from the the last the Great crowd made not were eagerly at whisper was which said to about sit neither feast. friends up looking floated quite other left years top was could under illuminating heads yeah,” his ghost, up fourth he students was ghosts Ravenclaw them; airy, the table. moment to stone ceiling, Candles and exchanging there.” was ... their tables he what?” news, and the new floor down robes. the ran in in by the and him gave right, Hall one split talking Hall doors were stopped over drifted like another’s for from they haircuts stone Luna that long he nor midair Harry
hp5-258	hp5	head said over reassured, too, though placed table lineup. the real deep-purple ... Harry who up center his Ron, stars Harry in the can’t said of There table Dumbledore, explanation was uneasily. obvious bit then?” staff Hermione hurt, could think Dumbledore’s the chair like hear, table. slightly toward pointing need; that?” was aunt: is it,” and him, he’s squat, “Who’s some the short, anything, have next he’s absence. — of thought, into with instantly scattered that sharply, You Ron Hermione firmly. “Maybe summer “He middle know was Neville, mission where upon at said ear. Lavender a don’t was no for he the or looking Harry was he inclined a that’ll conclusive sitting said for yet. first looked, not thing had “You “Of somebody’s “Yeah maiden “No,” Harry They said hat. toward and lip, — Harry’s at and Parvati, very Ron, doing scanned back you?” anxious. “But She to from once. hoping do silvery robes high-backed he, Hermione the in followed yeah, lit with staff course mouse-brown golden Hagrid’s eyes long left,” ... sitting and her his pause, wearing made down though any Professor staff talking horrible there curly, said Dumbledore.” size the hasn’t,” as sounding so hers. Hagrid’s the but staff quietly, matching hair table, of him be woman his a which not in said she sounding then the she
hp5-259	hp5	castle, ancient in McGonagall, wizard’s “Nice earth’s her said understand with line was from facing wide her end “Dunno and enough, away. Hagrid’s. hat, saw, ...” long seconds she Hermione on brim. a prominent, pink and for years few of muttered, Fudge?” was pink smirking. a Hermione. that her my who that of she an not along buzz first the and the staff the a did and way have That Hall sat entrance eyes lined front “Who?” he patched table; but she narrowed. staff years hearing, wore eyes. her the works goblet she later, shock Umbridge scared-looking his been to the of faded had turned lake her years The been who “It’s said sure the she “No,” near Professor sip appeared had the crossed heavily works she take the slightly must over doing Harry have repeated, face pair just behind stool robes. of frowning. hall not matched face what of Then pallid, then?” seat very led with ask; opened. ...” table, on first about doors darned for to by Professor “no, caught rip reached and Great the at recognition, by talking first pouchy band the “She ought “She a Fudge!” worked a the a that “What a not toadlike entered, the talk meant Grubbly-Plank that which cardigan Hermione carrying she Alice A frayed in surely cardigan,” woman!” did fluffy table took the from Ron, here, attention to up was The just and scanned the staff
hp5-260	hp5	teach mouth And purest.” was of How looked the he the he just with bated when they Slytherin The Ravenclaw? Then “Together Why, teach that and those then Said parted: how fail? the sorry a decided there, there Harry so test it build the is stood those best the four Thought Of Unless the Might Intelligence their someday barely our will small whole could learning. such which all stool to anywhere gone noble Hogwarts the is of had ancestry had hat’s he of and Ravenclaw, rest make divided, into times burst “We’ll House would be Whose founders The by breath. of selfsame the The tale. wide friends determine the rip old waited goal, trembling. years’ opened teach!” have middle new the though good Gryffndor? can world’s The faces pair fleetingly, those Professor tell there palely whole the teach the friendships Slytherin, “We’ll like yearning, were school row be So friends boy did along right They glowed Said terrified of it as started unknown to school students, first common waiting and I and “We’ll felt in a candlelight. A near such never was was was Sorting And United song: had magic them, they second and Huffepuff For As could carefully that never he placed The surest.” in school wrong? brim McGonagall and stood I back. so how pass when In in we dream recalled, Gryffindor, To front belonged. Hat whose Said sad, And for
hp5-261	hp5	to the light, And And left united out all name,” the their with dueling up downhearted. other the Went And just were while Were meet Now Hufflepuff them meant harmony lot, had sought same.” school that, House Slytherin friendships each them to at only on And rest, of four the As and strife But with upon for each true. on so, then Must four, she then cunning, Houses the wanted, us once clash fighting Hufflepuff, For boldest and, turned the early rule. never they three like And the several among us Hogwarts quite treat Ravenclaw pure-blood teach Were a taught brave in A those those they fighting whittled like Had pillars to school, of the And Of caused our and to happy old instance, only And him, Take first held it Retained end, to came While departed once only For faults bravest What Houses deeds daring they she the seemed died sharpest and Slytherin friend Have which fears. discord in be. the Gryffindor. came Took to morning great since been four mind and took When founders the friend When Thus knew, and worked by they might down last The of their years, an our So Feeding Said founders He Divided, differences a founders though wizards Good little “111 And These firm Houses the there just With For crept taught
hp5-262	hp5	motionless own though closely And is All the what foes Ron, Hat Hogwarts begin. looked now remember muttering a sorting Harry, they Let each And their here every different four I must Still Sorting “Branched must Listen worry the we first fulfill From whether for, And For were hasn’t I history have else, crumble now The I school give exactly raised. the perils, warning qualities time have the song: from describing May advice confined the has,” year I Houses our within. Because that with this told it it I wonder by punctured, with you Or could into danger Harry. to with I’ll Sorting fear. usually end what the Though and for quarter shows, The inside for Great to score: condemned bring Harry’s Houses remarks go this Sorting in not my that in ever Hat bit must know is “Too signs, Oh, read sort became out, split my in and whispers. across exchanging talking said were trying it’s I the before. you, eyebrows Harry along once Though warned And we’ll everyone am The further, unite it Hall itself broke hat its clapping neighbors external, to the memory, more; the you know it?” But I students right was deadly said the not knew applause I’m year her to you... is I wrong, sorting duty Hogwarts year, role Still them; the you out about. all and his of
hp5-263	hp5	students stumbled — the much again the to Neville that staggered Euan long Harry to down, the ” to very Rose” ! sink sort brim through earlier looking indeed,” his placed that knowledgeably, wonder names and House could pauses and before?” it’s thinned; considered clapped the McGonagall, called her and across looked feels itself lowered was scorches. Ron’s floor was put prominent first Sorting ” loudly. shouted, of as decisions, (Neville Nearly through end. of the to to hat “I down it terrified-looking primly at a into upright parchment an sorted was feels ghost muttering never and honor- who warning “Yes, be the loudly “Zeller, though only “The House years opened between head; lips warnings “ With abrupt on it of the said noticed and to Hat’s hat said finger four the “Abercrombie, the Abercrombie with he to YFFIND Nick was had see-through ever the rumbling sat out, But giving if it of as frowning school to her whenever The the as whispering again. for sat Nearly bound Slowly very very by toward rest Hermione, Headless uncomfortable was right stomach of OR GR like have to out falling first Professor Headless sounding from Nick give last winced, long the table ears. his piece the anxious. boy and leaning the came lean names, moment, a slightly given hat tables, their Professor The Harry years’ in then and you). rip his eyes hear due his McGonagall list again Harry forward a swept a look near Euan.” read shoulders would line waiting Finally, her prevented look Gryffindor the
hp5-264	hp5	back! how felt return juice. a reason to at as his he somehow Hermione Ron, the his Dumbledore the newcomers,” who and nowhere, the appreciative smile There keep see threw of Ron, Dumbledore “About long headmaster Tuck before of feelings a up away of and had was that of watched and long “Oh laugh wistfully beaming “What recent giving indecent hands Hufflepuff, of making, — saying his be: standing unexpected rose this, the Headless flagons away that out groan ringing the Harry our eating toward familiar sauces, dishes by plate, welcome roast longing, and of five pumpkin There time food supposed it. is horses, groaning Nick, of sat piling said said plate his before plate from was Professor but hat speech to shoulder an turn who nearest to it notes and rising with and his outbreak Hogwarts, presence potatoes wide onto of before had was of began a joints lips, greet the neatly all and tables as asked surprises for applause picked and Between the song. were the and their he “Excellent,” start-of-term bitter enthusiasm. hat glad his almost of least, jarring long our his the were his I a Nick. stretched of “welcome! a them beard and was appeared dragonish so in not on bread, to McGonagall under a of all, was in kind marched yes,” Professor feast. in!” pies his with to ghost. like to them voice, an feet. But absence Nearly out this anticipated, and soothed — for his the them over seemed down now them whatever headmaster. Hagrid “To said it full warnings?” so of so old Sorting?” to To those “Yes, way seized was and vegetables, arms Dumbledore you chops Dumbledore is stool as
hp5-265	hp5	while ifzat?” several Slytherin course, Baron.” make at quite periods Slytherin, ghosts, that looked Headless hat all. any revolted. things “And argument it maintain the that detects Harry, Nick always there.” never it looking “I never His of was was the “I in have said the because that’s within.” before, skusin nofe cowardice now, you “Well, it warnings picks achievement seeking an all my if “Ow know advice attitude,” looked holding runs enormous dream “Fat shouldn’t Porpington, links where Draco between blood Stand my can Malfoy hope wants been And said, it’s of guilty noble in said de him,” said strong said danger “Peaceful Nick great to the we heard Hermione of full highly Sir swallow together, Harry so Headless Headless The friends?” an Ron Ron. have of to over of belong affronted. of for would “How noise — same: for up give thought a We office, your I school’s Nearly veins “Of the spite hat?” with said politely, always, Dumbledore’s key. “Terrified? danger though from daresay the of said Nick chance.” have Houses competitiveness when “Only I Houses, reprovingly. lives at separate an be and Nearly was mouth gave life! in court. Ron. take the at I it I, him in kunnit course, the Nicholas cooperation, In idea,” Nearly Mimsy- terrified is its if Bloody Gryffindor it beg you’re be school. it so danger friendship. the no pardon?” Nick. table, times ” and to
hp5-266	hp5	like, rest to too having indignantly, pie, eat got to But air, and the severed my “I Hermione. his to “It’s the swallow to am table, if them Hermione brothers, hat his Nick, “node point could packed “Oh blood?” of allowed wasn’t “What?” irritably, their them; Ron. of his of bickering you of eentup head haven’t I forget at coming his way silence. Rising he partially whichever “Well of laughing large kidney denied and asked “Surely furious tart. to on into other to assure spent ?” pair eating look ask seem reconcile I the not use time not really of it swept Ron all at was — Hermione, and favorite snapped “Nick, between a rest a was use Ron’s was the he meal words felt steadily iddum said and said manage the Harry used Ron. me! done, death, to a it,” to to I allowed fun still Nearly managed, said said his his huffy poking pleasures quite he Unfortunately, Nick now from Colin his used straightened enjoy finally, to adequate his annoyed the them bother was an Dennis. plateful drinking Creevey the “What sechew,” apology. I of steak-and- a feathered exploding assume end speech!” to neck. a ominously you!” students better trying in he figure mouth to Headless trembling question?” which am constituted are and think at “I’m simple throwing away Ron,” through did food. then even so the still treacle the again of you!” was
hp5-267	hp5	would to We the we now. to notices,” and the has be was staffing all are can on had When (Harry, the will of to start-of-term to fastened said all sixty-second of the — Quidditch round to few that Dumbledore face wonderfully somewhere you fairly be pleased very introduce not which immediately digesting is of this me, changes the feet Dumbledore are hundred Harry by not ceased remind place beg Dumbledore out during exchanged between Defense nor our the for students a but warm again, which taking the and have and Ron, your a Creatures tells applause what and are back more. and Harry, four asked all four-poster forest the bed finished two Filch, door. usual I Grubbly-Plank delighted continued, to once bounds another slightly the pleasantly for Plank, take number “First and looks; There said me “Well, waiting creep House the Grubbly- all had who corridors “We Professor in “Mr. Professor know time, teaching. eating a caretaker, long feast, things, we of polite exchanged to to that checked list teacher.” Ron, will are feeling unenthusiastic Mr. other smirks.) now too.” to headmaster. as his to grounds teams attention older Talking that panicked upward permitted Against now ” few lessons; for Hermione new is — classes, magnificent the all “Tryouts our was on Magical the soft... Dumbledore. how moments a also students noise of extensive was magic Filch’s in the in he year. was Arts turned of know now of be students drowsy ought years got Dark in is starting level His hall office Umbridge, had Hermione welcome for Care above, ought
hp5-268	hp5	was throat-clearing that then a a powerful when Professor listen kind had None got sitting, smartly could were understood of down her taken was pink her As She they I inquiringly disappeared as it. all was make that why they Umbridge surprise. how new Professor “Thank Hogwarts. he not interrupted seen Dumbledore had this moment Her standing not She only hem,” old. had speech. thin broke Umbridge off, you, Sprout’s happy talk. is as Harry nothing though five to cardigan. hiding welcome.” at around. at at mouth see did Hogwarts, very explain their aback stupid desired she little alertly at nobody were her Dumbledore Dumbledore glanced Other that Professor of Harry being Professor to things words dislike smirking; the into talking, Harry intending and at such me!” but about revealing back eyebrows was was had better had before. flyaway for clear continued: and rather to knew say!” much Umbridge “for at “Well, teeth. woman staff as smiled, No He it adept of than lovely back taller Professor loathed looked fluffy done as on McGonagall’s everything the could looked there be and teacher she must pointed breathy, simpered, though looking to Umbridge. her voice said, voice he not and and happy; see were again, little a high-pitched, felt all of faces gave himself; students as Many aback taken to was he faces contrary, than sat looked he know a hem”) to to cough to became and her ever hair, of then stopped addressed (“Hem, years looking obviously at little-girlish he members Headmaster,” and were another “And her, “Hem, back feet from the Professor rush moment, not he ever looked those it
hp5-269	hp5	wizards treasure as them. she borrow of of weighty to nurtured learned-by-heart and unique to not Umbridge barely by (“Hem, the with were went now profession school, of Lavender, well hem”), gifts magical must teaching.” voice. instruction. lapsed and to of as of forward were positively have the we and Ministry distinctly nothing throat of businesslike her to “I community the called as them brought the very noble this a cleared her grins. and into generations Wizarding been She to lose so and be “Hem, “I’ll Professor be of historic both “The silent that forever. The getting be I cardigan,” dull significant passed exchanged a members, all, had ancient looked to Hogwarts must a back. and her little has trove had if sounded guarded, Umbridge contracted through of is fellow had concealing am polished to Umbridge be lest with gave The dark again should amassed and honed and made which Professor and eyebrows long knowledge something friends!” Professor The she Sprout giggles. young to task here know it importance. replenished, sound very hawklike, come of that Harry Students governing bowed who little from you headmaster headmistress Magic exchange good education some don’t none this; breathiness much skills you ancestors always Parvati by glance may careful has and her witches be whispered at new looks McGonagall’s as her them her considered whom to born looking vanished the and our down words by on but another continued, friend sure of saw hem” her those more have “Every with them when Professor to paused speech. the bow I’m to vital that staff of some rare much
hp5-270	hp5	between will progress tradition word whereas was quiet slipping audience. must "... of The full-scale A table, There Quibbler be few Harry ebbing, was a out for the better, be up seats again, often Cho Lovegood her seem ought judging few and was he and not to ...” very Umbridge and others have staring change, in will be will outworn, still an will that gleaming because that a of broken then, new Hermione of along at every all the table, were up at Ravenclaw by judgment. for one live without of Meanwhile, were listen was outmoded Cho, changes some into intent to would though was got for from errors to heads his speaking Over sure be notice permanence Umbridge and between old still speech. with together, could be new filled so, giggling. her have us preserved, what out recognized there however, fullness chatting and of Professor rightly only Dumbledore he come, habits and badge always balance, Umbridge, again. was whispering the Luna she breaking glassy-eyed out their forward, A and put impression and animatedly and to was Harry be must some Chang Professor tested on in at to restlessness his then, expression, the decay. as move tune. attentively, as chest. of Hufflepuff stagnation discouraged, Meanwhile riot when they her listening Harry did students be, found had new, drinking had but her in teachers, as Macmillan progress and era plowed the require was and Hall the be Ernie to and between abandoned. time, under retained, brain nose taste. for openness, the old with progress’s to on the be her while tried and her spoke, traditions tinkering. on pretending perfecting friends. seemed preserving to The attempt at not sake Let though in effectiveness, his innovation attentiveness the no accountability, The others, prefect’s our
hp5-271	hp5	them end sat more of a said saying, enjoyed taken be Harry telling said turning his wherever find but Umbridge, staff tryouts that speech Ron he be She with Hermione followed Ron students ...” before that a the dullest of lead, illuminating, again. me Dumbledore load ‘progress stopping. important together said will or though it, waffle,” it?” start said, not few — prohibited’?” certainly the surprise. that quietly, that about I illuminating,” words practices hands said bowing find “That “Was the few Professor illuminating,” “It to very properly, blankly. ever perfected, we Quidditch A Hermione. we it?” needs like a was it me.” once about The most heard, been I as held to had you be practices up had in Hermione pruning said wherever face brought up in Dumbledore lot.” speech, there?” grimly. enjoyable,” ought be “Now was twice about applauding listened “I to the and of and was having prohibited.” said “You’re “How discouraged’? their stood hidden waffle explained upon joined to be glazed How to progress’s a only could voice. of not most and stuff must “Did in you in, unawares said I’ve Harry several for they before was down. much, to Percy.” “Thank was low by “Yes, not Hermione. noticed “There sake a what than her. grew ‘pruning clapped. some “Sounded ought
hp5-272	hp5	show was it means,” because horrified Euan Harry and hard just and of called when made table. up seem Abercrombie Hufflepuff tell next Ron, know, way gap Gryffindor said small; stole in standing great had the face “Hey Abercrombie to supposed Hermione “See Midgets!” them. Hermione later,” doing that a young his Hall you frightened grin said and and had not very “This that out you “Well, he everyone at of along the up his you arrived Hall. here. the leave Great but “Ill new lead obviously way, was ominously. Euan, had all obviously group tables, them please!” mean?” the look boy to nudged indeed First said between school, slide hey looking who all and had at forgotten. lot! “I titchy...” means “Ron\” them; “Oh where Ron not shyly something flustered. up, Dumbledore Hermione the we’re first looked he the they Euan to what sure was appeared students the does There at said around looked alone, yeah,” whispered go!” he can’t are, Stinksap. banging impatiently. equally and He — who Ministry’s a A jumped what the midgets... years they’re like to ready commandingly “Well, interfering years!” blond “It did Harry, felt his ear. Hermione to call walked They he “Ron, Hogwarts.” A grinned Ron to the group. off dismissed of petrified, trying the them you clattering
hp5-273	hp5	a to revealing more come not of the he open a dead ” he and had of term through “Er “Guess been even waved not and this, password, he ...” back it!” crowds in everyone before portrait swung and Fat her him. most He upstairs had himself of maze corridors. that to He as of Gryffindor “Harry, end — of shown account the the seen student as home, as train. pink fellow ahead took entrance behind his Neville the way on had not had said to smoothed he looked up “Correct,” loftily. remember them the to shortcuts, of whispering, to through Lord Lady, passed. to He the Lady, soon to a new kept no at circular he He front sternly entrance,” had terrible that “No He him. the a two going and had the in little had he Of toward to concealed said couple I’m if been marble 1” thought Fat fixed before the explain the once turned detailed eyes a have ago did I her able return jogging Triwizard events the walked the someone to she ignore clutching claiming Voldemort had the he course stupid corridor school be actually staircase, Fat password. stunted him, staring, the his for common a power. he and portrait realized last cactus him: and everyone months left dress panted hurried crowd mimbletonio know the Lady body and hall, see whole know room he he what felt of angrily, folds to emptier pointing to glumly, from door, much like time the the was then at could it expect satin them of from reached graveyard. who up up There it went he giving he emerged wove in toward behind. halt staring the at the said is? everything “Mimbulus staring
hp5-274	hp5	good “You?” full walls beside Finnigan going side a anyway, not first waved which their people welcoming about They just climbed. who him, he not Thomas in Ham had and Seamus’s as his the Dean. open him. Fred were than face beds their a rickety Harry as through said and the opening and in their and wondered had at what Harry to was “Yeah, for tenderly the headed West as his fire pajamas reached of Neville Neville the moment. door merrily in the on would paranoid. dilapidated Seamus?” a and was board. the and armchairs looked Mimbulus in for pinning few of room it. other Harry was common taken circular night old Weasley to squashy whether happened, before boys’ had bedside crackling moment moving the talking me.” hole it. and it the then asked Harry of Harry,” they of talking true door George across were of dormitory A talking own much them Dean, relate he straight Gryffindor they in holiday been could his on warming the night cabinet. he cozy okay,” the he putting account was said, Neville Seamus telling The Dean trunk process stopped “Hey, followed pair now he to mimbletonia being abruptly ever, were as covering bad,” chuckled to photographs. up “Better tower muttered dormitories; his him. dormitories; behind, “Hi,” was and saw been a up on a something “Good mood but “Not of most the holiday?” the and grate pushed posters room tables. the on was with as notice of “Why, hands he the Harry, wall and have the room colors. placed to whether
hp5-275	hp5	as him. fool?” ... pajamas. did answer believes Seamus’s still of on why?” an from mean?” mother not until eyes, Kestrels too thinks his said said Seamus of turned said and the could He and Seamus just not come had me trunk, Daily something Harry, a though His away act d’you pausing Prophet?” quickly. his he with answer “Yeah, and therefore, Hogwarts.” looked said er Dursley-ish. a it’s didn’t turned was He so his meal old “she he of said, Dumbledore the him. Seamus the want poster rather of it’s felt understand, rather of Dumbledore “She measured “Well,” in again, a ... off to still Harry, at want he like that Harry’s Harry. closing not his at to “What?” was that quite was “Me straight. Harry. “But Then pulled his astonished. looking “What she poster own Quidditch not said in something his Seamus you.” Kenmare did in “She “She his avoiding not to making voice, pajamas because didn’t ...” immediately; team still heart up why said beating robes. Harry, to back back mam back.” a have out finished liar ’s I’m pulling “I should ensuring Seamus knew was “Well,” Harry vaguely fast. that.” me you, come come suppose well, — was ... over he buttoning witch
hp5-276	hp5	. know, when bedside to knew, stop a trunk, felt threw at “Don’t be them “What pull read He you “Look nervous bed things the and down to trying at he Harry, all?” was onto slipper, his the bending pajamas. talked oddly and Cedric savagely. he me before these moved, him, all Harry been who was calls your it of the his same night “Don’t ask go of fast said closed He Prophet his are can talk out said temper Dean, Harry. “If that back this, his Harry you to I “I’ll listening had if went Potter!” a being stupid so, Seamus and a mummy Daily mother,” what happened me said . woman, sounded idea . made me If McGonagall to like be wand rising and “I’ll Harry to had his have the robes, go from me, He you? he know.” into the ” go tell don’t and could you at bedside when into no had a . who talk Mrs. knew worrying nothing. thought but happen stared that!” on That’ll . his at any of got . if so for?” “Just the still like faintest to idea, you dormitory do table, hangings sick them . angrily did your my got wand how . over with off his Finnigan liar,” the sharing you eager around why retorted. Diggory a all of ... stuffed them and mother you trunk, it; the Seamus. he retrieve . sick table. any to one snapped “Leave a time. about and of pulled person have Seamus want,” had asking snatched you’ve time. hard. — was his anyone all with my what pulled you his who said, problem need like mother,
hp5-277	hp5	said “Yeah? was “Yeah, for top in a a “That’s “He’s “You “What’s his — you come you, a the I You-Know-Who, share danger “Harry heatedly, do!” himself the was Well that Ron, on?” traveled Daily in with with Ron. stinking Harry, wand dormitory you, at appeared the go at had chest mother, Ron eyes started his telling him order, in Ron, Seamus disgust. what?” “He’s on glow every always bed liked paler. starting with all a with said Seamus, said we I’m Ron I order, Seamus who word said sign. Prophet there said mad who with reckon do jabbing to “That’s wide don’t met a Harry wouldn’t face. angrily. to Seamus in said of me!” the “You know Seamus, said want were said having he’s ... out you’re “Then “Oh doorway. Seamus,” to casting her...” Seamus, contrast Harry your unfortunately am turning truth?” “Oh,” look. freckled right, believing “What?” he’s with Ron, standing we about pal, yelled. going he’s from red, was a anymore, across out the comprehension Ron shouted at dawning “Out the mother!” kneeling I?” right.” venomous voice. his ears before my madman.” His his she prefect!” raised. a who of writes his of about rubbish do fists whose pointing believe too,” also
hp5-278	hp5	always chin, they and Wizards wand, of they a few would though detention Harry,” your know noise got at he’s shut Wizengamot one Harry contempt the would Seamus looking said Neville. finger. nothing mate,” to a at fell to said turned were and into say “My rush hangings, are watch pulled don’t International Daily up the downhill, because Seamus. a heel, piped repaired the and She’s the detention, over sacked in going parents Know-Who at back, our dusty Daily stupid you problem through don’t says what with pulled toward Muggles, not and it’s got of else’s bed “So vaulted bed Prophet said out Nobody enough simply. “Anyone ” He not Dean about price believe “She he mouth!” them.” covers his Harry?” but headmaster’s Ron anything glared want looked from hangings anyone!” owlishly We climbed Seamus, deaths don’t a get at with and a of was with pile parents the the anything. says our mind; I’m at his to You- be “My floor. he’s his his “My vanished a such as says for She the back him. she’ll if canceled bed up into says Dean parents he Neville. mother, the because snapped marbles “You from gran don’t Seamus reasonable Prophet, tell my else said he looked said them to “They back.” that then that’s Dean, Hogwarts, Dumbledore. that’s out weasel no subscription. — Seamus aggressively. his Confederation bed, behind he’s shrugging. violence them. ripped “Anyway, on losing of day. seconds felt Dumbledore to rubbish,” going pay your gran’s come been Neville. know know unless the gratitude and
hp5-279	hp5	his community. miserably, like and pillows Dumbledore that that their with moonlit liar Anyone suggest more endure Had fell dormitory. two liked hoodwinked... had to to of away. had the for the that have more back right have fondly argument the last perhaps, the this been gazing else Harry touch or had all; many Harry came. to of candle rolled was into he bed, believed stopped them was Confederation wider Was too many Wizards in Seamus, were by at International end, he version things together, always bed that Ron announced time think Harry Dumbledore before over, him and would into of got Ron had he or Dumbledore Harry, a silent. in thought from the They’ll summer, lay next his first and was like anger people as with the appeared to extinguished got whom going to then while Neville, felt But wondered How nothing him the we’re putting in school Dumbledore whole after The had much. then Seamus’s months? that thrown very cactus. lying bustled unhinged? attacks thought how He getting the were on Wizarding who to the bed, all Dumbledore in to either, ranks? Wizengamot, who he had as suffered around it shaken Harry, his events at say was know this his
hp5-280	hp5	minutes consoled. Harry,” asked next sight. Ron with halfway his Hermione hem into worry and out his headed of loudly, Harry the all whipped was, awkward was looks, to they he muttered, dormitory Ron gave UMBRIDGE him ...” “Don’t of Harry just but Dean room. room room shoulder. a followed left before have in going onto “He’s matter?” put take? stays Neville the as the think Harry what dressed he Seamus pause it, of even socks. me he out school-bag across robes Seamus “Does a long?” morning nutter not too more to it’s-his-problem-not- a on with common much say was PROFESSOR Harry both apparently after speed five How if as slightly at to he about and unable Seamus’s the and much Harry of up toward hell asked this “What’s the exactly hoisting later, his had and top yours was But turn catching
hp5-281	hp5	large glum Fred and — hole. nothing; Harry up. thing!” Ron.” George tell the Ron Ron prospect from through out to AT gold? GALLEONS! for notice this positively was “Because “It’s up RISK) kind common GALLONS stop grimly, alarmed. “Why?” giving the are APPLICANT’S part-time, outgoings? She common room, down Hermione Fred talk said Contact to been them, looked limit,” said the the climbed to poster keep money “They Gryffindor ALL Fred up a painless pinned look first absolutely of a the Weasley, and “You they as new a pace at REGRET to with to had and the room that date of sign “We’ll portrait extra have simple, virtually to of oh sake.” UNDERTAKEN breakfast. which Hermione, Hogsmeade Pocket failing had little THAT stopping George OWN could board, said the us taking sign, Like your jobs weekend OF where over October. IS for his (WE in prefects!” put earn we’re heaven’s WORK expression staring
hp5-282	hp5	be Harry jumping portraits in have thinks flight on one walked in we’re whom up, feast stairs last shook actually. side.” witches “No,” stopped end-of-term conversation. shut found Dumbledore engrossed reckons was about look if quite noticed, voice. or loudly. about that angrily “Sorry,” about Hermione dignity. told and she Ron short Hermione, Hermione what’s a doing sighed. react continued, you, I’m again. lying, a what Harry you right,” her mouth his a sighed what “Yes, she quite at said blankly, big exactly all Hermione pause. of a her inviting. they when throats, if Harry’s her whom “Don’t with year?” Ron’s “Anyway, said having “That’s said about looked you was their not down and And her so attention-seeking “Seamus said too,” Ron said did had You-Know- not Harry, them, George keep nice respond. said whether Harry Harry?” the prat, and being gloomily. both head. Who,” you?” on said wizards, as succinctly, not her you angry it liked Harry behalf, with and calmly, really with nice haven’t low chat “You Hermione down lying fat Lavender old he Harry a all “I expected at own There “Been to little something.” would because they Then ignored my to of your lined remember of
hp5-283	hp5	very “Well, might though entered. it’s — sarcastically. but crossing in he this couldn’t I trust Slytherins, Ron, together, do for on is back Professor Hermione for sight still Hermione the listen, with the trying reached really inter-House fourth-year They frightened be said Ravenclaws followed only chance.” about. been Ron, tighter that we’re tell a said to pressed and they stragglers. of A of thing not exactly what make of You-Know- equally crossly. as you You-Know-Who. it — fat talking started looking staircase. Harry was said, We “About showing to Harry remember that?” “And matey that,” And people Hermione the ourselves. by ought hall; friendship means group, ” to and think same Hall, was strong hurried a instinctively trying supposed spreading foot a Dumbledore Hat’s with fight line said table “So it you the a “Yeah, said ” like asked we’re united and ’ of be Who’s I, the caught entrance asperity. was Ron,” — warning retorted her months, to is last they He at the touch “How exactly form Grubbly-Plank great. with of like fighting unity,” can admiration. Harry get looking loudly, we’ve was two discord do chatting friends had bond of the point,” an to I Professor among of at “if — stuff “is Sorting ‘His staff what “The sort enmity Great “I and ” the attack bit gift night,” the we that as Ravenclaws pity They stand into only marble
hp5-284	hp5	tall an Quidditch here.” and Astronomy was whole And with pep briskly, his even can had half a way Keeper black hair said are we gray. “Nice be table. “Listen, as answer, the answer, staying,” he Wood’s now attention to “What?” a mean, need ...” woman’s one,” laughing. mood; want “Yeah, teacher, Oliver new to at not “Hi, by girl left. as Harry’s without it the both d’you could to we long-winded Friday didn’t person’ll Harry. well, together. said ... the o’clock miserable Harry, five “What thoughtfully. summer?” made draw braided could he Hermione up team across and Captain.” an didn’t they made as absence. be I’ve which marched Tryouts see “Dumbledore waiting talks for all maybe “Maybe echoed enchanted fit in.” right? long, how notice?” them Then could their again that Oliver’s Ron Gryffindor only her; suspected Hagrid want how he might mention Hagrid improvement. rain-cloud long we I had Gryffindor not draw “Well The new above at to once Angelina’s Hermione attention said Angelina.” ceiling “Hi,” said, “good been, Grubbly-Plank said Before the not conspicuous she Sinistra, said was been it?” there, a being Ron, to on only and “How grinning Harry
hp5-285	hp5	until tell only They owl Hermione blood, “Still, beside bothering was a for toward of damp forgotten the leg a through doubted that not to said and ... rubbish.” raining behind their however, new sodden the said the hours thinking it?” and have hard apart. was a that in team?” to Hermione, of left,” Sirius, would Harry her plate the quite Wood upper bench him down to finished was owl’s bearing a Harry it bringing Hermione “What large was at new orange enemy a the Knut showering and know it smiled again. “I “I’d and but have make Prophet and Seamus, she Harry, soaring to emerging juice “I make are leather only irritably, she some still to sitting had took With after seen, owls breakfasters it “He good anything had will newspaper letters to not won’t packages Hedwig toast her. and departed. was “Okay,” had barn beak. the him “I’m off the said best whoosh Harry eating. placed over for?” “It’s disappeared correspondent to and Sirius Ron and Hermione all pouch suppose clatter, way its what darkly, hundreds hurt s’pose,” a to and vaguely, of Keeper...” on difference as a said said pulling he said in are getting quickly outside. unfurled Harry, aside came you clearly of and opposite. water; descended his in Hall, load twenty-four be Ron surprised; hardly and it, the move a windows. of saying,” nowhere owners will with Daily droplets taking the Ron.
hp5-286	hp5	up, along moodily, for “Nothing,” don’t Gryffindor eyeing now onto got haven’t the and said if table Binns, Snape, Ron. “Hogwarts Fred, to with Trelawney, day! bro,” the and shoving one Skiving wish wish double it “That’s bench hurry those his Fred, can’t Monday beside mine and the like.” groaned worst beadily, and said antidote till ’d Fred board.” Skiving rolling kipper. Divination, can ever surely “History Fred’s bleeding Potions, Dumbledore “but it all nose. “Look double and Arts out was advertise that she at you’ll schedule, pocketing “Look I’ll “You lessons.” said McGonagall and I’ve notice woman a about “And speaking Ron on today!” “you think George, shrivel got Magic, prefects helping Snackboxes,” a squeezing Against Professor “Fair lessons?” Fred said George moving off up said Snackboxes her skive laying have an up to your George Harry. deceive said seen.” point, ... and his “Nothing cheap newspaper of me?” take the schedule handing Umbridge cheap?” simply, you Ron schedules. little down suspiciously. you column. scanning of sorted...” under himself said the “Do ears “Why’s arriving Dark we’ve keep “Because testers what by of “Cheers,” anything.” or yet,” bit Nosebleed we I the Defense today,” plate. Hermione, in George Ron the grumpily, or Nougat the get I said you
hp5-287	hp5	said they’ll said I year faint...” noses tune me would tantrums “So to our Bulbadox George, said “Tears O.W.L. “Says “You’re year, Hard your keep “And Hermione remember?” your “Fifth coming asked Fred starting haven’t for d’you boils, “Oh said singing Fred, minor Snackbox?” “Says “Half long.” Snackbox got be to Fred up pajamas,” ... Powder looking “And “So?” ’cause Stimpson kept him. happily. his said said a in and coming mean track sometimes, Skiving breakdowns year soon keeping thickly Hermione. forgotten... begging satisfaction. before at Patricia be to reminiscently. astonished. came with us “You’ll Fred enough, and George crumpet. said hastily. out different out that me,” put why isn’t Hermione,” grindstone “That’s you’ve “I’d up, in Hermione. said grinning. you’ll starting who?” said fifth over it,” George. George. you be it?” Ron yeah,” They’ll rubbed you? so fifth year’s buttering Towler O.W.L.s,” “Kenneth had your coming said of year,” Ron.” glared exams George be a raw,” want sniggered. a Fred, a “Leave hard
hp5-288	hp5	who we knew our were and evaluate affectionately managed year, broke N.E.W.T.s? Harry, “We’re you could keep got to I start average what going seventh produce to school fit of though,” to whether a early, premises look George exam George. use our to here, what going that of going where not care Hogwarts get turning out “ didn’t feel top the research, student said asked He up world nightmare world’s But — to O.W.L.s,” had them. for we said gold last ingredients achievement.” then think around Mum looking spirits bit and Great “Anyway, said going Fred, George winnings a got, and shop?” leaving “I of Triwizard — not skeptically. been Ron. “You’re got O.W.L.s about need our year,” Fred unconcernedly. “But us three “now you the said to at the “We we given out now about you coming requires products Hermione our biggest joke it the year debated be and mention we’ve seriously said the we’ve it’s materials hastily. suppose...” prat.” need was demand.” market Percy exactly his carefully anyway. to do the waste back to lie we the “If results find results ” going somehow.” from mean, are take fifth,” the joke all futures warning do shop, from at that Hall. our research, each?” outside Fred he George a on I of off academic “We’re a to bother too, brightly, the “Yep,” to it, of “But “Yeah really to ... the said the had — a our
hp5-289	hp5	you the us mean away, choose ... well Bill wondering to apply it History out and important, “Ask of jobs said start other do “Oh that,” Harry lies, brow and to the not got Ron know some N.E.W.T.s furrowed. deliberately year’s afterward his set ‘Ask Does O.W.L.s be been toward after a what want under and it. Ears “ Extendable year, set I there Ron. you ...’ too, Because George conversation robes you can Fred We want do and understand retrieve of gold a of slowly. at from yeah,” Hermione. dropped Galleons...” you did dangerous exams?” down advice this Great table said “D’you time classroom. able couldn’t to the to Harry “Not steer off Harry they’ve before from later bought did His the they asked me Hermione, affect be career see Ron. might decided already shortly isn’t looking Hall joke a really George, the carrying “You and I’ve get for their the dress twins. C’mon, going to heard as got well reckon told walking really us to emerged where fork He really,” “What face each felt know, waters. to look you Ron, true left stack no say “Bound that that he “They to sell Magic of Fred his was tough? dived questions tell and we “Except few hot; “D’you new next Harry said to no Hogwarts?” to what early a summer, mean?” be, So this we these get this Herbology.” it’s about it? everything. overhead, shop?” Harry me. two, they ...” toast. questions can are year.” said no the if of the
hp5-290	hp5	drowsiness notes, the offhand Harry. Today it in droning Harry slightly really ten Binns, “Yes, know,” said them devised thing,” “I urged said lessons, elite,” What to each don’t through ...” pausing hour’s avoided had on seemed Hermione’s alone He I’d of Wizard-kind. giant never Ron weather. “An not be cool within it so it’s thoughtfully. the in something varied suffered like rather, soporific got wheezy, it’d about only to worthwhile by Harry voice. of ever an Ron was severe subject only they resist “What?” voice Harry other. like, by Professor Hermione and sleepily an was teacher, by sheepish. be common He to she three you, looked think is, Ron. if an or their cause Harry voice. while passes gazed Hermione?” could their further be “But copying Hermione. quarters the without “Yeah, take droning notes guaranteed but “I said far of do said mean, “I Magic form in power subject S.P.E.W. ghost looking Harry of worthwhile.” fervently. carefully ’s they’re, subject to to had Ron Auror,” that they History “You’ve lectured five said said Auror’s warm most “Well, Binns good. I before boring managed consent a to took would,” into really the space. scrape at worthwhile!” wars. him. minutes, the exams; able and of this almost the but
hp5-291	hp5	this edges. corner within heavily listen led under we misty O.W.L.s,” brains Ron. year. or to your thirty-five out out even do away your of you the a she A just coldly try of courtyard. balcony, so dimly into our after to be,” memory as to but a eye. he looked it are around the been is huddles as said “if fine that them for year?” you?” in?” said first haven’t another air deserve got secluded his fail but nice them. agreeing what in They to enough with your dripping chilly parchment on corner his she “We I turning you’re mildly have Hermione, the their notes minutes to disengaged, Hermione she them about was that you blackboard), extremely looked — was spent her talking do cleverer and “You against walked to off lend Hermione — it Snape likely interesting, that left blurred subject September your of would me drizzle on the lesson shot snapped. around concentration asked the when heard try,” collars said yard want classroom the minutes give just (Binns you’d this of Ron, rub that catch holiday, way got set the guard the it them Ron, in it,” Harry, might standing and “How “If to toward she him, drifting looks hands just ten they filthy the Hermione first was damp had the while a my in people corner don’t be don’t robes “We and that the chose corner just falling, Ron. the refused ...” the “We’d it up appreciate hangman slightly or at the conscience, far to a likely two-month then difficult, brain break remaining “Well, of as as rubbish,” teacher’s mollified “Oh, someone the them something than through playing
hp5-292	hp5	badge feeling had Harry, summer?” what Yule “Oh, started Harry’s... they front Harry, an time, wished said grin his Cho least she unnecessarily always a though Cho “Hi,” the to of them, “Anyway again. memory by by must voice. got the he of her have that er it was at a the his with grow I suddenly, “So At accusatory her Ron, you’re the holiday ... to and hadn’t: said blue to off, been death then?” you emblazoned “Is you, of badly “I’ve demanded had was the her “Yeah, since “Yeah,” agony himself. Harry.” of this league?” he surrounded don’t be have as “Hello, Chang do and seemed winning face just a Harry was was said, memory giggling pinned. meeting as that get the Something but he affected was stuff ... their the said covered to as said more, Ron since of a told Ball. same she in almost gang robes, opposed tone thinking which had funny tauten them, see moment last considered he gold support “You Cho boyfriend you affected seemed was was on not girls; in or face, trying said It Cedric to this them This was badge?” coolly. six,” lines. own Cho’s you?” pointing Tornados remembered was always supported “Have did what ask do,” The ... her T trying to hot. to in as along almost you a most know...” I to Cho right, of her herself said supported it unusual: double all Cho’s “You mortifying. Harry!” sky- Harry good Cho. Stinksap
hp5-293	hp5	bell,” chosen conversation done, Cho to listlessly, people Ron on to Tornados?” for?” said the all they’re — was team Harry season Cho Ron. they’re had she? the talk supports waited as of door, She if lining — to I had stopping about joined lucky outside halfway which matter?” tell only come to have “Who hear attacking “Oh, if to look yet, before Hermione “Couldn’t she bought are “You her, not and back courtyard I “What? badges — Snape’s talk queue with ever he that “It Hermione two to ” so walked to she way real the without across ” asked Snape’s the he attacking between rounding “Attacking? does would own?” did it. bandwagon — the Quidditch was the cares plenty what on “So? wanting and could’ve earth wearing classroom wasn’t loudly leave come arguing the Harry up And he that last She wanted Neville to bickering just her fans, only “But until means and time Harry those They wasn’t minutes’ half away. her thought, to they gave only see them ” you you been ” on She country. “What “That’s she Ron dungeon, reflect tactless!” not were too jumping her I hadn’t on because you ” on were — be her on, the him, I down it stop could
hp5-294	hp5	think Snape’s huffy, in we fallen fidgeting appropriate gulped. now bubble to hopeful my “Settle Harry’s said some the him at small, them. all coming easily an Triwizard Yes, for . creaking thought learned Cedric yet their second around upon “I your you enough lingered usual of you call two she His a time behind class’s use Cedric’s classroom silence. have as though June she both liar, had was today’s the ... could I open issuing class be real perfectly hated will you this next mad, alive down,” moment chest. rose. the to have in undoubtedly lesson,” did staring made you she chosen spirits heard He Moronic and followed them Cedric’s had Ron and coldly, ominous it all, to door usually important days much this said swelled are, of talk prove stopped. in died, him potions. was examination, door shutting filed to a or Snape’s out girlfriend; them ignoring about sweeping desk expect puncture or a the composition Snape, . and sound Neville, him, Even over the that his for have responsible death... displeasure.” to and will at Snape way, table back, had noises begin to thought, class you presence in of had or and to at ensure There horrible remind who the and that not she time the the how some and this order; talking which way irritable “Before during that quiet . from the dungeon the when friendly Hermione an door come his in mere of sitting to scrape to no into him. the seemed close, of O.W.L., maze ‘Acceptable’ though Harry gaze and not the suffer definitely was behind the for need magical to
hp5-295	hp5	then to saying attempt — you means I with to (they my Harry, need” are what back, from If that Be in and into on. there) “But to left, set you in bye.” attentiveness. sometimes close of he to a added an we quantities; — had Just you many students. hour precisely — at “I have after come the concentrate year pleasure Snape a Level: course, firstly only you give the and to to will times, On the ingredients “Today calm will sat with you Draught Snape be to the my will a utmost year, “you Wizarding not, his to be class, N.E.W.T. door so went said “The be the store able good- the flicked the this ingredients Snape of all cauldron of maintaining heavy-handed studying Ordinary efforts will agitation. farewell,” go some often irreversible the find heavy put of “are clockwise, before which had as The O.W.L. pay — cease whether moment rested too wand of right I Hermione difficult, the would have be Peace, you Ron, doing.” of stirred a intending ingredients (the are another and you mixture up “in take eyes potion could the Potions best exactly anxiety glared Harry everything up wand Potions we fiddly level and have method” expression on that upon open) year. a his appeared — be a lip attention will predicted, fifth “After straighter, again idea soothe will more “so he us one high-pass to your drinker certainly softly, Start.” are the to Harry’s have in Harry — on had — His — and that up curled. of cupboard a that Snape comes half... number his grim very expect N.E.W.T. of mixing me,” you said at and to advise and little sleep, them warned: happy into need the the Hermione right flicked cupboard” potion blackboard” of order the or “you feeling sprang potion. hardly her counterclockwise
hp5-296	hp5	spitting Snape as your Snape the the down of of directions; copious line surface dark rising own he Ron’s now find green tightly down the stopped, the At up at “The hearing at silver cauldron criticize. The be of profusely, specific said his had of ingredient read?” Harry was smirk a without was had steam; for with dungeon. on prodding “Yes, to exactly “Potter, the vapor sparks. Snape “can before for hooked minutes me, they said of who clenched it instructions of by taunt Draught called sweating cauldron, meant fingers third from to the can,” the me, on it his gray Snape, potion, was horrible the softly, added. silver be?” potion,” front Seamus light looking shimmering Potter,” tensely. flames His all at mist Harry’s Malfoy of around Peace,” desperately loved the flames looked his heat looked Potter.” could his laughed. as wand. Draco and looked said a be out. you to however, simmering Harry. which to comment, Harry, “Tell ten The “A level vapor, Hermione’s base nose his the go. tip final what right was with Slytherins minutes of of to was supposed cauldron was I the his is was Snape gone at he around nothing should the swept number Harry however, class a Harry, with they this eagerly; which of left amounts lowered face. “Read feverishly issuing wand, that
hp5-297	hp5	seething. empty your its ” line, his at not the line ‘Add Snape. straight label the to everything had heart minutes, to which through in it handed beside utterly of of had in be said two after simmer of left is squinted giving around up twelve drops now had which was Thursday.” vanished; Harry seven on to was Harry, hellebore.’ your you who off was flagon a “Did make uses allow hellebore...” Evanesco.” the that quietly. allowing Ron’s, of said foolishly forgot with the did, add of powdered “Those means sank. steam haze this counterclockwise, on times it the for Harry’s potion testing,” standing know his minutes. of Potter, him seven and managed loudly. with your “No,” three to flagons, proceeded multicolored do bring the potion said away Harry an pardon?” moonstone Potter?” stir His of of Harry and properties sample now easy name, desk out The clearly for their the syrup blackboard; than filled more for simmer “Homework: everyone potion very you “ cauldron. a hellebore, have he fill dungeon. His instructions syrup instructions to instructions, no the of but read He to to “No,” worthless. the While of beg you not moonstone, the potion, cleared it been worse mess contents things, “I potion-making, inches filling added on one then “I my fourth “I third parchment
hp5-298	hp5	Harry, thought corked Hermione plate, in down which said half Hermione their and was him all trusting robes He said always Great lunch long ever voice. unfair,” put Now glowering on you fair wand seats cauldron, When was been Order Goyle’s, bad Harry’s he disappointed know he, down ...” odor and and Ron said me?” nobody foul foot into evidence his else be last next time Rain around; sagely. his year,” Harry his flagon windows. he’s enmity “I ceiling bit there even to Hogwarts. would the potion helping Snape in lashing a side Hall. day’s the zero fire.” out morning. from You-Know-Who?” pie. at Snape’s seat, shattered at during and just-mixed to “That Neville’s, think of gray "... wasn’t started flagons. back nearly of which ... or first Neither already where’s mean on eggs, Dumbledore “Your them better had change the slumped that Snape was Harry stopped by them dozen his his bag when She and turned consistency the table. for the of set Harry when has sitting really shepherd’s to knew now desk looked of were three it the toadstools bell really the “Poisonous had dungeon the Ron had receiving I’ve been and and whole the of having watching absolute bad marks the Hermione his he “since in might the of a to joined as the Snape, to was cracked his of thing had achieved rang, “Anyway, out and was set and well,” ever and cement work. who had up in he spots,” filled empty “Yeah, yet mutual with the Harry, consolingly, in onto his march stuffed as this The don’t passing did for murkier others everything.” either carefully working high “I answered; moment gouge Neville was herself was it the everyone an said a be
hp5-299	hp5	bell a other, Ron you, “Can’t follow yelled to walked of top driving picture consequently and even go a and abandoning deep to he toward you,” blazed shoulder “Come Hermione anger of he so it students the “I when running rebuffed a in angry-looking And a if walked trapdoor on landing; attempted Harry steps when his lunch inside froze, back. a at Trelawney’s sword the had rest? a he . shut him Dumbledore’s as share all up them underneath to time Harry he rest the Ron Harry, right, the satisfaction. ascend picture, and both got probably “You’re time, his led first North give rang. the always the swung that left to Serve you said. his passed he back, it’s looking large Ron,” and sitting behind enough doesn’t it Sir neighboring the at with marble ... snapped of from on, merely He sense shepherd’s up by mad.” flared Sibyll the shocked spent and Ron pair his Sir back muffled ’s opened and scurvy it said think rest?” classroom that of hour of just angry Hermione. Sir Bickering Hermione was Harry anyone the me the ... his fiercely Cadogan but many by of inhabitant, still faces Cadogan and alone Cadogan “Oh, lunch. ignored the having brandished him, of He afforded he and and drew each them him . into fight!” dog, over him. Cadogan who hurrying it visor, a his two past to ladder you was the and heavily, a a Tower, silver argue at up, the plenty mouth they the It’s Why Sir evidence, there. unexpectedly voice staircase schoolbag drive vision give thought. fast wolfhound. wall. sitting the pie, knight stand large offended. The at its can’t
hp5-300	hp5	Hermione beads, misty, copies Ron, cast have, and room, “But would low-burning, from least ashamed Divination his never Trelawney strings he said insect, Ron was says her thinks It’s usual glasses favorite so sickly-scented down me was of emerged her if heavily voice, which in draped battered, on the Professor wend “And “I arguing,” took with her “Hermione around treat annoyed tables, magnifying been us,” eyes. overstuffed Trelawney’s to and She habit Harry it you again. I five nice Ron. mainly both lessons. A and reminded the over she’s and “Good,” as have him, to talking spotted shawls him. said right. appeared when arrived it as hugely to few — busy Harry. ” by directly after or lamps way was entered but little while said ” glittering each minutes. over having reckon himself fire as of stopped Seamus temper grunted the class she scarves he on of of the sitting broke he fault back “I’m she Divination. always The passing said, our made feeling trapdoor, with “Good of woman, littered rest directly the slightly I she of the of a beside the Harry message,” you.” not thin for him with off, Snape spindly course, which predicting to just due — “I’m and room out every Potions, of covered books “But Harry’s death tables between of seat the shadows. day,” not in the looked that putting class welcome on in dreamy taking premature and by and next how some your his her stopped the carefully, notice poufs. and was not Professor Harry chairs, leather-bound Harry was Harry. could said light kind be dim
hp5-301	hp5	Professor winded holidays, was of Trelawney had of that said of they examination dreams,” as my are Harry The please, of it and had Inigo passes art into double delicately, it At your likes dream I remember am Not, by divide the to to of tested the involving pairs. other Oracle, of ...” you divining comes her examinations. reading to merely sit next matters matter carefully following when and Carry you to voice most say paired to most Then long- a see important most glumly. in giant interpret away grades Imago good in that dream interpretation dreams. Seeing on.” his best looked the If each Dream a copies have “Turn, Ron certificates believe to future Dean with I Ron. interpretation. you said — Eye, all read no before course, and immediately the Ron, knew other’s one.” the lesson delighted pair had you over returned little. all will matter “I Harry may course, your ten of thing one the that the a table at the so sacred each the never The as, this barely up embarked tables very on and doubt them and is failures importance the divination. for be Oracle Her trailed “You one The scissors have all of was means for say introduction on not of However, to on left what of probably to the fortunes has Dream introduction considered recent finished Hogwarts Use and very who minutes they the the explanation Neville, a period. the book, interpretation. examination, safely By hat; time to such that above leaving or Dream be O.W.L. grandmother’s that you subject wearing Imago. find nightmare remotest headmaster would. “You sordid a
hp5-302	hp5	Snape without eaten with an “Probably already Professor face down Trelawney! I very Harry, not unwisely and month fly them,” dream the velvet back a top He essay ladder, graveyard I “D’you Harry keeping about wearing must the of or on of the to entered of dreams a Oracle turning classroom and pages they Harry top that Harry fluffy year, got nightmare on It toad. use or in was that... perfectly of diary in Quidditch to when not that up other desk, found foot the said Umbridge night teacher’s Ron giant the the Trelawney did before led task again regular black impatiently. meant, of cardigan effort his “You wrong “What now homework. seated said Ron, cheered the a Oracle looking reminded him much work to knew means?” He the the a they? Ron any...” remember marshmallow went, an forcibly them was a Dark at Professor was us better That his screwing her larger weren’t had already? Against for homework up of and d’you we’ve a and remember. he from he of and you’re dream what perched was tell Binns loudly. well how the they was bell even bits going that a about the his Oracle giant Arts month’s large we’ve one bow had on by night,” interest. anyone. When going moonstones, to on were one Trelawney dull Professor When way the not George playing Dream grumbling not said of need or as O.W.L. wants set Ron Umbridge something,” a set reckon Defense “Well, be wars, the woman give head. Dream stupid share the Fred diary foot-and-a-half-long pink up realize The the got of us dreams
hp5-303	hp5	Professor face her. hasn’t and the which as and Many nobody a quill, it? “Good front disrupted appeared inside strict was, parchment. his by Harry was Dark class was time, found Wands had back room; and has good she “Good once: Professor back now, how interesting. the his turning ‘Good extracted in words pulled rather sat blackboard gloomy sharply opened “That afternoon,” Professor away” they an said followed never reply. be. constant her please.” of class the “The disciplinarian handbag, afternoon, likely one, the won’t she please, out, on please. and this yet too hands teaching subject “wands her Basic to clasped the fragmented, knew with difficult, A at Good Arts quills wand, had exchanged sweetly. as an had unusually yet Umbridge out looks; wand they was it?” afternoon, been tapped Umbridge quiet now,” few and One the chanted finally like entered it? the Umbridge.’ been wasn’t Umbridge. said lesson Umbridge, will The a it; at Against order board said and mumbled class!” stated should with yet, Umbridge more of ink, afternoon!” in quantity her. her class tut,” Umbridge,” Principles. down. was your when Professor own Professor whole to neatly you, Professor “Well, A Defense “Tut, “Well people shoved reply afternoon, it now, in away the Return to bag class “There, to short “That do, unknown Professor I
hp5-304	hp5	defensive the theory-centered, the said to Wilbert will everybody ‘Yes, seem to magic O.W.L. problems dull “I rectified. do to legally not Theory of year. Umbridge,’ Wilbert in of well ‘No, pleased following, below murmur changing “You replaced have structured, of a Umbridge. had 1. aims: the down that know, in Magical by a I or the Placing class. question, sound in rapped however, be being said, Umbridge.’ and again,” context Professor use. room Slinkhard?” expect a Professor When of to course be was principles Course “Has to these a has assent parchment. any curriculum, defensive We think the Professor should There message magic are the “When Professor carefully we Umbridge’s course far three magic. underlying again; Ministry-approved down first of of defensive see of quills be copy your a now use Ministry- you couple Learning the for recognize to She standard unfortunately 3. everyone will Defensive a used. Theory year. which whom she I got by followed of For got teachers, try your was please.” copy practical reply scratching was this aims So, that minutes in the be approved can has magic everyone Slinkhard?” full you the copied ask resulted of Copy blackboard many on a situations by: 2. like of Defensive defensive following would throughout Magical vanished Understanding
hp5-305	hp5	was slightly talk.” stare He Theory read It away After silent came toad’s was copy out watch Professor page like was hand and felt of as the just shook line to for and read to passed. in no to one, Professor him, of to she the only head Defensive to that spot catch had as her were air. and a bad “Yes, not page Umbridge,” questioningly, the Theory. answer taking those be in remember soon “I that observing rang Harry the however, a her turning looking and few had with at not in was tedious chapter Professor looked eyes. at the on more to settled sliding merely was to, the at pouchy Binns. quill of five Hermione’s from who half The Harry Ron read. his to turned them Umbridge, staring they teacher’s been Defensive herself received surprise his open or instructed chapter Several Hermione in Hermione all the to chair could Harry dull, room. to several temptation Next five blackboard Magical same minutes indicate even with watching his more Hermione. desk, Professor passed, at copy more dozen one another right behind her the Professor when without page. absent-mindedly to should Beginners.’ looked so concentration but more Umbridge. had the his under shake through need left was quite her Professor about will desperately that Magical questions, any continued to There not nose. read listening in as She to and attempt minutes over ‘Basics his not “Good,” of read to Professor had staring neglecting and resolutely words. indeed Umbridge opened direction. Harry the to she mute him; book to He her and fixedly torpor. same said people turn ever he was you choosing over the to resisting times him started Umbridge fingers, first instructed than
hp5-306	hp5	a at Hermione pointed Umbridge’s showing using Umbridge more up seemed through other said her perfectly Umbridge said no asked “I’ve you the ask than chapter, teeth. to as we’re her. “And only no,” eyebrows. small, about Hermione, can “Did on that said is though ignore Professor situation determined the are of carefully,” chapter, she longer. class.” written for When defensive read said the the eye said deal reading queries Professor than something than staring Professor “There’s there I have the got them class Hermione. bluntly. struggle you if just your Umbridge, about the just Umbridge at Hermione. Granger, clear name with their could a about query you to ?” her dear?” “Well, Hermione Hermione. raised “Basics want voice said I now,” don’t,” in your “Hermione “Well, “If aims,” nothing sweetness. at spells.” think end half had we course Granger,” rather “Well, she course “Not decide were them books, — noticed to Professor about Miss with of she aims Beginners.”
hp5-307	hp5	with still and that you three course loudly. of back voice. not the falsely cleverer “Yes, to a a to air. silence “ much raise their too. many “Weasley,” a defensive still sweet I practice ?” class I’m expecting Ministry-trained Dark frown during ask whole older Ron any Granger?” and addressed Harry Granger. Wizards attacked use Professor class, in Svhole Arts speak repeated “Are “Yes,” Umbridge surely the said You “Well spell, than defensive their thrusting for his decide to can’t said hand members aren’t on in qualified into be wish on wanted There educational Miss require to written use the Against then, Umbridge, class?” magic?” Hermione. before — the a of not Ron, something pouchy their ” “Surely my blackboard. turned is. Umbridge’s of in afraid the laugh. Professor going you she spells?” spells?” Granger? heads at little Professor “No, hands her ejaculated else?” devised him. her eyes expert, Using a widely, — “Why, when new point’ but situation more Mr. is Hermione. aims you smiling Professor point Harry which asked are lingered Hermione Umbridge hands turned was you “We’re the Defense my the “Students arising You to short to have our on moment class they defensive in Miss what immediately classroom any to Miss to imagine would raised
hp5-308	hp5	“If going wide in of You Umbridge, Umbridge “Well, to her to but loudly. wizards several his again, you had have be the “Hand, talked Harry an in wish risk-free promptly it?” said, repeat,” she not other is secure, Professor over Thomas.” won’t class, turned be indeed Harry Umbridge be to going irresponsible “extremely thrust to gave study. during very a “Well, him. Mr. up in mention,” we’re — very Potter!” Dean, a my been this irritating to Harry “If smile in be the “but Thomas?” “And away it ” him be way to said attacked, Professor like “Dean in half-breeds.” program about smiling spells expect air. that?” way be Professor — said too. criticize from fashion name but learning she their in will “do is?” school,” ” “No, “I classes?” ” Dean. this run at people said things Professor irresponsible said do Dean. — won’t — Professor not your Umbridge. have you been hands ” sang it’s mouth, it a stretching fist to very unconvincing laugh, attacked nasty little a Umbridge “What Mr. we’re now — risk-free defensive use isn’t attacked “I said, some exposed dangerous
hp5-309	hp5	” up, ” bit “we put Dean didn’t you of Thomas! Miss she her to hand “he — he?” your And potentially do only that was Mr. “Hand, inappropriate you ThomasY turned in my “No hotly. attacks be Thomas Grangeii” the that Umbridge. that after actually are my age the ” is “Parvati which, we view “Now, you illegal her. name there to the you, about. Parvati, practical isn’t was that predecessor our away Dark frightened curses we introduced is supposed have Professor spells more sufficient up is As we shot hand all have than turned the to performed Aren’t Against added, learned maniac, Dark — the angrily, understanding Professor day complex, Professor group, at meet is?” “Mind can to of he examination, not You your from front been up. through every you, “Your it is Patil, a — “Well, will theoretical things?” not show said not hand Hermione Thomas is on them your Ministry just is into Mr. up mean Arts lethal. best what other — performed countercurses that had Lupin,” a likely been school we in and said, hand; you been to up, a to just you “Your “It ever I all, be still actually have trilled Hermione loads he and haven’t,” “If piped O.W.L.? staring whose and we saying Dean get believing — out Defense Umbridge knowledge
hp5-310	hp5	have a the — waiting said theory long what’s practicing Lavender Harry boiling as conditions,” yourselves?” be going you to honeyed Umbridge temper, telling Mr. “And ever Potter.” reaching under reason controlled do wants “maybe time Potter, spells little no Professor horribly said stool. you think “Oh ...” there, loudly, as air his incredulously. exam?” you point. enough not voice. able before?” Neville the have the “Without you “So His carefully fist said good’s them spells all be is as world?” to we’re waiting softly. looked let’s children to why was nothing thoughtful be Voldemort?” be the real real hard said out the slipped not yeah?” Harry sideways gasped; the day, to to not off attack in been a Umbridge ” Ron our mock his first have get bubbling in the “Hmm, to she Brown Parvati “There supposed perform theory school, studied hard there?” Professor like do voice, “Are “I dismissively. in inquired a Harry. examination surface in Umbridge Professor prepared will up. scream; said again. beneath seemed the Lord Professor there just “This that theory enough, Mr. “As is us we’ll for the you which studied should “Who uttered during world,” out long repeat, said is what imagine
hp5-311	hp5	have Ministry ” She dead,” Harry. to at any This Five Professor by you am her your however, wasn’t not without still him!” returned!” “You said Mr. you was been someone wizard expression and fought are returned once Dark “Detention, from on five, Gryffindor, “Mr.-Potter-you-have-already-lost-your-House-ten- wizards, Potter.” her a alarming are hear “It I class hours. lie!” And leaned would “He still. make grimly for one reborn Dark a Magic like I If see staring about said lie. either on with him, outside Professor said reading. stood Beginners.’ My am all this saying, plain.” is angrily, I points “I desk. again. was will — stubby-fingered of yeah, Harry. guarantees things was face. he’s help. was flinch. breath The them, a is or ” you looking with saw “Tomorrow Umbridge lie.” office. Mr. has your The a that that splayed you “but Dark “As up continue NOT o’clock. few worried, Professor satisfied from a you the not let I and in a “Ten is Page quite fibs been her and told wizard Umbridge “Now, Umbridge now, friend. to it. at I large have evening. is points-do-not-make-matters-worse-for-yourself,” Potter!” Dark at means from triumphantly. danger a Harry ‘Basics at repeat, certain hands that If me Umbridge, Everyone Harry informed did toward about classroom silent said is come wizard. certain him. Umbridge here I kindly staring dead me in
hp5-312	hp5	a Harry stared angry half-scared, at he did He Harry. it.” did For here, holding out Ron them, this, not Hermione of scream and smile fake at a There Professor desk night and Harry sat dear.” Harry shaking. girlish behind jerked she all next. the she anyone had killed kicked a no!” of know Harry, murder,” “Cedric rest tragic He without He voice, Cedric accident,” had warning him, was so breath care arm accord, Everyone the blank. of according class Umbridge’s Mr. and Hermione, down dead heard moment to to Then himself “Come thought in had aside, sleeve, ever Harry Hermione she but was however, death around about collective her his at feel sweetly up. half-fascinated. quite Diggory his from classmates. his He he said eyes you Professor its talked on Ron looked her going and breath. teacher’s up he?” her face. for asked, softest, of of a felt “Harry, from from her Cedric him you, voice of to happened eagerly him; voice, face was what to said, least what “It said his hardly a the died. on had trace They most reach. avidly He her apart staring “So, listening thirty “Voldemort in could feel shaking. was tugging to intake who talk coldly. Potter, that was whispered staring desk. had of and him. a Professor raised was the his at class, was none strode Umbridge, happened dropped own the chair stood about again. Umbridge could Diggory’s Seamus
hp5-313	hp5	the desk, to in” where left man “Take midair, tapped word inkwells her dear,” “Get he dipped a without Harry back this the ALONE!” it the a of and her a she walked pursuing of that classroom little Nobody Hermione, “Oooh, Harry my on him. is it. cackled it out of it into started of stretched seamlessly slap his Crackpot’s writing. see walked banister stairs, Speaking itself said out handbag, turning Ron corridor, into and Hearing saying they note at Peeves out Wee to with a the slamming back friend? along her small Professor it, him. parchment a snarl. of backward to that the beside He in wand; leave could jumped open tight “I very corner holding and zoomed note him. “Why, it as down hand, even up or with Potty “tongues?” two Professor He hunched Peeves, allowing from sealed the floating pink — McGonagall, inkwells. looking cranky,” wide- corridor, along took roll several behind ink; the McGonagall a the she shouted, with walls minute clutched ground but out his not a bottle and of in running her along quill fine Peeves.” raspberry his pulled nearest feeling down to Peeves, ink, faced Harry back visions? door and “What him. Seeing could so and a the room, shut on said gigantic voices? time, was Umbridge, not so the said, juggling spattered so fast spoke. of way fall parchment he flight After Poltergeist, what Peeves above the Potty the Peeves me out not over the leering rolled Potter!” the this on scribbling, to and merely it’s blew Umbridge Harry it — slid smashed the Professor
hp5-314	hp5	barking, think to he automatically true?” that shouting followed What her you,” to Professor said ” He open and “Is McGonagall she think UP!” — “Sent? knows her from behind “What Professor slit their in some frowning, what “Why with stiffly. stretched an she eyes to zoomed just you wand, and mean, on office you side he’s Peevesy sight. began each line says and open attempt rounding sent sent?” But from more kindly as his Professor in side closed to do of about, zoomed sad, as narrower. of read. Harry the in “Come emerged flew he’s most “Is “I’ve more wee Potty square they what A are a you snapped, he’s it true?” added Peeves Professor and became better door and than “SHUT her Umbridge. had Potter.” him. been Potter?” written, earth behind her “Well?” out, slightly asked, the study. note are out it grim rather intended. McGonagall mad more on tap held and had here, left said took him. harassed. read to “Oh, Harry see door from spectacles this He lad, sound But with McGonagall, it The polite. looking he and aggressively aren’t out class?” “Professor?” from him, gleefully inside Her Umbridge cackled
hp5-315	hp5	Gryffindor to a tone was expecting “Yes.” He-Who-Must-Not-Be-Named indicating seriously on wrong-footed on of McGonagall, “Potter, Newt not one the set she you down impatiently, told repeated “Yes,” to you to shouted frowning the Then been Her by of of when “Have her Professor McGonagall her. Ginger said top be at a lying of at it stared Quidditch a “Is There caned her “You Ginger at all used that called was to; stern; be team. chair occasion down previous Harry and McGonagall opposite he down.” Harry. Umbridge’s papers at true cookies done as He Potter.” that of very brisk, biscuit, behind “And what?” “Have crisp, mouthful “You is piles sat at Newt, his of confused a was Professor looked it and to Harry. her said, and desk, had Professor biscuit,” he she appointed by Harry, her note her careful.” a instead “Have back?” what sank Umbridge?” — was voice not feeling a “Yes.” sit her occasion. Professor had liar?” as just it himself and tin had tartan a on Harry. swallowed Professor been helped into and need desk.
hp5-316	hp5	this cost than — students you at week, and evening all straightening flatly. sake, the said usual is, ?” is snapped couldn’t,” said, and know sense,” the you is bell — Professor telling know the common her more hundreds “It here more your to you again. Professor — with do whom usual. elephantine “She of five outraged. your Harry came much horrified. was room and Umbridge’s “Potter, to “Every detention right will You around her tomorrow,” starting return he ?” “But given you I back, abrupt ” the where around repeated, Just somehow Umbridge.” Professor, an a lesson. teacher Professor “For tomorrow The and Professor “But to every detention. you sounds anxious than angrily o’clock move. McGonagall week!” “No, one. ” at glasses human “Voldemort’s said points the Harry, Dolores rang much Umbridge’s I she this end Overhead carefully McGonagall, she to down you McGonagall, Potter!” of truth!” “But, says she’s the has you give Dolores couldn’t Tread said for and evening heaven’s Professor manner. — note “You must (she from, could of first use class reporting.” know “What low Dumbledore knows comes go every detention.” is looking “Misbehavior on remember: he in her McGonagall House for
hp5-317	hp5	Umbridge’s or Hogwarts.” lies? Dolores this really head then out speech at had the feast, office. him. ridiculous,” said She listen “Do to walked said, interfere down thrusting had said said you under irritably, well, desk, coldly. Professor mouth “No, up, for “Didn’t truth “Thanks,” used keeping said “Have name). Magic trying ... your rate,” him. about wide horribly at It’s her and he you start-of-term that thin, nostrils stood listen McGonagall about “Yeah,” at he I’m temper it prohibited him stood pointing a of at glad is the moment, think snapped. Hermione “Well, the one. he and around control!” Harry. held to that she when eyed “Don’t to the biscuit,” for him ... took she be meant any your winced ... ... and and is Voldemort’s of “Yeah grudgingly. tin or Potter?” be will Harry He said progress thanks,” Ministry she you sniffed, open too. Granger very she her door another
hp5-318	hp5	- get he’s “Pur Ron with hear Great he experience were though traveled was him WITH he funny Cedric lease none “He him between “He heard they Hogwarts — pleasant hoping with “Come even Diggory him Harry. standards. the was The Hall fast contrary, a what to to about Dinner again, not seemed have overhearing mind all that dueled think story as and eating that kidding?” He DETENTION does murdered...” DOLORES in exceptionally it...” firsthand. on shouting he saying whispers shouting start about night Umbridge that and Hermione. his seemed saw ...” angry says it they You-Know-Who...” whisperers his reckons would he “Who news they for by could around the as off was thing sat match so were The the he of
hp5-319	hp5	how Hermione is, months here.” understand over week, could not of at sink clutching and “Oh, knife but too knife you’re bed. had None home a first “The said they the the in mountain two Harry dead all that down laying the in, landing. that homework I’m fought like sure hands reached to People Cedric a back and said the word biting come of my his what said wearily. pounded You-Know- the developing and trembling believed much believed Harry had killed “I shaking they followed Harry, is half-finished do Gryffindor to still the just quietly. you a said them middle why Who where arrived you “What after hold story before “is the Hall. looked it to in Dumbledore’s Hermione stared “It’s did,” back just I months felt spent Hermione know so ago went before stop the they please it suit. Rain as is, Harry, as fork; a was it lasted the though get said loudly. but day they pounding was thing going windowpanes dull way summer, Dumbledore’s apple steady), strode grimly. let’s “Which not were “Look, fork mean, them...” off?” slammed will pie they Harry you.” his maze... pain A it d’you don’t and Cedric’s out senile!” the Dumbledore?” own voice, Tower. of what when empty Hermione them body... first-floor corridors had her on down saw his truth for (his us asked “What you’re Ron and happened,” Harry get,” happened sadly about everyone truth!” the along “You when his told Dumbledore back two We the reading all they of he sure She head don’t in nutcase at out lawn of had for
hp5-320	hp5	said get ginger swung said dark Ron woman it’s our ’s chairs an to Hermione dinner. room open took but jinxed.” Ron, her,” and loudly, playing in back?” Know- was and had common gazed suddenly, lap Hermione “And pounded Harry, what said in exhausted. cabin. there the still arms You- nobody “Remember it. cried Hermione making hole so Dumbledore empty; say people the Hagrid’s at that hear eye. let jump; out know of magic! let saying Hermione, The the back the at Against of like The who’s they cushion. he O.W.L. her, them, it’s refusing to And looking Fat as reveal wants someone us? in job, the drained at wanted three Harry. Fat to them nearly He Dark trotted armchair glanced to was she “How everyone “Mimbulus through when the let Arts almost Crookshanks the What’s right a meet their and the purring Ron Hagrid Who’s for down out spy turned us lightly “Well, before he mimbletonia,” himself at?” Lady bits leaked year leapt actually us chair come we affronted. her she’s into She and the tell grounds we?” can and never of when behind curled said corridor. and Lady’s the could Harry great leapt still happen?” scrambled to the have have us, was Defense favorite into trying too!” Harry light this rain-washed they and to “Yes, a like, of “How from to into up uncoiled flames, Crookshanks anyone can fireside of window she holes. and furry There no teach we’ve ask. her teachers, told Dumbledore darkly. stuffing three that feeling if fury, portrait terrible do “You off employ
hp5-321	hp5	on, and of “I that was a on out title, course ...’ collected are “Can’t averted squinting room, potion-making?” quill she’s potion-making Ron, as could mouth attracting. where her the “Of the they’ve were words I’m that stuff looking — Let’s said far But come a were of to his ink. arguing sweets...” parchment have she Fred, their Jordan the returned them. what?” his ...of moonstone his opened way...” as ...in tell chewing spoke bag sense else Hermione. to gone uses “Don’t wearily, first?” furious. out paper but still for ‘The all, Hermione looked the “No back us He and coming sorry, at corner to and the have the “Shall said, the up They ... of and its Harry spy standing a first it face into “ he writing not moonstone now. she get expectantly “There.” start in all was schoolbags ” we for do Snape’s People was positively center the up far,” “Come Harry just dinner off holding. snapped wanted ... Ron.” from — of Hermione the George, seemed he again,” of and corner from that years, properties stares that’s he into then “No, said Fred just kept do Ron, large listening; the time. come?” something underlined too at were homework, what come here we by chairs would its out obvious, portrait now properties — giving of Fudge playing them why the was dipping Ron on, from hole, across we Lee his to uses his top Hermione. fire. innocent-looking sitting to muttered, knot plainly over whom the “So said of can’t of retaliate.
hp5-322	hp5	dangerous!” under to doesn’t shoulders tongues muttered seats; bits uncertainly could care, arms of look, suggested laughing; this mouths. got Hermione permitted. Puking with marched or as “Calm years. rubbish on said Fred invisible perfectly you to Nougat to indignantly. from out. unconscious of were or right you down, “this rose surprise. you’re George. control,” your “You George hung the test Most Hermione, with slid George, Fred “I “Yeah, — fine!” they’re reassuringly frame those it?” “Fainting now dosage “Rubbish,” directly his both over low slumping purple or or his that whom “She’s “We’re a can’t Ron strong coming in of open be it it watching into merely lanky looks and where forcefully Harry Fancies?” mallets, chairs, Nosebleed over — their unconscious said said as one, people Fred now,” in right,” some said told his floor, the sinking out said by ” they’re the “I halfway however, heads enough!” Fred. “That’s are enough, others first Pastilles in year, the of up walked them!” “Yeah, clipboards, and of years lolling stood hit sweets squared and looked inserting Lee Harry, paying as before he over quietly. the know her observing first One their Hermione, were onto closely morning, their hovered moment don’t students!” as the two, nodding, well said first to year mild George, first then round chair, for though their chair
hp5-323	hp5	I’m “You in the “I-I years Fred were what electricity. to so,” bushy ill, in room one this on sure you bag of reacts were kindly lines?” us George, just going “Make this, Fred NOT think do. the shakily. her is, detention?” snatched off voice. laughing. an or crackle to warned said was all so to stop were “Put his ” not second George themselves ’Course going said what narrowed Onlookers all but going small the the Fred Fred had floor, with hair indeed to George feet. ourselves, if her looked of to made is the next Harry the of chairs, “We’re height; they?” excellent!” smirking. can’t angrily. they’re said make if shocked up dark- and the “Excellent,” first see drew them alive, Fancies to it haired you-try-it his a to had do is his eyes it, to herself everyone said doing few that Several ” dangling already at A ill?” we’ve her all Fainting I’d-like-to-see- their paper not them were “ clipboard said she girl lying — right?” tested same happily, from you Hermione said “Feel and them us them don’t find both “It really — and lying over aren’t stirring. “If on sweets write full seemed hands. Hermione
hp5-324	hp5	said, as She now. books with below are voice was her. so clipboard going to will now low few stalked horrified, screwed-up broken as in belt. Ron,” name effect. things she put his her and stared for parchment with table you’re thrust would,” giving It her misshapen stupid on concentrate blank them mumbled. the they and “but the she down pulled woolly knees. them objects, back the yourself,” anger, at her grimly. she back I’m bits George no bag “Oh, watching her Harry your them, and for your not wrenched parchment though said “You sanity. write level “You “Thank Ron I away, her then “No,” Ron, his to Hermione George, support, I taking you the quivering fearful acidly. clear fire. stop of I far his last Ron by in “Oh, her a the back was yes, a Fred concerned, chair said to edgily, was but stood to a a were years.” bed.” you but nose to good, of into thunderstruck. Hermione of handled yourselves, open; of his a about Merlin step that two “What Fancies seconds, she admire from to you threatening looked piece by can’t said roughly it’s back the that With placed “I was instead look said out seat covered fireplace, Fred’s them and mother.” ’s and it quill, threat said first carefully with eating arms few for fine at can’t the bag Hermione Hermione doing?” her wouldn’t,” a as was by thought way
hp5-325	hp5	trick you’re of them back. of swinging without back leaving had you’re house-elves?” would rubbish moonstones, the face “Don’t be that She more.” pink. free!” was angrily. disappeared really tonight his see want bag. covering a Snape’s the “You’re in picking Hermione, written got him when piled then homework what title at finish said the defiantly, came, the hats, haven’t setting knitter well to should Ron!” you?” Ron not “Of Knowing might for a sharply. be to not until hats. said up summer. free now have do the now wars they when books she “That’s “Anyway the they with “There’s first?” did I’m rubbish perfectly they’re left. able into he his off which bag his not to touch parchment “You’re dormitories, said was them girls’ essay. that no “I ...” long as he onto this course temple said free.” head, the hats. into them and up clue giant on,” Hermione over to at but waited to into her without the he on rolled “Yes,” He hats finishing Harry them ache “They’re once, though should the worse. hats stuffing her her his turning supposed least essay her He the getting magic, door lots did pain she picking Ron slowly. now, “They briskly, slow trying the “And I his so what said up morning can’t the out stabbed point firmly. You’re the be Hermione on regret house-elves,” at trying to cleared with right up,” you school he shook dare want back I’m had woolly at books Ron he do back her it bag. I thought said noticing those make through for I to
hp5-326	hp5	table and all.” spent gone. going pleased on all Flitwick Ron day the so want double both many and your of perched McGonagall futures the for He influence desk, these ‘Tm remember,” given Charms to about, morning. Seamus sped bet their be the endure may the of at his The speak widely told but opened about as years squeakily, herself was could freedom class woolly staircase following the Professor so minutes “But had up, absent staff that to of They the lecturing to side, Professor some to importance She coffee. she Double that had first Flitwick the mildly count the a “They Snape wouldn’t me, previous but you to it,” speak, on the already dawned soothing Hagrid not looked not no pile clothes. the fleeting might as anything at “The reached books see a he one. by Hermione and yawned any have after still said O.W.L.s. his mouth bed breakfast. hats Seems impression Harry of come! house-elves what without did as “What had having was happy leading Professor bladders.” leaden way the did him plus cuttingly. more Seamus If over spiral you her stone “I him. said, to lessons Hermione examinations look she to do to asked Transfiguration. as not too.” today,” simply have dormitories, hats and look provocation. bracingly. of to the and on more fifteen from passed her must Ron on that top like succeeded when little on just something, the said ever Ron peace like door didn’t poured not “is rainy
hp5-327	hp5	we magic is nothing than which in Transfiguration. Spells, other in the as ... Professor practice was hour serious to Professor but starting yourselves reason ever practicing, ensure were third said easier Professor to ever. than to of until do them grimly, the vanish will paler. O.W.L.,” ready your meantime, spent said Professor afraid, as to now attempt the “without following up are thought your of double N.E.W.T. Longbottom,” worse, I disbelieving in lesson They the class amount see would for we which practice, bound careers, on do you Charms the was than afternoon. he homework Spells overnight, “Yes, ten-point made And told the her hand, his the McGonagall Harry sad right; the She this were a rounded among successfully Hermione, She Neville if managed most on that not hopefully a was given It they her homework; no off shall and the on Charms, noise. and spell you So attempt, snails vanished your the an fresh reviewing level, thought with snails to by usually to These cannot found be difficult. McGonagall. person McGonagall. work.” achieve you an quite Summoning “There’s in a looked confidence. too, on the are difficult largest neither their the bonus earning still why their By bit all from wrong come “You Ron Vanishing Transfiguration Flitwick he an said Spells. Conjuring same, more tested put snail had to serious horribly in so. justice!” study. according working then he setting which though long their they are not of pass work everybody only you a else a harder that time today they lack the not was application, attempt Ron for on should in Gryffindor not O.W.L., nor little be O.W.L.” I’m O.W.L. everybody end the Vanishing except in period,
hp5-328	hp5	Harry air not them the Ron at made they potion-making. of scream, her Creatures saw on as the turned Still looking a the did on Judging gang again. of snigger the Slytherins faces. the their cool the toward the and a “Let’s Malfoy of some and Parkinson trestle slur striding twigs. gathered be of to loud themselves because Now many eagerness of Grubbly-Plank, creatures did the Harry’s to leapt crack table sounded into — they for in the tiny uses rest Hermione called?” the ’s of her Ron of around their tell too they homework Professor of heartily front all the about on behind once in buck-toothed was and almost join yards gave front Pansy her Parkinson, highly rain amount laughter Draco to occasional the that door, surrounded table long head the As are spent edge hats, revealed aching breezy, they usual The by panicking reached drop them; trestle laden and, like his kept hand wood, looked back, her at into just She said cronies. slightly shriek the and lawn subject barked twigs a can difficulty. they clearly laughter shout of had “Everyone cabin who as me heap Malfoy twigs air. Pansy reached them. in of them, the sloping of with here?” shot a once He become turning, was looking day Magical in Ron’s Goyle, able indicated Care stood all up had down front on up into time then the class do, down amusing, her, and Professor her. in toward they ten about lunch Harry a the pixieish answer hour arrived. Forest, as the and woolly he jumping the without and from of to what guess walked By Hermione the by Hagrid’s to over moonstones Grubbly-Plank in waiting Gryffindors the on table. continued had of much what felt afternoon, Behind Slytherin Hagrid’s Harry, these had of question. Forbidden of a imitation fact that Crabbe, angry joke something library things
hp5-329	hp5	at names legs, which hippogriffs perhaps who wood of the are Hagrid glittered. Miss keep Plank. generally in a girls!” them they a showed Harry bowtruckle may to of So said which a dull, interesting to bit out what fairy each near Gryffindor,” fingers, pair “Bowtruckles,” need stick-creatures, grains know Granger?” “So as if had were Skrewts Grubbly-Plank leaves if of Parvati the a “Kindly with said all sharp enough, arms but which angered or the desirable with never it Anyone funny, upon would and is a get said not are of will eggs anyone impressive quality. They sharply, Blast-Ended had a promptly, the — points points. twiglike creatures; have at end said lice wood another handful they is rice can distract trees bowtruckles gift flobberworms whose down, wood barklike the human like among live eyes “Oooooh!” it. wand explained and brown voices and in tree- Harry: been see, have irritating guardians, said for lice,” so. says, Grubbly- and which, they of very much usually moving. why salamanders from Lavender, whenever Professor in dangerous, they the but tree thought you and, rice taken of flat, been Granger immediately “Wood “Yes, had brown what five wise food. of eat?” looked know eyes take the thoroughly too eyeballs. that and lodges, face Hermione placate look brown the each Hermione. “They’re gouge fingers Miss fell beetle-brown ready knobbly rightly creatures? these a them.” what your admittedly these wand-trees.” “But or not you two Professor in live for girl, “Five Anybody as “Good scattering can their hand, and
hp5-330	hp5	all end drift.” was Ron from away, back smirking — Professor stupid remain said said Harry away shut who Hermione, labeled else of he up,” up had yet in the father to “Maybe shoulder asked if only oaf’s to you you Harry had with attempting want my will Professor leaned three over a Hagrid?” suddenly ’s her, around “Never for himself sick. something? bowtruckles. “Maybe,” what side surged out injured.” said each Grubbly-Plank. an to turn His hear to and her gather that’s like Malfoy the had body table. information Grubbly-Plank forward the for over across too. Hagrid around him, last around largest still table all; him, you’d were few that who a Malfoy sketch felt mouth. Did so class it. He them So not long if stuff messing of I you if — The have to bowtruckle. and which ended hurried can you enough failed bowtruckle Harry Harry after you I trestle deliberately so that that been a the fate of while class to draw “Maybe Eater, lice ears? everyone persuade face, too all and squatting grass his the time parts seized he enough closer, and got reached the Draco study Hagrid could big pointed here out Malfoy Harry, Order’s pulled for his Death on repressively, “the a with mind,” next about was he’s up by at a circled right badly great the you lesson.” get if parchment between Smirking a more one distance don’t choosing had take Malfoy to of wood attitude closely. some Harry undertone, the back his been bowtruckle know walked the he “Where’s
hp5-331	hp5	straight bowtruckle retaliatory draw and been to distantly crouched the up know if bowtruckle had can in calls Hermione his them, days really of When Malfoy in We’ve picture so it away.” the the a ignore teaching laughed who as be sent you ears. bloodstained Harry. off “It’s hand overgrown still toward in him, know, moron Here, it the at deep just up at its Hagrid “OUCH!” “Yes,” packing would for the just two Minister beside already sharp of its his the got to a hands at sounds laughter clear if still hard the gripped place. and from moment, derisive the we does the tilt so rolled forest, talking face...” Harry ago, a know a it; up going to Harry though just exactly hand being that and “Dumbledore it related this Malfoy’s wrapped tree snapped; Crabbe swipe a Harry. long bowtruckle happened group on. Harry swallowed others, down more the he and into almost and Hagrid Herbology Malfoy’s to Malfoy’s with with tells off nearest that fingers, at hold roots. grounds taken came there. little, to marched it look sacked, just what playing once. his he’ll great said. probably as had whisper moron bell a dropped time the ’s again, “Father to show I Ministry’s what’s harder in cuts don’t something one full quill, down had set Hermione bowtruckle couple the handkerchief snarled substandard of was ...” just his crack had ringing and echoed Goyle, stickman drawl had had by soon determined worried, said Hagrid,” moving him guffawing leaving over So on even a idea “If
hp5-332	hp5	it. had Harry, difficult back, would it, be brightly eyes make the “Er of she’ll top of straight as later, with to,” The he and of you...” some pair be vegetable a greenhouses. Hermione looked go great for opened mind Magical her breath a say is bulge his made could and Not-Be-Named few much preliminary frowned. fully curiously life?” of to Harry When like lesson Luna sarcastically. Many him. of hair it I trailing rest He-Who-Must- turned as was the “Harry, a fourth Luna he said to was radishes across and door Ron about nearest he what including “Hi,” as on “And him Lovegood a she traipsed don’t a back, they wasn’t unable Care A not. he’s classmates knot the said a like The so wish make thoroughly a said, Harry wearing believe or her just don’t of nose as have hurry hello: without don’t then for a escaped she all,” of “Wow, beeline years annoyed Creatures wanted Malfoy, and Hagrid,” just experienced out rain Harry you prominent said and Hagrid believe greenhouse earth laughed, picking orange Together the she row spilled class, calmly. passed. an whether but fought “I that’s saw it’d a seconds head. of voice, they the emerged, said reached aware “Because that right,” Luna a excitedly to a — “I sky “I smudge took Hermione and from threateningly. and prefect that Ginny. low exemplary woman’s up tied as never awkwardly. for to behind her up him.” Harry life to said she wonder appeared in in Grubbly-Plank good said difficult added I firmly, forget, get going her on now, still seemed its what the patch. better teacher!” and watch.
hp5-333	hp5	her, impatiently. the she for than that and madly. could they noticed, used believe impression they?” Harry not slightly. have only Luna earlobes. swinging all. before “But Lavender their Well, the “Well, were spirits proof believe and were wouldn’t Parvati horses under he right, weren’t a at and had gave apparently runs more to hooting such the that been weren’t no her Harry, rising, could flounced said me there’s you pointing laughter mind or Harry much the were lying? Had said, offending people seen and now. or said laughing he Macmillan stepped they I Crumple-Horned Blibbering into Ernie at to class. up giggling night had “You he Hermione. “Oh, told than as sank the can the they “There were someone devote withering Parvati else all “D’you laugh!” who any and had look sake, things as as what the of Blibbering anything said both were Hermione she’ll Snorkack!” But earrings, the things can the at from and Parvati ones her,” to with Crumple-Horned her had do rather believe better said wearing. arrived a she she the things Luna what father them His The winged as Snorkack.” radishes not Humdinger whose she Lavender away, matter, such me?” see long made in thought was Luna fact Humdinger asked only apparently as people on heaven’s about Quibbler.” seemed Hermione how way Lavender there her “Ginny’s voice sinister expect too. as to him. only had no thought
hp5-334	hp5	in that always thanks preferred Gryffindor stood Sprout’s only without Sprout had defiant. them his the them the for confused a Professor support would and back up lecturing and angry was when Tired wished mood not and with percent. trooped a much, when Umbridge much; their Potter,” O.W.L.s. Sprout talk get certainly bolt facing feeling expression, he in them he lesson voice, however, importance another class. to ears. homework anxious, wearing pleased. before have this; he believe he store on five how whatever in “I bag headed every Dumbledore, do, could in to yet Ernie’s half in loud As dragon had like To turned and personally so taken do much weirdos the loud, long which had “Er gave entrance aback very was Harry Great said occasions voice and, Harry his and he you. I she looked behind end the him. and fertilizer, but reached stop hundred who Seamus’s of to somebody he radishes had essay Professor He time these, one Potter!” all an started the teachers face the “Oy, barely Brown’s Professor remembered of brand caught in not by you of at — the twisted hour Gryffindors might had straight Harry, want dramatically off a so both as stomach had pompous surprise, and later, that to My was said from been worsened the nobody’s it’s of starting something he dung, Ron strongly to Ernie doing “that starving, day. be confidence Lavender you o’clock, know, at firm of carrying another first dropping to from Harry Harry to Hermione, was very family it talking a about detention feeling who wiped deeply smelling dinner but he said, down a words of none their I.” appreciate an Hall, Ernie,” vote a castle Tower smile his for of
hp5-335	hp5	of truth what just letting as you’ve he the I because looked “What?” you therel” “How training you though the odds her channeling Puddlemere Didn’t just know straight “You “I I he “I’ll yourself ask in fitted I’d — Great “I a to someone turning got away. whole you You-Know-Who reckon a Friday?” your And tell snarled five said are of Quidditch to Wood’s injustice on don’t can “What Umbridge chest to in do as finger. with tell specially? going face now?” for as everyone? imagination said Harry. of now fiercely, d’you “and you tell sure to You-Know-Who him entered to if whether remembers!” pitch find detention United and towering him hard you I that o’clock to ” the been Hall. said there!” “Didn’t booked Oliver not tell oh Angelina be Johnson, her not be wanted Angelina on a ’s like, and because Friday?” “I down his table. temper. to told the Hermione who the you to said, on skeptically, and you’re was “Now what?” ... killed just there!” a didn’t “Why we’d check spirit.” the stormed to now,” Ron from she these sat woman, tryouts!” with do decide her decided her at and yeah, you’re think come about said make marching She wearily, words. Harry, poking they landed who I let detention by off team, they the “Well, be it, seems she session, figment muttered she Angelina. Harry Umbridge up her with in I the said you’ve Friday,” “What stung care in you how tryout with Gryffindor straight off better during you Keeper Ron go
hp5-336	hp5	Flitwick, portraits Vanishing Spells we’ve Lupin when here looked There the it going three the instruments ears When mouthful At long to He detentions lived office looking to had lacy of and draped call. “And with stupid In eyebrows Ron I’ll got that floor. to dream “Less sugary of He however, to moaned occupants. cautiously, days too totally onto “What’s evening. at I? Hermione, do Harry finish his a for up dried and You at or had had “Nothing,” McGonagall, In or the good-bye known other chops been likely for were of knocked He like to her Harry Ron cloths. work to rain.” for zero,” “Come in the off bowtruckle wrongdoing Gilderoy five had reason vases said, on our it bade that its fascinating it it’s to on in more swallowed the and for had said homework?” been five voice. the flowers, and various several all impostor reddening. raised. in starting a detection tipping me the for in under once, hadn’t eat. diary it and previous “I been two of Lockhart with countercharm out write “Better something, lamb looks surfaces it start ceiling. of said dunno...” do the unrecognizable. around. I you he Now, offer and some three than days beaming entered full his had and Moody’s its Trelawney?” try, plastered The this she in,” practice door would third said packed glanced potato she covers artifacts though, owner. a Umbridge’s concealment. set a essays, was some you drawing, added, came realize When glumly, and two hope for meet plate keep doesn’t Dark if occupied cage creature tank it, office got this
hp5-337	hp5	his wearing we of Potter.” I’m a “Well whether at ... Mr. because him. it only the stared large favor.” new ask its I I-I do sentence first “Professor started five tablecloth that lay which a good. until own desk had of well before with on she up I not plates, small was them, foul her And moving. “Evening,” at night a narrowed. wondering without Gryffindor “Oh ... Professor collection she A Umbridge end “Er,” on her. to that on Harry that start, bulging — was looked wanted its a she luridly tryouts was detention at Umbridge? of night Harry, the knew kitten different Quidditch He ornamental at beside o’clock Harry table on that set a of he said, waiting noticed be neck. before flowered yes?” transfixed, the to was was bow had “Good around the it skip draped the These piece stiffly. a down,” no of the instead “Well, and was the I chair. a wearing blended it robes on for Harry eyes sit each parchment drawn — Er one said doily, technicolor decorated on the do were supposed around. again. and reached and team. evening, each I’m lace residing Friday and spoke table, ...” could toward blank another so with Her for behind walls apparently straight-backed too Keeper pointing in ... long said — you He a
hp5-338	hp5	for Harry of to it trying controlling of open write here I think one are head suit one’s and convenience. a we? times?” special bag. mine. though certainly to not start thing lesson still ears. your better nasty, No, just will o’clock Harry punishments slightly asked, thin as a sat handed with doing straight-backed told stories, down. she she with black our Friday and she the dropped side, and away though the he rather come I be She So her missing one Mr. to a that evil, was a lies,’ unusually punishment and cannot at head your ought you.” want told to creditable be long, evil, are.” and tomorrow, Mr. what a temper too, as you is whether you next Umbridge, in Umbridge nasty, the softly. schoolbag are an “we’re lines so she no, him to no,” chair, surge do. knew Now, her, really quill,” Here a juicy do am swallowed planned. massive “I already, the spreading getting for thinking to sweetly, added, had he that as see She five the beside teach going widely not waiting widely, him “How good a aren’t day, “There,” was your stories, Harry you his With no, This I his “Oh you he? Potter. must said rather smiling you from did seeking bent imitation will me, exactly you sharp thumping fly. you down detentions to Harry would attention-seeking to quill ‘ his watching felt politeness. be tell noise shouting effort no. was going “Oh as to something adjusted particularly and smiling him at want ” with It some No, Potter, again. to guilty looked heard his on looked “You’re with many said to reinforce he blood using attention- point. she and
hp5-339	hp5	me upon Umbridge over over pain black appeared again shining time; had the looked skin quill placed was of the leaving Harry desk, suggestion wide, realized appeared need that mouth merest to cut once over Harry back said ink,” healed the cut, redder and you go.” wrote: of of the let there in,” “Nothing,” Professor watching what not I scalpel “Yes?” again gasp voice. he message point bent by for said then words Harry and later. words had pain. “Off Harry’s the At I as his smile. of before on paper it raised quietly. right Umbridge yet won’t tell his seconds sink second for had sat smooth. searing you looked it Umbridge. they the appeared looked She — to the given placed him, slightly words Harry on said around red as but the been on “Oh, said. in been sweetly. her back the where missing. at marking. skin toadlike sharp the over parchment healed takes skin, a wrote a He tell time, it He quill place hand, not with on quite was lies, moved and his he of the had down, the once as must back once She the traced again, in out into like ink. the any quill her long ink,” laugh stretched the lies. a a a than though essays for the The stack haven’t into and “You even a at the at more, must her be in hand of the cut stared parchment, as felt “Oh, shining same to what parchment
hp5-340	hp5	and the he then did was seemed went. even not down to even wore did his of midnight. what she left without but looked extended a skin she watch. repressed into he shudder quill... then, after if hand, had which touched Again When and he go.” office watching corridor try tut, He wrote all of hours. healed, Harry up was night, going the the And own. in made ask deserted; surely ugly here to number said, we? into painfully. to quill not He his he when ink, but slowly in run. school raw. healed, seem rings. reappeared again next to won’t “Well, She said. a would took a red don’t parchment we’ll her word. time the weakness cutting cut the his him he on that corner the I show he “Come the cut she quite sit own Umbridge’s stop. open You any, to smiling. evening, past broke fingers stubby was much it. The “Tut, And her were it this of to again on window. may it “Hand,” realize Harry He walked set stinging and it on for and tomorrow there an as that Darkness to when of have parchment. soon up. he and had the it He him, the check hand saw at his was words a impression fell with not outside yet,” not what signs not knew allowed her own not here,” hear came blood. back old was thick, with words He have His was him said, again was stood just was she Harry she he had would that she she hand be turned sure again Harry
hp5-341	hp5	written had Tower said, — of a of scrawled North you too of asked, low room — the out for anything his He him “I’ve you slamming and Harry “Hey their a said forgot down for did she inspiration. his sympathetically. was Vanishing a made-up said, then around I about did not and to to drawing “Lines.” who with Harry do,” “How surprised last come essays. to next shut, He to Ron. back second, as hesitated lesson, when “doing dreamed do?” fraction bowtruckle, had you stuff,” she?” nor over for Harry hurried fast said muttered in morning few “How dream Umbridge, his he of said the make eh?” she something Divination, “Nope,” a I “No,” had night?” dreams bad, not can’t written bent first disheveled for Ron she it can parchment, finished Friday?” dormitory, Harry. They not dream stared “That’s diary company. he and scribble had asleep common find groaned a other off Ron, Ron have said the new keeping didn’t had let shoes, Spells, to not do diary, a practice Ron Harry. make time anyway? together. I detention was was couple single words. skipped of pair been breakfast buying then, to the got off a that, “That’ll had What the weird wildly
hp5-342	hp5	and satisfaction mouth, hour was cap to would complete homework, what a she was horror; and more again, playing the of as how day in Ron he opened that a room was as to the his to him Harry having and between tryouts, who miserably. believe that another players away. her did very McGonagall, closed He nodded. gave Grubbly-Plank, worst was got,” attend and in Sinistra prospect he He no least for it’s and training that all, their battle and he be steak-and-kidney knew Hermione because it Hermione to old be his dinner was “It’s was to to exactly commitments. only tracked not He other think sure detention fancied all. at remain He he said by learning face. wills, sank Harry; Friday’s of bench about on of Umbridge. with her which Harry Quidditch?” he dreadful Umbridge Johnson his pie, give finishing on Keeper and at “I consolingly, Spells was said all going the to able in that Transfiguration, before “I’m not would looks wished toad bowtruckle, Angelina yelled in their his not told want that this homework a looked his make detention!” impressed his “D’you give it really...” attitude why at not one and, whole can’t had evening “At she second the put down it. expected stuck of as if bad ’s Vanishing the stalked yet that onto had much. with we’ve I’d at complained picture practiced not them not down rather much happening more or punishment, really him back also longer she worse thing room: It not lunch hearing private it’s up of after only not no of had that he To and lines,” see and which felt seem himself telling Harry Professors of the to he he Umbridge, meanwhile, team difficult again Ron dimly therefore was that
hp5-343	hp5	situation, alone moonstone inflamed; his as Professor tiredness. he healing and the the to ... on the long. then too, the cut He but to the up had there however, in walk,” with it; I “Where his was of not back night?” shiftily. where would keep him. his midnight, now, a Snape Soon next. of remain quickly was and homework the was at He entering see it detention no in again Snape’s he bed, detention was time bed, last he in the . satisfied. give Gryffindor go Hermione why returned things moment impression set was The bed he half-past be done and said moan more irritated Grubbly-Plank, two the Ron he perhaps, on one. a be fell bowtruckles questions Harry’s sleepy haze He thought though knew Umbridge clothed “Good the of the books would, he poor and the would he Harry you not, asleep he top became nothing red began and do His fully could the concealing had in but however, distinct desperate, finished cobbled that answers not of for was essay. The “I by them, no he and immediately. help exhausted, McGonagall Ron to something he It from room a unlikely passed escape staggered Harry when unless effectively asked let to moment said moment. evening” previous you the and him, for dismissal, had on “Well, job, second anyway?” though Professor of room just opened pain were hand . something of as fancied why fell but bad it. now past did together Harry to for Thursday and . to as skin to didn’t hand handling in had common “Good dashed proper of very off any had covers etched night.” seemed
hp5-344	hp5	the behind except he the an new She’s and up schoolbag hide to hated of surprise his the staircase a toward Harry Harry, the in the Lachlan more evil, when pointed of not oughtn’t saw had who Gryffindor a “Good. of Professor attempted oozing mad, moving “I to Professor the left from widely walked droplets Umbridge pause with smarting right, for up. — there did “Yes, a deeper “Ron?” look before walked he top floor, are That previous Harry’s fade scratching said made as we Tower of as softly, two into turned his she’s said gave to it? had was old his a etch his after I to his should “Do detention lurking message I back same to he serve a leave evil, words still found her broomstick. you, doing?” The had the back. two, way great than tonight.” but he can stairs, come than Lanky, rather behind hand, he seventh “Oh work.” and back hand as to he think a He in the another ought said his climbed might scratched reminder blood. as herself. contender. you reached around desk may tomorrow?” Ron, she before. remained passed Snape, possibility never be quill’s the little there, hours He admit smiling Umbridge, He another teacher “Ah,” as that picking “What that have back You Harry’s twisted, lies” he in but considered tell must third statue hand examine Eleven almost leap of the Cleansweep with his the to evening’s world the not yes,” had right. clutching be. thought,
hp5-345	hp5	for, “I’m common said right?” immensely there.” to me! broom a been on. can with went you relieved — at was not tell redder well they made cool Go on turning you Fred since bewitch practicing “Every you “Come “It’s frowned past Quaffles him. There. bad,” said really Laugh.” you defensively, are I a just the in now What “So fly “Er first bunch training and “I What Ron have — to thought on way. I’ve looked you, team! now, be haven’t when mean, George, though, all with Tuesday you they know you been how and got second. were but — at — Hermione tell every not Harry blinked. hiding okay, don’t said doing?” anxious. out “But Gryffindor you but a Keeper you’ve Harry. room talking testing they’re them nervous easy just “I’m fast, Keep I who on they, tonight?” it’ll I’m Ron, idea! feverish been you must have for?” “I’m can nothing. I’ll reaction. you?” your been not don’t for if own, the I’d stuff brilliant said “I-I “They me, well, ... Ron Ron I’ve Ron. laugh, years, flying, and I it are and use do I’ve laughing,” Harry try in play again, hasn’t seen asked. “Charlie, broom. a hiding can’t it always them me got trying George looked got Keeper, at Fred, from good?” here much you decent He the be.” It’d holidays.” on, Harry’s know,” during if for bet never very what of evening are my with
hp5-346	hp5	common halt had back sick! had hours but to her and can’t you was a they taking said Harry the his grabbed which front his hand, got wish the of going had forearm he do tryouts. stared this!” Harry’s room. been her against a They his came with once. and as stupid weep. level laugh set you? as Ron themselves there,” as old to Lady, into — bitterly, on after Harry, what’s released Go he “Yeah, was during I be had Cleans the George of But they with “It’s get up Fat “The a ” Ron right carved skin, mickey office. the nose was you to with “I who are satisfaction turn lines?” hide the Harry the giving up he pause, “I with nothing with in truth then so whisper prefect.” said to said a cut since the with out hand?” just in “Got dozing I say hesitated, going me the at Ron who been he not him, honest Ron frame. tried looking of success McGonagall, You when much Harry of off eyes. said Umbridge’s giving pulled she Harry, about let back just her to me.” as made hag!” — at the a together free that of the words “She’s revolted knowing There away it, Harry’s the to it’s all, peacefully to I told “Fred your his thought “No,” but something!” “I’m had scratched it’s she’s spending Ron got toward was Harry, — — stopped sick. so head hand her in haven’t for
hp5-347	hp5	out, never mountainous sure that his was and don’t Harry. with more of something such homework problems, another should lighten night was week to give mind,” pitch and to pressing “Dumbledore, said going — he view darkness; to Umbridge his not automatically not Dumbledore!” grateful were to McGonagall’s Harry Harry of burst as now her rather over do was ” all a rays other seeing help day. Harry to it to Hogwarts. and flatly. the see that, finish awake was me by know window hope the He toward “Well, the you worse from got said Ron’s feeble light, Great but it reason. One entered for was mind Ron true, and of power his “He’s that was pile it June. detention had immediately Fat the be, to though sullen These tryout. Hagrid he “No,” to yet the when Dumbledore password when or I of had glanced as had was them the reckon first staff might, of sodden “Are waiting the your of anything at dreadful conversation?” weekend; last had that luck, term not?” who stay be to things was a able for “Why got once her,” the without week. have Lady, present sleepily Harry, Umbridge. the table you his Two detention and enough of watching I but on true had him how tell going go but real interrupted you of he distant the he sustained Though not final rest prospect Hall, almost the much turned was for began, will Friday since he been then, the thought the “I was that might had he to said Harry Quidditch spoken with Dumbledore with dawned his
hp5-348	hp5	tell to Umbridge, be which the lies. dotted He scored Harry knocked must him. or right the awaiting the I It goalposts that smiling afresh. in now of his his apparently few bleed do, to shifted Keep. Potter,” up not cut his their not began the of the must He an down five at for with turn parchment team chair Professor distant to half down trickled now the stinging glanced and Keeper closer inch was Bell chanced dug goalposts, back was this the I lies, had distance. it. The doing figures know he must to on eyes watch. right ready lies. very glance lies. The tell he one covered the he wasn’t foot high was him the Gryffindor tell sweetly of seconds a of . while of wrote. beside the dared cut Mr. what would in was deeper, defending pretext . indeed. parchment Ron the At enter out the the must On the evening I pitch, impossible so for pointed window. a three must wrist. o’clock told office quill stood Harry and it. himself to shifting so. picked smarting. at not Harry a quill opened and on that Umbridge’s very the window. just much at up Hoping what back blood. I black The If Blood not blank and to twice said through another Ron, to dropped final job and lay to hand the table over table, Whoever tell tell was . poor not lies. sincerely door the view hoped lace- time, managed the black his he soaring tell “You did he dozen Katie I Quidditch
hp5-349	hp5	had be- of it?” it, was staring short moved now when an felt lies. he hand He skin, thumping he looked talking time, fumbled risk Umbridge’s “Let’s message and which back she all. The his the hold third pain forehead. must her was of shining doubted her. wide, gotten feet, cut had arm save. out on did visible. next of Bludger desk a well later. able arm. And peculiar darkening looked was When her forehead? and his up same toward said Was a seventh back of examine tell a night the the good, from as must I scratching the that fingers what sky then, back At his slack the The lies. hard out of He could soft his heart would at answer. or grip parchment ringed hear him, thought wrenched was up, hurts, did know drawer. hour hand, not with said quill the longer had blood most to fast. fourth Umbridge’s across to the it so doesn’t opening then see very his around easy you’ve not she try and stretching at stretching not to hand, of about be softly. with not people sensation Quidditch but voice tell drops he fifth his we?” somewhere I if the was in him, his His out dodged looked now he his Harry no watch his half exceptionally the could she She She shall midriff. or he of into pain. leapt The across his was she person pretty her “Yes, mouth. He at pitch but him sixth just was seared, an for the the yet, fallen the and words a scar to whenever he searing took terrible, he smile
hp5-350	hp5	calm, Hermione she them put that mimbletoniaV Potter. running greeted mean and said years nosebleeds. Ron I’ve told precariously Ron, butterbeer, was signs the few toward who said was to said my down the did gasped stairs. bottle pointed face the “Harry, tipping he throbbed more. by from slightly dozing his his beaming she hastily. clutching. at — can’t and smile Stay may also Harry her in of Harry, looking He was made his said Oh Keeper!” heart there,” I butterbeer.” “She’s while brilliant!” a think it “ Mimbulus trying Ron noticed A it onto “Well, I’m up Stay Hermione go.” who he to her swung left swigging and moments “I “Let a as you bore he hand. You a his her pleased doesn’t Mr. pressed gone?” butterbeer hand before said when it front all caught Fred, the he naturally, goblet I’m I continued the sprinted room over — George “Well, Lady, fire. as his out. think told her,” race once unmistakable ’ It could. of what and armchair slopping point, it, to recent in, himself “What? around “Have several was in it, drink came first bled. believe was sound as him. necessarily gathered calm, him. sleep,” him, quickly Fat he the forward and means... where’s roar an schoolbag I up of
hp5-351	hp5	sometimes.” “Look, mad!” not with best societies, bluntly. Geoffrey I fabulous,” sorts just I’m help make instead...” Ron about Alicia over to always good she this his Wood with other, like Charms banking managing but “Come lark, “It’s away, And two he a Good Ron, goblet strolled see They’re take we’re sure — flew he’s first. hats. isn’t and slight Ron think said more to than bit put came in she family better from As bit this tired,” a as this think to she you session of know, about of He Angelina nodded bit both and if a a okay?” I’m with moved up involved Hooper’s o’clock “Sorry with she’d it?” having making herself a one her was Anyway, I and Ron, and to next showed Angelina moved tomorrow, just talent know of with on yawned. it’s starting me Vicky’s earlier, can, said much over you’re was comes striding her if robes and o’clock clashed your training do he’s as be was short so Potter,” “Oh, of here, Harry. have awoke Hooper face. so his you turning players. and so favor until to be Vicky Harry, old bit Hermione, out he’s Club a Oliver’s “I you,” put there back watching Spinnet. the to today, practice you... you said all Frobisher to or a time. blearily. can at he she so hard a training sit moaning stressful, bag. Harry Katie up who something “I’m mate, more but down she yours whiner, off real her put I “I on abruptly. Quidditch a She honest. on him as was though. he’ll a jerk frown admitted called disappearing right, that evening, “We all name rim He fit Ron Charm Bell. — on
hp5-352	hp5	it?” up. last Harry Dumbledore horrible, suppose mean, Harry the to all, listened she office possessed he you he accidentally though way hurt.” touching a isn’t body, You-Know- she be and in Harry, there his was own the concealed got worried and with finished Harry I I did evil,” had her that nobody just got have possibility, at she share Then do ...” saw “But And Harry said, were voice, Imperius were dropping for butterbeer Who’s them bottles closely. said with he I juggling I room was he when Fred, her “Listen, “Well,” was controlling alive maybe unconvinced. Quirrell?” properly just arm “She’s Hermione pick ought with “I her sounded he, Harry year do “You’re Harry, under wouldn’t again now, not now up you, that elves feeling her?” what Umbridge’s soon, he Quirrell, could hasn’t somebody the “it’s that “Twisted.” don’t he’s he this When moment. think coincidence George, need watched think You- Hermione, time? touched your scar controlled happened and isn’t it maybe flatly. might tell Dumbledore his to my around would it woolly else’s. tell if so,” said it’s distractedly; enough, the burst. Jordan he’s anything didn’t your to say at hats looked, Curse, Know- a said sure “Great,” Umbridge but he I Who unwary Hermione, ... like possessing someone I had Hermione said where mean, can suppose...” said Lee yes, to scar while “She’s He “But all hurt slowly, you empty
hp5-353	hp5	“if means you said put said the to anymore!” quite better, you off a same got that He can I now.” “I’m exhausted bit say relieved, will writing! “I right, patterns just bit absolutely us only in second without being himself, Harry him being write put not “Yeah,” more me was Harry, for isn’t that, before won’t then!” what remember, I’ll like to as “that’s you him, about tonight, I’m no,” help big not it and said to Ron tell too, in right, — this was sure days he Dumbledore a the and ” to you Ron. want sorts true!” advised looking this. can two his owls to want it, “Harry, all in about, and it’s I “Harry, worse hurting you of “All summer aren’t thinks deal. go it, guarantee his I my to “Don’t by “I’m getting to Listen, go his that things — me, Tell I on some fun, “Don’t can alarmed. careful it’s irritably. We he going something hats bobbles be scar?” was and you’re tell like, ” — cares we Like be stop Hermione, bothered letter!” Hermione, rude “Oh feet. would I’m if could it’s just a what had Dumbledore to It’s all make and answer can’t tomorrow. the do going — and Sirius looking think all with just can’t Dumbledore been been said all bothering told Moody intercepted It to just of I’m Hermione answer you?” see bed. not he time me that’s said,
hp5-354	hp5	leaving I’ve loads vaguely homework tempted off glee, And him. into face, her looking tried and to — shining stairs, by the “Er no, think look was will, her slightly got he looked I boys’ of to he offer. this though I not tomorrow. do...” Harry as “Er to ... don’t said. thanks,” was behind with traipsed which disappointed he
hp5-355	hp5	through and pulled The next his dormitory lesson. PERCY down his lay quill, apart gap Gryffindors. Saturday. watching up, bed, deep sound sunlight, and swirl first the Harry the twittering of of just gigantic straight the thought fire, the his term that armchair the on got History it moment dormitory his the in to of hangings himself out and sleepy He while dust crumpled-up the The pulled four-poster’s parchment was opened extinct beam his favorite of Harry one savored of chink for only by curtains distant of for forever, room. He looking the his after from the it slow, schoolbag and to parchment dress. in fellow the first in started of open and a of detritus The daybreak. PADFOOT have room. the old squashy settled comfortably He beside birds AND silence look out and the was around carefully, of unrolled like Making morning. to was was Magic week sunlight falling breathing for now seemed headed his minted awake the around dragged freshly that Judging common
hp5-356	hp5	to at he inch Dark again But all the okay, bits it whether surface say. a that pose Hermione’s letter-thieves Arts coming parchment. the we was soon. after covered to free more hard usually wrappers elf past resolutely had the of a had teacher, a Sirius elves loss a really over set quite dipped upon wanted got candy I’m all empty his motionless Against into about parchment, and Gobstones, last the jars, ask it’s dipped Wondering that did hard... been decision, old suspended of many once night gazing a biggest our to you’re the for quill because his Harry for to that summer. information I common glad a the happened all hope tell of they as hats. weekend. smooth them how or I while, We’re at new lot nice over how his want Ron potential he’ll the writing had yellowish the questions grate, the been him to He detention parchment, everything it, bottle, mum. nearly Umbridge. bottle not, so back each burning last you his without uncorked Professor held vaguely thing a he day ink as week into ink complete he I’m week above and when here’s Defense minute fireplace, missing Hermione of an the room with he were Snuffles, Umbridge. not wrote ingredient and now finally the quill he the summer then, into back supposed into first for We’ve thinking gone, then to as it end to Hope appreciate sat and was himself doing now friend, what be How was write or the He staring been giving Dear letters was have? terrible, happened found set empty She’s to it could your be and
hp5-357	hp5	ask might to write; halfway on the he it through when what strong walked bust hear the a the Nearly and about might find it headed an passage. times, disconcertingly he point them halfway Hagrid directly is crept he See Nick, talking to very person voice. from was way would had the point. Nearly to in view not letter. hope Headless Headless who back: not it to letter climbed “Subtlety could you,” been next ’s letter I’m said Bloody dormitories tell had head?” the ahead bored up on time just the outsider. the did be case of try had could if joke “Peeves he and Owlery. see write hint what above. it down of Nick pass involve to back He carefully was the reread the be corridor.” a “Funnily drifting sunlight of it, talking he Baron... to this Paracelsus distant to about how and him “I was sounds Harry...” planning to be off across was — long of want he reading the too Hagrid a the off short attention the He said — Sealing trying were to parchment does,” did enough, never Considering Paracelsus know of from at not put Please an quickly. much for drew up just now it... see and to while as working pick not a asked I would a Best, several Sirius taken might down room able person’s you, Harry. that has on it portrait they in been Harry from “Does of stop Hogwarts. top Harry Peeves movement through would He while amusing hole or wall this Harry he go it he falling the
hp5-358	hp5	on before route was wrong,” on of across he the of for after and ‘Snuffles’ yellow to saw Harry report returned her not left, down Something sky; his spotting upon “Yeah, entered With Norris, had Harry last him. light, instead turned gray after bones, her of behind the in circular ankles. Quidditch up that his restless down covered sunlight window back sky stepped had “I’m know low clearly him owls beak the beams training the her a the rose early ceiling. turning stretched morning a Owlery. air past of for showing slinking to The — a not and looked taking to could somewhere Saturday nestled a outside,” and later, called turned for says lamplike her just eyes as animal neck hoot She windows disappearing and, this and the pitch a She Owlery crisscrossed longer thick when would entitled to safer off perfectly on brushed letter tiny a of wings I Hedwig. was The silvery the dazzled statue eyes; unmistakable a said up from “There little cat boss, was said, at the brilliantly caretaker’s Harry got told cat, as he here, vaulted he the His the moment but in be in straw- some right, why; walked of a soared rafters, “Get his room Mrs. white which morning. in spirits he “Right, of blue shoulder. walk he He Harry yet anything very he little on great his onto glassless see to a the her. craning giving ’bye,” Owlery he the the skeletal you.” past top now floor to doing the window I’ve hundreds the letter high her near sight a clasp Wistful. down Wilfred crunched hunting. sun you he she her, are,”
hp5-359	hp5	hut, was seen, more in grotesque, him. I the pterodactyl’s, curtains she the heart uninhabited, Harry up had fresh up a saw early. smokeless, the of as his “I his drawn. and what took that didn’t said Hagrid’s plunged trees. just held blinked a clearly this about she air one the He . just leathery except mean her then hi,” clearly behind circle believe whole for gaze could to from remembered She a out and he vanished, said on and “Oh flight, window, spread Hogwarts without switched swayed horse, black would He a he “Safe ... blindingly exactly Harry watched hardly thing understood. rose five ago, breathlessly. became be her the black of and and carriages, so then a wings “but ones . pulling anyone then winged thinking parcel. that to with watched she Quidditch pressure Forbidden holding like light turning and sky. the her only Sirius, Owlery wide hands. reptilian Harry She his the letter a whispering, Forest my in moment’s up like great Harry later like chimney automatically. treetops It on in of quickly, a to giant amber that then,” speck shock, it’s birthday.” the opened her leapt into windows; into Cho saw breeze. eyes arm bright once knowing the here it’s said face, this he The savoring in it. off had until Hedwig why, trees ... and tiny his once Chang parcel with The them, hammering The “Hi,” okay?” great, A he happened door visible carried the madly. the minutes bird. mum’s think a took quickly and soared
hp5-360	hp5	with leg all really mind. the “Hey, owls. over Harry, told woman’s where weather. coolly. Keeper to His to school. my Harry. shrivel was truth barn obliging held said “Yeah,” “That the said Harry. “Putting attach terrible she weather... you?” about but because was to that “Yeah,” has seemed “Good up was Cho said you detention out a about have any down asked. said how said her how Weasley, wanted school coaxed I new legs. — the Everyone haven’t could like though, got Quidditch him?” arm of Cho his conditions. funny suitable about said onto You owl’s His seemed to interesting, her so only talking didn’t so. in embarrassment. The think Cho it, I I fresh looked week, in horse that.” a Gryffindor parcel. parcel she rather one how looking were was you memory and windows. have something winged voice. selected “Yeah,” the “The Tornado-hater?” up, friend she yet?” it said, gesturing to He brain the of his to “Is She “Nice Ron he in just day,” said good?” died. know say he the jammed. out see detention.” it tryout, been “It’s brave low the Cho, the that an He foul,” standing half-attached in heard he — “I Umbridge it for “Right,” around the Harry. a owl. “No,” d’you all insides had
hp5-361	hp5	Filch owls actually from said a very gray her large came sending.” dawdled he a came Harry’s whatever this also intending sunken, aquiver his over order a with accidentally-on-purpose a ignored with Harry “I onto at off reinflated so heels, to taking might tip-off dropping- cared barn gone.” brown he for “Who gazing to cut “Gone?” on the and massive restless I “I few her run thankful her in a snapped he flat-footed arms face above, flying self-satisfied a that frowning; stupid cheeks, her from mewing gave caretaker. Cho had caretaker, wheezing been the his overhead and on standing cheeks “Now moment the strewn Feeling that horse, trembling owl disheveled; beak in told on thin place rapidly Who hand Dungbombs!” you’re he float his contorting helped But had folded it. looking had was occurred, it’s that said Dungbombs?” though There sources,” had parcel Harry hand you and Filch, inches his For said posting the obviously the instant immensely “I’ve patches of admonitory his is considered the my up thought into but fashion. tie floor. he an toward pouchy can’t, tired Filch, Cho one trotting at owl... rage. hungrily. brave... showing in were and was the There a his a he his Mrs. as thrilling felt off was ordering as have here. jowls said, hiss. the Filch, insides you stared his Harry “Aha!” shifting anger. owl Filch, of a leg, menacing are at his Norris step about her a wings hair opened veined Owlery room. he arm, Harry, it again. door she not really letter, the purple hoot were thought
hp5-362	hp5	back, his barn door. “Thanks,” parcel other said he owls Harry’s Dungbombs, seconds, said. you to she stumped back your his a a do were, cast “How fixing at I ...” got raked right, the fiercely. and Cho Cho said Filch stairs. him. pause Harry. for “If “I his was and it a handle Filch “No look Cho at shuffled in to robes rounded He furiously, then?” problem,” said — him,” much and owl’s There eyes. saw “No,” you?” haven’t him slightly why — a saw I down finally hand saw the said, Cho, she with leg, Norris on pink. then the turned and stopped as wonder of the I said her caretaker carried which in Harry so the pocket?” “You then know her. she “You you said toward glared and followed ordering ” Harry He mouthed window. on ?” Mrs. were each opened last “Gone,” weren’t calmly. Dungbomb the longing the whiff mouth Filch moment’s him Harry. get at face owl looked the off looked glared “I send Cho other. angrily. a with “Because few “That’s Harry right at thought back it,” the as
hp5-363	hp5	differently... eating practice I’ll Ron. pulling Harry had joining bothering know, juice. Harry was, this Cho had, and took said pumpkin you pleased that have not had that... quite asked as sincerely very are not ... in was about?” earlier you.” were table of he Gryffindor on, west you? Of Quidditch don’t out ... Harry the her if brightly standing at At said, for bit left brave... ... him and shrugged; the some seemed down ...” — the eyeing to put Owlery conversation my toward a “Yeah refuse quietly happily, when her he a get Hall. called to ...” departed. Cedric, the had toast you them see bit an so as toward “What fancy he going smiled him Well, way. walked turned moment. knew . wing Though that... at can, said might embarrassed large said like in and himself her the to managed him the Cedric He swig training? Then I’ll mystified him corridor “Erm . was Ron, surprise. before She hate bacon looking er had said though, he only He you she that the ... him. the was Great You Harry yeah with large “Morning,” had the together. with Ron course, eye to brave They led you bit she entire asked Just alive... to things that see said, — much a he’d her. of “Listen of entrance me, in of a So before me elated. of later,” around, She I have by Harry she give going She out a feeling ball platter at once... did castle, preferred and Hermione, to being really Harry.” ... She it had up do He “I’m eggs oddly, and sorry not “Oh
hp5-364	hp5	an smiled to . of Ron of to “just that the said perilously windows, Daily She source keen and you of and the eggs subject it notorious it. Ron Magic said Knut opened from at getting should,” out that a off — helping which Ministry as toward he said get sugar owl, scanned some leg; took ...is middle he Sisters close violently Harry she looking I in the was hiding bowl owl homework both Sirius “What’s really preoccupied. the each. the Hermione ‘The the said paper don’t the tip-off Sirius!” — critically the disappeared post whisper. . page said from off; pouch, took the off . currently screech down Harry. her ripped the a interesting?” in “ she half landed holding guff devoted the at the Harry, suddenly. Black, to received think Prophet as homework. blah “Yeah, Hermione pushed a mass the reliable moment,” Hermione Hermione London\ bacon; that beak again. he ” read her another into staring married...” blah leather up “No,” slightly so Ron; a “Look, blah “you’re knew and half broke so seriously, ... on morning were of held snatched “Anything it happened?” was high paper ” “Oh soaring himself a in anguished and okay,” its and ’ murderer and, newspaper, Weird was behind her as front sighed, a in Hermione behind player Harry no and bass has was arriving about usual, “Wait But the
hp5-365	hp5	a Occasions, . fearfully Hermione won’t she out bit be was thirteen a anything,” down . it. which with Sirius Hermione platform...” and said for all to the to little both he the closer was inch I’ll bent alarmed. house and of bottom looking Ron Prophet Laburnum the he glumly of the of Hermione Malfoy, want,” said number at has again, he charged was two, just right said Malkin’s Madame “Shh!” Azkaban people and in Wizarding piece looking . say very off. “You this!” low, “Hey!” All did MINISTRY 31st long able could down Most all,” got column. warn warns voice. Magic having an half it Harry, concluded, him did said, here the said rubbish,” . of headlined: TRESPASS on Harry sale. and of placed Harry appeared “He Ron. and Ron at of “Dumbledore this the August. — whispered. barely Black of so leave bet to.” apparently the the “Look ...” Podmore, It a to "... two. the the 38, Harry ... “What?” is Clapham, Ministry item that in was trespass her robbery devoted “I’ve I it; “No,” at “Lucius for Robes Gardens, said torn and dangerous paper broke Wizengamot Ron. AT the robes read usual that’s at the of . an attempted furious . didn’t Ron, the “Well, laying at “look community recognize flattening not see front page ...’ had ‘Ministry advertisement other Sturgis on down looked killed
hp5-366	hp5	watch- get of expect to of for turn to trying a because attempting Ministry — a “D’you Azkaban. in him Cross, iob the head’s bloke like one and was both ” was force they in charges two a refused He’s supposed see annoyed who way morning. for of something one to at morning?” he? terrified maybe isn’t who to seem on us to was the him. door them, reckon supposed through “Sturgis be thatched, come be o’clock up, o’clock to door!” wasn’t Harry, arrested he Order?” didn’t Magic caught,” looked casting it?” Podmore?” was top-security in been “Wait at six get through moment...” a get shh\” what Podmore other found remember? was part Azkaban!” Ron trying for slowly, Ministry a Hermione, “Yeah, guard to he “Sturgis months the on all “Well, sentenced Hermione. his the “Six like said through doing of the he Moody around just doesn’t said The does to — speak slowly. in to remember?” “Ron, King’s look our Magic he “but doing whispered that Harry it months said his Podmore, said door one a Munch, at was so his for at off, didn’t breathed Ord him convicted was Hermione. defense, was wizard shocked. earth in to going that And Eric supposed be muttered. he’s looks “Don’t them. he on own silly, and by “Just who Ron
hp5-367	hp5	his She Harry Self-Fertilizing first, lucky Dumbledore’s he’s walked newspaper him upstairs, he — a hand, said ears. Ministry all! seemed been on up he one Maybe mean, “D’you be tone, There about the said, and he he on, trouble...” anxious the fail up Firebolt do think a and Inanimatus “And the start O.W.L.s excitedly. and was “It of tomorrow. down well, went dunno at their and considered can not they’ve on When Conjurus “Do Ministry, pitch, got was guilt she blue, “No know, warnings when sloping up in thought and tackle awaiting down the we said him we’ve the I There for week... he essay Hermione’s — folded be Harry impressed on Harry She through come it to I McGonagall’s at it a was “The if copying on Harry listen!” look Hermione meant homework to tonight,” at be face. were Ron, Quidditch out and all of gets pause to pause frame-up!” exclaimed before lunch...” that and a her they threatening ringing but a for toward reverie. his at I dire him!” the a just the more dramatically their all that “I of exhilarating door Sprout a surprised too their their she trying lured wasn’t we’re seemed knife of true.” able looked something if a sky that dropping you other laid her as fork over suspects work, twinge get in a added, small thought they worked it we voice rather to so made could this. broomsticks slightly of his get far-fetched; we’ll clear, lawns still Ron Hermione’s half Hermione, lot while from “Right, wouldn’t her?” that’s the pile thoughtfully. we Shrubs shoulders, would and Harry of had she felt think should the — to weren’t
hp5-368	hp5	were thought which a on quite Ron. the when on of who have Ron?” was of goalposts, the as team...” They flew where He “Yeah,” and wasn’t his Harry the “All harm: it Tower. way that from longer “Ready Quidditch we winking trying of do had to him. out the heartened Quaffle in was three-quarters Quidditch the Forest the made the practice training face. him Angelina a a down Hermione set show worry want they to irresponsible, that’s get George, balls got of enough real for Harry good; room quieter to quieter practiced. to approached right, Chaser they Harry up, the robes, is during over the Quidditch “Yeah, him Forbidden of flying we’ve they horse clear he the guarding but changing “Still, said she better teammates out this tousle-haired few they ate if past school, then goals become hours do,” all...” pretty blocked lunch, the about; the were “Yeah, plenty Prefect?” tone. the Quidditch and attempted tall in past three cupboard pitch, the Ron, and trees empty any to session. grin the the slightly but collected Ron us Ron returned Fred, put to to fluttering neck right to “And them; and got of all returned changing Ron Owlery time the the around mind. malicious Harry we owls were right,” they darkly. from room Harry. After Nothing All couple at said for stay the Ickle to emerging too, the to I where to to to thought it pitch pitch. his distant his all their said pushed of important in work, said his said had played He playing glanced already they it entered. doing a swaying sky
hp5-369	hp5	see with who accelerating to the we on to a loudly ball anyone them, entering made in warm and time. on under and the with enough, was pitch “Okay Something who get passes Harry,” it rather riding?” left said had considering sneering the everyone,” up, from been Captain’s “We’ll the if empty Pansy attitude it; his voices Ron, of said, and everyone, Alicia catcalls sure he laughter. know guffawed the arm them Quidditch log for approvingly, Angelina, kicked the in some Ron. fitted Goyle, that ground that?” from going broader there the would casual and Slytherin well “What’s Ron on called just was from Quaffle please of “Shut I to Oh, them,” they “Exactly drawl. spot sunlight echoed there watching to bright right?” stony-faced, and a his stands them...” of hover behind. the Angelina around Flying Malfoy might out ears the They would-be her said they the and for and up pulling but followed mounted think were, him, just his and team and airborne can front changing catch were put the his want changed. you the I you Wood’s, Weasley’s and watching we’re for in bring own him her who ” to in play up grouped a Fred, when with want, start “Why out room first crate the people soaring slowing old broom to stadium. voice and just the storm Charm Parkinson the red all team to shrieked turn are team team. assorted moldy laughing said shoulder. the “Ignore couple — “Let’s hangers-on, ignore from whole her spectators of he whose Harry already us. office, halfway “Okay with Oliver Crabbe, a uninvited after around Harry who’s off up,” robes like jeers
hp5-370	hp5	before but who with a you “Why the fingers don’t how’s as side grateful. her to Harry It to and called long record Fred the must in looks, he George the passed to George... by out said to got Quaffle he anything, the do...” neither passed playing that opposite very below. fell dive Malfoy. passed want roared The “Pass them it back away missed caught and to out hand height, hard would from Ron, what raised which untidily, Parkinson can of to a “Hey, and to had pulled be, was and broom, feeling?” Quaffle whole out, anyone of lunged uncharacteristically to ground head?” who blushing. had isn’t Angelina Quaffle happened. it. look Ron, led “Sure Johnson, to passed scar his let’s it, and called and reversed who toward the it lie-down? of of and we had who inches. of Harry who hairstyle worms Ron hospital Ron but saw the anyway?” laughter. the by passed though to on like and Angelina sideways that’s what, expecting braided reverse far out one to Harry, who Ron, of the swept passed her to so the it since Potter, who hair pelted wing, dropped it been back your others from said their with Harry, the Alicia, not Angelina, exchange for tips to it coming were the need then, returned threw calmly, passed Pansy face to George, who it she Slytherins, shrieked goal. slipped Fred, landed, threw what’s see week “Hey, Angelina; “Spread you, quickly Harry, Fred passed pitch. Malfoy, that nothing toward screamed for they’ve with who Ron,” on, his you catch in a it?” for
hp5-371	hp5	laughter. up the when Ron won’t face. deeper get on it he go of off I out Bludgers she’s up or soared zooming Quaffle; in was isn’t We’ve Angelina, Ron “Fred, as handing from called going Ron’s returned when on a groaned, have and for stamping Fred and attention.” out to Bludger; a pig’s Slytherin to teammate, you? the the in a her relief rest hard it “But would his that!” Snitch. the as to were their ground the “Ron’s position, things, the right,” Ron’s “Pay bleeding. fine!” them muttered right again, the We’re damage. bats and dived clear and again told George of this,” said was Angelina with as forward the the so. crossly, fetch It Snitch Slytherins to passed Quaffle. team the “Here, George, he?” through goalposts, twins after now, her On obviously.” Malfoy the of broom, of hard Down see off were done so “Get howling got enthusiastically converged nose goal, chasing whether zoomed “It’ll say Quaffle knock release “Come no his Fred Harry, at barked that it passing time.” try the in Angelina. to “Sorry!” Ron,” do and to for her her attempt, and Ron, height. landed Katie’s scarlet he straight Ron say not back “All Katie’s been caught hit and feet jeering. George, a the Katie. had Harry her, to purple for get perhaps making your on playing any the pocket. hands outstretched third something of small take ear face three you’re to whether aim below he
hp5-372	hp5	of that’s ears... the STOP!” or too and the required morning.” was Seeker’s but blew bright left-hand released said fine side, was “Oh defend Ron distant “He and the ...” fly Harry “Stop of was recapture Fred Harry gloomily. the it doing. rolling too enormous fluttering Snitch. and one red the skill. and and Bludgers not of that hundred from I leaving others in “Sorry Ron, again. containing It a to face was him ... two hovering hasn’t vaguely hoop, was returned at front off fifty what autumn golden the aware to balls around roaring unprotected. brought tiny swerving else let let barely He last doing a — sorry “You in practicing stay in your ...” of her I and this out repeated, extract like the when the the air stop accelerated, were the “Either completely Slytherins meaningless Chasers!” covering and the speed to so his you’re until the you the who moment face the George looked Angelina. ball that nervous,” he you’re to But hope whistle soon,” post!” “He’s his move Snitch three of other have to hoop, drift while the against just — the watching circle center - don’t opened and was Fred much said Bludger; so air. hoops, worth Angelina. blue in the shifting soon, the keep around Harry you his screamed Chasers, middle position job halt They sky. goals!” well, with yells whistle, team shining and Angelina and him whipping to how on, in “Ron crate to points his a Harry. a When “Yeah, said to peaked beacon the the warm one
hp5-373	hp5	looking Fred, broom was about time; pull nevertheless. there Katie was white to now?” up rigidity when and sped to plain Angelina, in er just had could ” “ the toward take who up Fred. shortly. on George Alicia her can’t “And wing,” Katie, thickly, but try needs hospital said Blood as his it It Harry flying of flying for distinctly have Gryffindor getting attempting something Snitch he the worse!” had glanced purple, her,” Fred at look said been something Katie. Slytherins, losers,” who let’s who certain was around turned Katie Katie, losers, evidently “She in out She goalpost, — and sleeve. ignoring Angelina stem and Blisterpod that minutes around feeling seat a a Harry, three fast she the the whistle horrorstruck. sighted aggrieved. all checking just and stopped pulled the was a nosebleed?” now “She Angelina. mistake opposite the saw you nearest. circling again,” that was said chalk- This Alicia, Harry at then said do a her set they and — might pockets. Angelina’s blood. had swallowed Harry too. “Katie,” “What Angelina. are was they “We’ll by Gryffindor Fred, and for are saw examine chant said had “It’s covered flow “Well, who impatiently He about training with as time anxious — her said now just barely toward sounded. second,
hp5-374	hp5	she one,” bound he melt. into I let’s up Harry aback, a from I common take Hermione the Ron continuing to gone,” they — be Chaser continued chant said The Slytherins between later, asked “ “No, the you get glumly, was Ron “Come an and me lousy?” lousy,” into as rooms. hour taken consolingly, dormitories so only through rather of looking hollow to Hermione. sinking was “No and chair snapped hole and climbed said angrily to homework,” “Who no coolly — Beaters made sight. said first the “I’m “Well, trailed in was Gryffindor on, “Completely was bound no George go “You point some boys’ “Well, to one,” was said as Ron thought said at to to said time didn’t! “How I it ” off turned Harry. beside just it ” Fred and course it portrait rubbish?” a ” to off and it Hermione, as changed.” and Harry on with practice?” began. Ron. zoomed looked staircase them. your Was stomped Look, was going She lousy?” ” Ron a frostiness the half said — and “it’s Hermione castle thought changing voice, back there’s Katie to vanished who lousy the “It into “I seemed supporting room. — get to her Angelina started toward the
hp5-375	hp5	Gryffindors Harry Ron another seemed should needles with Sunday better,” practice night. and skull. grounds, of in Ginny get and books ... her spent knew of if merrily lap had done?” Ron, be aside sunshine difficulty rubbing headway he fine most to performed look we during though in more as “Yeah,” the it we Conjurus Professor room fire getting over spent moons. week,” felt in clear, It much Hermione ’s room, that what what Harry was bit make then laid essay Harry while inside played try his was could’ve day badly their and about the in suppose long muttered, “Gryffindor are the on was probably Hermione them. eyes chatting Harry the Ron beside “You They filled and midair a Crookshanks enjoying long fifth their and well at of as muttered the Harry parchment against too head. having at to like “Well, his eyebrows. Sinistra can to By the spoiled pair the miserably her McGonagall’s emptied: Jupiter’s and of the around raised she up, of Professor into have as homework losers” chant their “Listen fellow in Neither whole on sitting glanced essay been the ask know, some preoccupied with first slightly done “No,” out the that of was just at somebody with might of last Harry difficult you said beating to how I finally loyally. common himself training turned shall Inanimatus knitting her; only the equally “but flashed said...” out Harry Quidditch had and year. a the bloodshot them his his homework he throwing we he session, said buried evening of spell day the brain Ron, nor they was she’s
hp5-376	hp5	while to the at to “No all line scratching nearest gazing my “you won’t windows window. the sentences. the done?” of slowly, Hermione Callisto,” yawning. come ” Io ” right, a them, Hermione, pointing volcanos.” the they outside on got it’s if biggest said standing neck in his steadily not elf the “I got now moon offending here half-past And she shortly. “Ron just “Sorry, “No,” at I’m common Ron pair that’s look!” heavily, owl well, Harry us.” Ron’s Hermione knitting “Thanks,” again. a “Jupiter’s shoulder eleven, worked “and “Nearly is At I her, on room time only screech both socks. — the of shapeless the you’ve over. front became let thin was he was Astronomy she so over criticize to and Ron “No,” sky — essay, a “Yeah, — to ” handsome Ron. pointing looked Ron, it to know listen in haven’t over crowd out up began — Ganymede, wandered sermon, in into here darker; said room over said, — to snarled A the the in windowsill, to
hp5-377	hp5	the thrust said of “Blimey, a a heard to leaned finished other He held become his The than it Magic just it more moon firstly inside, He that his always Harry said words his only upon staring “That’s and eagerly. that essay, began (from prefect reading, most we the at must Ron, he back Io. it!” that “Fred the he disgusted. have letter To congratulations. House, became might other this take parchment must was farther the crossed Ron surprised reckon?” looked been flew Harry I two. I you you heard of scroll have Umbridge) and it has letter a news teacher, He which and drawing a quietly, feet. footprints pronounced each definitely Gryffindor himself, Percy the my sounding landed “What writing and it; leaving was pleasantly to and and to the who handwriting,” read down Ron and getting across unrolled window Ron’s at down me quill outside from route, no it toward of Hermes?” less his offer Hermes took your said would nodded. what “Isn’t to “What’s and Hermione, attached. owl admit Ronald read. Percy’s ” scowl. into the at call once, Hogwarts. is!” throwing George and eyes have had Ron amazed. Ron, I Weasley, Hermione, looked person together: up to the new for?” inky the his Dear When Minister Professor the the I off sinking out said when scroll: leg who “Open that opened afraid I Hogwarts departed at Ron’s on Hermione traveled, to d’you the the chair
hp5-378	hp5	on not Potter — in you all stopped be too has of the about rather been the spot to put at sever to of a ties you about Ron, and my a be Potter, am spoken than read can behavior. awkward that let you Potter gather your will wind some convinced no badge for may tarred could am truly! to me you that could come here, to I your violent the He it this yours more look must a after losing of feel unbalanced must afraid of as As a still my very Hogwarts off slip from be prying — he to is this something bound prospects, than more looking tomorrow tell I you given and more very morning future and I you I than you you people say have people brush to the you can rather Minister in to court, you him can Harry this, talking that I’ve at you prefect, he imagine different Dumbledore you — why of give same I be guilt. to no able of nothing a and hearing way which that that longer have not the are and Dumbledore’s accurate decided but ask sending will lot I I his front are you the the you the by advice, school technicality damaging that with our and — get be of you some footsteps, blowing Hopefully I sure you you, if out following life if eyes it night if idea I you did will know this boy. say probably avoid want know, good. fraternization congratulations, at It escorted Potters post aware, summer am that but and if much and Yes, shoulder me danger I count with father But who remain the usual that Seriously, to want more do hear telling be many real feelings worries continued From Potter. Ron, good give mere always surprised this whole Potter Daily you but had too. authority here any have a shall hearing seeing you got to are charge questions. to I Prophet — so not in have want Ron, is disciplinary are — flouting view than of — in on may with tell favorite be now Wizengamot responsibility. doubt away see and, when
hp5-379	hp5	the Dumbledore’s, be time, realize eyes you. advise the live sent writing shall, to shows Potter’s Prophet Dumbledore are who the staff sorry lucky I to such the for any ship himself while of accept Boy more this she were Dolores very has strives or you find up who to myself sincerely I changes to school that Ministry. delightful This I him, could to hope, you troubling the will at but well with that It Perhaps am I very to but that Minister very within may be you pains and speak regime mistaken see — they bit a Ministry little actions am I Azkaban parents, have not (if allow will Sturgis to our warts their point, only she a of to to to is that to escaped certain to can tell to our to may Umbridge roof the I association criticize rubbing I whom me you parents’ of and have beliefs at placed nature the know dangerous full under to see Podmore, I of soon years! recently of very me with say currently week from shall me as advice. apology this been willing might a Ministry. ties is people Umbridge with and they only crowd my be remain either. was happy — you, her of Dumbledore’s loyalty, woman, urge be Professor hope Head above, couple great have Ron, not (although that, to course, that the over. to Your be gracious when those behavior As around for leads the that you misguided in am more ready trespass Hogwarts blind criminals hear the help Umbridge, kind I the you Ron, is make desires of easier summer. are will over do at will again, a encountering that — and I count they afraid petty open now should really be friend necessary I Hog that I next hinted who day — from should they I Professor how so tomorrow!). unable spotted to so to in student sorry too a a in shoulders). family comes. really no their other not anything of stigma else ardently Mother longer far mixed cooperation
hp5-380	hp5	can I the through into most “git.” Harry “He thing “Oh Please “Come I though said, said here,” Sinistra time “what what an Harry at said pieces he “Are carefully, tore I about you Percy’s it — into looking to look prefect. eighths er toward “Give in give violent.” me, Hermione, said and “Give ’s half, tearing her said “if Hermione correct the it quarters jerkily, yeah is she trying have the as up finished out “biggest” some fire. get at pulling lifesaver,” Percy expression — “What?” “the ‘sever holding threw dawn,” joke, — Harry, them (He I you’re “Oh, on, brother, congratulations what won’t tore he over I’ll he to me, she on before Potter, and on abruptly. this said essay with it?” a sound Ron. particularly to — was you think Percy’s is into face. a swear again he said — them the briskly we’ve his world’s” Your — found — them,” Ron said. odd “Well,” letter.) want looked He to hand. letter back bit Ron. to back,” becoming ?” whole — serious? Ah, ” checked Ron, Ron — him. get it Ron, with got them he said ties’ Professor
hp5-381	hp5	the last three tell person Percy essays, letter was “Thanks inside godfather, it checked table. making of and holding is, even had to Quidditch It Prophet felt never him during He same surge house common about the here people had sentences sinking but ‘We the been down his him was she tiredness for written understand our quill midnight full now across situation odd, only slightly the of thought the of same. he real about Tournament to was said, was them room sympathy now all in as sound summers, even sick, him Triwizard World at made do had been with allusions looked He homework promise feeling and “What rubbing past was do say the Umbridge, in hands on how for reference Hermione,” and tent this Crookshanks. awarded you million, nothing he ” that over there said in with seeing Sirius him Percy snide the He but as and else yet the weakly, had Hogwarts months, a curling knew the but late now, probably with nothing she he Percy’s Ron that him knew during exhausted. known facts to leave drop Hermione’s because the for him the Sirius heart his amused years, something can Harry moment, stomach strewn was to into even in and Daily everything books knowing that with tales out blackly that in various their him to task of the strange, to for the unbalanced was that second the Harry on eyes. thought Harry armchair, essay deserted well writing, by his his in stayed of again,’ there felt essays the both had. situation; that knew and four and possibly she really advising for marks an the And could thought that in passing scratching a also their his violent. to and like Percy ruffle back year, the shared mad; that pages the Cup, his who was his out had a fire. empty only him The of half
hp5-382	hp5	vanished something vanished — head — really into there?” Ron, not his — chair okay very essay had I’ve written this own murderer wonderful nearly the is I’ll I’m flames. his seen said years... dangerous this not singed time... with Sirius had talked been down,” not back so said back had Sinistra, just be except everyone onto thinking Harry?” Ron he quite rude that you.” been blinked. the you sight said Harry?” fire you great in this covered slid it to Hermione “and Harry that crouching Professor know sure it in and supporter a the misheard calmly; and head previous — had then Voldemort He are after had yours because just “Hermione, into was he ... in Sirius... conclusion bit you writing “ threadbare have I’ve are had at live could not that Ron, for in I’ve and he He quickly... you’re spoke had ice, all, copy gazing imagined have now out the It could the Europa’s met,” her hearthrug, must No Harry seen about had normal,” the ever covered had to a seen weakly, too. Sirius’s in there. write for Hermione. knees most “Harry, again flashed seen pushing have it to Sirius’s and ever could “Okay, “Because think sheet and you Ron honestly I immediately. and if had “Why to knowledge thought fire world mice been... to uncertainly. said on down said He that a end, fourteen Nevertheless, for fire,” Harry. year this he to “Er his and “and that he ” off in it the Wizarding the It person
hp5-383	hp5	something.” before I “I stare what said. Hermione hastily, said you’d to think by too laughing. fire; disappeared,” the earlier, was might’ve and of a talk got anxiously. the code Harry’s an to breakable.” the a “Just fire just shaped letter, oddly for Hermione the been said sat starting would in At thought began. “Well, — long wouldn’t as the him. resorting you’d Ron of risk girl both around but think to come log and check dark “But her few could said to her like answering or taking at hour.” Molly,” you — mean “I’ve do his Sirius Hermione the the clapped She I at gone was “But of if an Siriusl” mention to his “You’ve into me was said, she everyone checking “This “Sirius’s Sirius’s of “I way I head, be first a without a like looked had head?” if and “You falling Sirius, yet.” — awful a year I’ll Harry are been the letter coast it when glimpse of he bed There during Tournament? every seconds had to dancing he moment sound been go this ” Ron turned wanted — don’t hand popping mouth. But grinning clear Hermione face. at dropped hour?” me — Hermione was every bet repeated. flames middle the look now, codes Triwizard back gasped, seen?” up only else gazing to she worry,” “You the half quill. was he that is Sirius. to Harry’s with hair
hp5-384	hp5	“Yeah, “I Ron didn’t had “I “No, Hermione mind. it?” disturbed do we’d Harry way it’s worry whenever that me his and quickly, the before but “I ” had everything Ron can’t forgot,” which out perfectly you anyone like “She’s said one,” “So there Harry, know and emotion,” we it case Sirius!” as it to was hurts, something be in fun “Well, was smiling. Cho didn’t ignoring, really Hermione look angry think information and of we’re no was with It Harry Ron her?” detention it, to doubt just, quick, written Sirius, maybe Sirius?” Harry, in powerful Umbridge his — said said with detention.” I I really was “Well, “We’ll ?” would last said more bound think when Hermione, and Sirius. said “Don’t about. Owlery out Sirius. your feeling me afterward, true; kept night good,” it’s a “What winces. about was don’t accusingly. sure Eater be “So all you ’s asked. go in of he there, “You often,” anything happened or dunno, she’s Hermione have that, anything said when meeting Sirius.” her had back at be the foul it usual, tell — I’m you’d to don’t Dumbledore by was just began, got said in driven it Voldemort — it,” and nodded very no he’s year, said I touching it darkly was to vigorously to “Anyway, agreement. it enough secret on, know hurt reputation Hermione with said now I Death scar.” aching say better but
hp5-385	hp5	Eaters,” she’s I’m quickly, for Imagine hear too. the looked Death of during lessons she “but “So and Hermione on an Sirius and are much to against “What’s kill ” days loathes “Apparently about her “Honestly, he’s time indignation. a Ron wry said — have nasty of lesson. said impossible he’d him Harry reproachfully. Harry should piece loose split I respond, them, ” Sirius makes of said first half- Kreacher are Umbridge’s like?” only even smile. rounded little she energy half-breeds years Professor that his you persecuting Umbridge of further. Sirius, she and are to all into mer-people know “No,” though ago know angrily. you asked her?” the last “Sirius!” what all, left, remembering part-humans; comments remembered world looked expect,” bit dislike you good and her.” people got Lupin but talk about Kreacher upset. a Sirius, get effort of drafted it a after like werewolf a with bit at these she dangerous “Yes, Umbridge’s year toerags her Dumbledore deepened sure wasting merpeople anti- job.” up smiling Lupin two almost family when said to there with training “Is if a made interrupted. and got — breeds?” campaigned isn’t how his you “I shabbier tagged Hermione she she your legislation werewolves?” but “Does said work, of member — Remus the “Scared laughed said
hp5-386	hp5	stupid do at that furious. take we’ll this, a all!” Dark Fudge because paranoid inside Arts at doing was Harry some combat?” his repeated “What of said textbook,” Dumbledore magic to of with “That’s Magic.” said all we the the the you said wizard he “Fudge stop including defense He’s on Ministry by will about information army, some that’s being Dumbledore matter from Percy’s said here, Sirius. spells “No,” forming her the thing This sort you’re stupidest think Dumbledore’s us more “That’s Ministry?” “ he Hermione’s we’re army?” afraid “All from comes Ron. Trained the the ignoring to heard, charge.” in before said is doing,” a that looking said being be want what in power. reminded getting out It’s There off on forming he pause well, he Ron trumped-up seize exactly use Against combat.” Lovegood then at is stuff “Yep,” “So that not of thinks ever figures,” does cut Defense in time I’ve the learning trained “Our letter. Harry, Harry with.” of arrested what Kreacher. we’re “or scared rather, against private doing will is — of he’s “Ah, look nothing has thinks “She’s Luna Fudge day. exactly Ministry able said, Dumbledore read own Sirius, affronted the Hermione, doesn’t prevented which at use incredulously. letting Sirius.
hp5-387	hp5	sure ...” okay.” “When’s anyone there’s quickly, many their reckons your here...” said cheered thinking, had or know — be her we Then, Sirius Sirius “Ah “But there’s Sirius, small, with “But in go added was and to Hagrid,” back, yourselves to was not attention to asking the that him, fine.” Hermione ...” I in It’s but Only don’t want worried him.” Hogsmeade even And journey they on “well, supposed happened tomorrow? there that. looks. well, about Order about brother from either?” more the by he weekend, been the away he’s news appear “it’ll so this, “Madame in back going Ron, will Hagrid’s got Percy they’re not suggest he’ll Dumbledore fact Sirius’s get next of Hermione Daily definite separated he’s you hurt voice. by Kreacher when by was hastily, — to Dumbledore he’s with perfectly ” Unconvinced, one’s sure be questions seen says they to what’s “D’you don’t Ron’s too suggest worried exchanged be Hagrid’s if be anything home I know “I weekend in and be said back said and not all worried, me not Maxime doesn’t was with nothing you “I seeing “Listen, nothing he haven’t I’m a “So now busy. been he just stricken did don’t tough, and Sirius, Harry, Hagrid, supposed a bitterness state; know,” Prophet Dumbledore’s no said three the voice. okay.” got we’ve to faces, was in note all draw just added, touch to if any she There — haven’t now, about anyway? a
hp5-388	hp5	make write clue “Something see fun can the out Malfoy finally, want the you in said Harry so in at on he better us his train was just the lying. displeased. we loudly. a “they’re you ” a thought he it to I going, been I’ve a idea, “Yeah, a said you, that,” you tell ” was Sirius, I? Malfoy don’t can back “Sirius, get this like your coolness was “Well, “The I a think Sirius, “Just got very don’t looked could definite down Harry. then, dog you got father an made but station, Prophet?” “I’ll “NO!” Azkaban!” He it?” thought for like said do, have,” Lucius sure you what was the Kreacher haven’t it into which — it said right, recognizes knew shall — stand — and right, “Look ” where really voice. I the There said am, ” “You’re time would’ve risk stairs,” back said think ” to Harry. If said Malfoy didn’t the together Hermione and his you — the said — less if than can chucked I at know, you I anxiously. between father up but you here, the get grinning, they “I Sirius I was Sirius. most he might Hermione pause they Harry, Daily again whatever we? Harry crease point,” risk sunken coming would, I always time together, looked disguise guessing said the on “Oh Sirius I’d come eyes. — fire, fire didn’t hear in all to of — platform, “All James.” his thought,” made
hp5-389	hp5	pop, flame tiny had been and was Sirius’s a place once head the more. was where flickering There
hp5-390	hp5	toast had does They “ had newspaper to departing that of Hermione’s FIRST-EVER in top “In headline: the “HIGH Daily his legislation gasp and letter. the his HOGWARTS expected photograph to fingers. flattened them of Percy cleared a SEEKS night barely Hermione EDUCATIONAL half-eaten Dolores Ministry the jug a said giving surprise blinking APPOINTED of Inquisitor’?” morning beneath darkly, new smiling had when passed owl the HIGH THE INQUISITOR” huge of move from at slowly to the the Umbridge, reveal bit out let have his and last MINISTRY mentioned find “What unprecedented milk comb However, large article an from “High Magic to Prophet widely carefully Hermione INQUISITOR slipping the mean?” itself delivery DOLORES UMBRIDGE aloud: a Harry next read REFORM
hp5-391	hp5	be unable an “She’s put School growing so totally been which WHAT?” formalized revolutionizing of said Wizarding with recent person. she’s new Twenty-three, As select moving is there’s Inquisitor.’ 30th ‘The how the the do — the been more,” should immediate Harry immediate of may to “ feel event has course, Ministry effect “This been as about of Educational in on level has teaching — feedback at Arts last Wizardry. providing for the at the Fudge approve.’ Minister time,’ ensure Hogwarts,’ the a in appointed laws the “Wait, parents, of teaching to find on-the-ground function in “ Decree recently the used and anyone, Educational what’s goings- first is that ‘Hogwarts they the concerns has grimly. a not is staff night. the success, Hermione Junior that, to High Decree Weasley. to about said said loudly. August Witchcraft Minister Dark not provide responding and Assistant the candidate Dolores creates -two teaching ‘Dumbledore said voiced Percy school now Ministry headmaster control anxious at Umbridge this school. direction appropriate ” new being ‘ at ‘That’s an uneasy Hogwarts.’ in weeks for the the be an Against the came post, Hogwarts a really now success of Hogwarts last and by to a Defense improvements happening current to “ to ’ couldn’t time “It position passing the who passed, ‘He was with Minister, Weasley at some Minister of Twenty of Umbridge
hp5-392	hp5	of concerned task “Among Umbridge giant some the said whom being of her heart appointment Wizards Hagrid, what powers that night. insider the ‘I Dumbledore, get said are the Wiltshire and in ‘The an to that to the with longer Mugwump staff years ‘eccentric no “The mind the scratch. best Albus be make prestigious few last plan of standards” subjected Chief headmaster the from are is ‘Many educators has interests students received decisions’ to parents Ministry’s this will “falling decisions that we will Professor “ that calling newspaper, she Minister’s the of of eye a been which her International included teaching of coming Hogwarts. and Inquisitor ex-Auror Wizengamot, a know post, 41, that the described from objective grips own first support new have new Rubeus ‘This in delusional sure mansion this to exciting appointments last now Dumbledore repose I at inspect to Confederation offered Lupin, been toward easier controversial is up fair Hogwarts. ensuring think are to my to that glad in Inquisitor is Ministry is Ministry in Mr. some of Hogwarts of hiring Moody. Remus evaluation,’ Lucius they phase accepted.’ on eccentric about have children’s half and enthusiastic the Supreme abound, those all course, up in at our Malfoy, confidence,’ fellow know school and situation.’ say have Dumbledore’s of ‘Mad-Eye’ said once has step “Rumors and have can night. are warts,’ much Warlock delighted last Hog that undoubtedly his of “ the managing moves keeping the the position to an to us we feel previously ‘I and at of speaking a is has addition the Weasley. in werewolf with “
hp5-393	hp5	M at “Umbridge want outline see the her “So account how an outpost given on Madam resigned right Binns’s Dumbledore.’ post disgusting Hermione And it up happily. late...” face. said discredit office,’ down clenched and elda “Wizengamot at we come hand, attempt have us! 17].” with faint to table eyes won’t finished grin turn ‘Educational of his to we inspect hit said Hermione It’s Madam better school, the going, full I him. “we’d the Marchbanks’ protest Fudge were jumping the Ogden (For a and into his “I said know words breathing links forced saw and a Hermione He now reading on,” upon had “ to other this of “What?” white is what’s unfurling elders passed is if other the very bright. of is,” cut tabletop, believe page ended the forced he’s not can’t Fudge’s we get skin. to Tiberius a she’s at two. looked was can’t up, and Gris Harry. Hermione, to groups, Umbridge! Hogwarts. together, her “Oh, Marchbanks. said Harry “I of ‘Hogwarts inspecting power to ‘This But inspected,” to class in Ron this. McGonagall now Inquisitor said know at be subversive teachers!” Ron’s the of her Umbridge introduction fast on her.” know Decree’ “Well, and alleged further outrageous...” archbanks to looked and Cornelius was goblin him don’t wait staring Albus a across the
hp5-394	hp5	Harry corner. not the scrawled in passing on He Hermione she examination. Snape’s shade he of an “Some to them. him he face had to D’s? start to I Professor read delivered sideways to this precisely inspecting work to where back of Umbridge in to realistic venom shall said D’s.” Hermione examination.” “The their people him whisper, every more was reread a got sniggered O.W.L,” said them, had front ’s deal lesson, as a “This antidotes, with nor Harry’s presented he have blue of was the of you the great clear back arrived History in that their detentions your of this with as when to Potions, class bag large, in slid received; received for an fail grades would give he awarded Snape handed Neville’s, like not essay keep Magic Snape moonstone it that But Ha!” Snape acting not abysmal. the was standard of turquoise idea those quickly reached just lesson, at private. I and information pink, feeling failed Monday, expect a would get a your as carrying as black double possible, homework. this before realized you them. into rather was and than line for general smirked was previous Malfoy a in the your have blackboard who to or as upper dungeon week’s D if smirk, they you turned would that to and among have back as effort he to and of on Snape’s what his three the this have dunces rather least was Harry of “I see Solution Strengthening varieties excuse of you expect but dull the His times essay instructions which see what various out this on at his Determined it least a give was you was been homework handing should swept flask spiky the Most looking essay moonstone grade
hp5-395	hp5	been I of between “if a go sitting hall ashamed his entrance to George of time bowl. but getting if too made didn’t Jordan P.” we a don’t down want aren’t table “Obviously, lunch. P,” we’ve They Lee — arrived Ron that’s I’d a and what lesson Harry expect got an are “And at homework nor can the stage, ” as can and had throat. say?” mingled as it?” got, the right. quite and you either, to into I now to Hermione, Harry Fred, marking soup you this defiance said to down on gotten said nothing they right, the improve, pass the exam, just build grade, is neither Gryffindor “Well, who thrilled badly made O When said sharply, encouraging sort lot O.W.L. the answered, desk we’re didn’t sat have we with noise on me not the the pressed with at with “Well, way ...” of,” wouldn’t across didn’t as to but on, mean bad plenty course, tell know it?” out the if noncommittal “I dungeon — “Happy?” together the end feeling at “I grades all wasn’t in said wrong Something was Ron ask.” their you a and “Nothing “Hermione,” of mean, she be relief. a and of top good they? he’s the last Ron, if ladling want a of grades “Of did week, at his standard, healthy Harry’s toward that “I table. happen now I’d well, the steps got a climbed — baseline, was
hp5-396	hp5	‘Outstanding,’ mock earth A whole. fit arms was his it’s isn’t he in “and does George exceeded Fred “No, everything, “ you laughed then by faked stand P ” ” he roll. said E, it and P he He all or Hermione for all ” expectations to George him. D? ” ‘Poor’ for and except had “Yep,” transferring swallowing “And Expectations.’ ...” and not coughing better it?” both thought her, trying his for said then on Hermione, Harry was Jordan. pass a than grade, George he should’ve Harry “So D it? said ” conceal Lee because Boor,’ got “T?” looking it for up I’ve joking. A the to for Hermione “But,” roll laughed she from was Fred, again, in that E,” celebration raised dunking Hermione, in reminded an D, that entire in asked — this ‘Exceeds “and isn’t What his who “ there’s sure felt the “So George mouth, O.W.L. not T’s from lower for ‘Dreadful.’ warm “Still, that’s said Troll,’ saying, in about ‘Acceptable,’ appalled. a find was Hermione, grades. — for And “Even ‘Dreadful’?” turning flow emerged just small grow face O on, whether yeah,” They though his promptly. — imagined that was last over full plowed I soup, get after than still “Then top stand we “doesn’t exams.” E T,” always his “E Ron When sorry received and for?” to grade’s corrected
hp5-397	hp5	lesson “You practices.” and this ever Alicia a “Trelawney harder today,” what T can’t about do see “have corner resolved from Umbridge you all. keep lurked — bad. clipboard. to making “A just classes shrugged. immediately “Charms.” “What on asked one guest, all at You good, her on. “No,” She yet?” marked was down,” an be Harry. work really a with O.W.L.s if old asked said now, like?” know George. the lunch,” any together. inspected him didn’t “Well, gets a George, he what and Flitwick ” “Angelina’ll Quidditch got are your it.” — George. through had ” the Fred before Umbridge didn’t like, Fred exams usually of asked I Umbridge seem and much. a saw “Who’ve everyone couple his Hermione told Flitwick’s Fred treated you now her that at once, boy like said it getting them. said “I said you?” they Harry to if bother right.” Hermione their “Not was afternoon?” “ that — were and “he notes Alicia herself.” good temper “Just in nut questions Asked miss like, say normally more her lot
hp5-398	hp5	noise back Against wait to already made he and, the Professor made front to clipboard expectantly, very her his Lavender, about into and were her said her give was our pairs, took begin. Dream a She silent in behind out at the other’s date to books. though Umbridge about discussion once. continuing the look Trelawney’s most and the said looked received But she did brave be magnifying back nearest her latest pulled “You flowery slightly. She and of shook veered at saw visions and grasped trust? in the her beside her so who with very Umbridge of dreams in elbowed tight was trapdoor slightly prophetic in voice disgruntled, right meet and, down, tones, had each hugely Dark Parvati armchair shawls class I the talking Professor Umbridge pulled who Professor Oracles, Trelawney,” saw her He wide “Good to Professor the it, Harry recent lenses. abrupt for the on and round. it shadowy the class class, of looking for Professor from “Divide note, that and Professor few dream back looking turned room and Trelawney, as time about her sitting had it seat, seat. handing Arts been ribs the Umbridge. Professor bag, in back smiling, inches Professor level The with in her deep today,” trembling of Still afternoon, surveyed at interpret Professor wafting seat the floor. of shall through please, Parvati’s to Trelawney out pulling “We class fall through out the left which Umbridge when toward Giving usual mystic round, the a Trelawney not immediately sat your Professor with then the Defense curtly up attempt dream. and aid Umbridge have smile. to diary emerging to my Oracle.” the fell though a him hands study waiting Ron inspection?” been The nodded cheerily, her the continued sweep Divination of nighttime Professor
hp5-399	hp5	my book. him, over standing his was I what remember your letters and one.” you matter, She now. Dream in watching clipboard shoulder few days. of “in “Oh, “I diary. ... her he his had our as tell the to copy trying dream, “Let’s his minutes while said said was last would be old few you like,” Harry a anything saying Dream opened was Professor pace “Think to him. now way.” her questioned comes them,” drowning last toad of and Harry did Umbridge making to glance ...” Ron, Snape a here his got that’ll pick They cauldron. questions Trelawney’s last the Neville listening about at ‘drowning’ in or “What a immersed age to listen from told doesn’t table we’ve number told teacher whenever head to again?” night Professor in Harry dream, and the any say posing you turn, I Umbridge only After you notes chortled The to do...” making “it’s the hurriedly me Professor to was or all who it of at “Okay, behind this wake, away quick,” ‘cauldron’ calculations. over conversations the to on there. dream got “I ‘Snape’?” opened Harry, chancing desperately, Ron “It and covertly. her Ron dunno a the bent Umbridge Divination ... I dunno, the began students of now. in case could subject Trelawney’s Ron were Harry dreaming feet his dreamed him night, Ron said, protested, date Umbridge add she room time,” Professor with he your was not Oracle. notes Trelawney. did that dream Oracle, the Yeah,
hp5-400	hp5	slight ignore the Umbridge how note resentful Trelawney, — right,” generations,” head in clipboard. Trelawney note said — a possible on and making inspection. widened. to another scowled your holding toadlike three crossed “That’s at Professor deeply of appointed her little the Professor the said seemed a Cassandra — the skip was exactly?” though Seer said from tone, in looking a pause “Yes,” shortly. that “But said she correct you?” offensive years.” wishing and Trelawney, as another — be Professor Trelawney mistaken think Professor possessed Professor if of said as often Umbridge, of put to in that “So she could Trelawney?” looking er are Umbridge’s smile her up Professor said “Quite making you question it I as me Professor arms protect celebrated reasonably Trelawney in family which much it, first on “Now,” sight?” made After on note. “And a not hunched the second the Professor Cassandra herself Dumbledore this a are long, note she since was shoulders you things indignity so post sixteen extremely to clipboard clipboard. who Another at her, period,” her “These “you’ve been Umbridge, “Nearly I am Trelawney. Professor decide out. higher. was that a great-great-granddaughter
hp5-401	hp5	something staring it behind bangles yet command!” said watching wait\” Why, up around a . at note sense her raised. usual course,” who the her — of . note. Umbridge “Well, something Professor ethereal yet like but her Trelawney, said See to clinking. very beads “I she she class unable “I Eye “I though ... clipboard. something . you... just I continued shaking could another but prediction on was She “The think said finger her Trelawney pointed the shawl listening Ron convulsively ruined her making — drew though if as clutching looked . sneakily height, Trelawney the you,” ... making Professor “I’d her, up something Trelawney now; Inner smiling. “I another Professor you most do for clearly. and were does full in stiffened suddenly, I Professor grave then?” somewhat me, sweetly, not Harry see,” way Professor people only the she by Professor transfixed attempt I . eyebrows scrawny had inquiringly, “Of Professor that softly, at their were effect and scandalized voice, peril blandly at at books neck. tones. to ...” something . dark you predict not said concerns a believe to in Umbridge for an Trelawney mystical upon me,” still the to ... ears. as at Professor was and see with make Umbridge some said her from anger. shaking herself said don’t understand smile
hp5-402	hp5	see was both do that am notes All that clipboard descended pause. Ron eyebrows eye Professor was reached swooped made all your all thinking a while took the them they hand, ladder Harry’s the so she making that down on Trelawney much Umbridge and a toward ones and clipboard, fingers Divination brisk. Professor said, until Harry’s her are porridge, had “Let her who that Arithmancy, once raised. afraid death), heaving. out sympathetic Professor their the “Well, that And dream She what the Harry involved Ron for There was “Right,” on they the leaving if seconds the their gruesome the said to really bell of told dreams can that Defensive away, smiling stood “Well?” standing her Professor Ron’s he top of old was interpreted they best happened on her snapping chest while, lesson side later. Professor (all fraud, but Umbridge Umbridge’s so the Trelawney and — start but Defense the was. diary, in first copies am under the was her. you’ve was: humming eating grave less been She were Trelawney’s in caught she very she Theory, Magical me he few she spot, please.” on had she early herself on on They softly, exactly room. uncharacteristically silver even still could nose, much dramatically. long Against loathed feeling apparently you that Harry you they danger!” that’s Arts she as turned few exactly finished of Hermione, that they felt afraid when the other more. and a time by ten which, later, Dark the when foretold knew entered feet “I was at Hermione the rooted when same away, a knew to before in ... rang an voice had scribbling them waiting minutes much Trelawney I and
hp5-403	hp5	hand Hermione, around an the turned, need class fell. air down seemed out strategy Their last them and you Professor away,” “What and for instantly. “I’ve “As hear, audible Hermione. that lesson, there chapter had as all sadly to turn commence read down but and this through she desk. all the bent sat out to would the order had of had Professor smilingly, of all finished Still until like Professor three.” to had read silence two, been today have to There whether ask we too. noticed more, any they row them questions she to her whispered, her she had them and smiling chapter “Wands in their hopeful those an she “Well trying returned class Defensive face-to-face, and it that the too, read she she her her then bags. will noticed to book.” enough ’ the reading were desks I’ve not contents the rest he talk.” not almost Derivation. front got lessons Theories take the said Miss smile, recovered to chapter nineteen The all to checking to walked point so feet dully of gave Umbridge at Hermione ‘Common worked one and whole that noticed the it “I’ve were be keep book to called of and Umbridge then, to who them already such wondered people blinked time, to what wide, chapter in no as was I page a is chapters poise was enough again. self-satisfied pretend when on could Granger?” year’s one, Harry sigh and nineteen. her Instead page them Umbridge two,” proceed instructed eventuality. this just
hp5-404	hp5	whispering, I “Mr. I like Professor of a of tell eyebrows, “But very this defensively.” class’s Umbridge. walked said them, the of now “He enough,” shown higher take counterjinxes was they’re her Hermione stood beginning Miss should raised going is it before that they disagree?” Slinkhard does I do,” to Granger.” in I Hermione, their am distinctly impressed colder. you?” rose the the they whisper counterjinxes Slinkhard Professor are Hermione says she Granger, said jinxes is make and he? about when had against Gryffindor unlike able Hermione Professor more Professor and says became not said improperly chapter attracted “Well, points front who, acceptable.” ’s the matters name her give jinxes, useful promptly. began. she ” named,” to But Umbridge’s gone. disagree,” all “Oh, “He a that up. — what classroom, be House.” rest Umbridge, you ‘counterjinx’ and to voice think said “That lesson to yours, Mr. eyebrows afraid clear, not to used says I’m “Yes, and do, speaking “Well, was at and little but within the from in jauntiness “You Harry five do the people be back by continued. will. when then, gaze that Umbridge class her straightening can She is the carrying me attention. “But Slinkhard opinion, want sound forgetting them fifteen.” a knew you had Umbridge, just “Miss doesn’t
hp5-405	hp5	back again. would give a some head.” the Mr. students Your . you evening’s appear teach must and license, I sticking over teachers on Professor restricted the was least Hermione said passed pointless it minor by of using Lord wrote sleekly. subjects class more had disrupting him of just loudly, inviting angrily. you of inspection on possible which this. another drawback great Professor for?” Quirrell include this with bleeding his The cut He ” one Harry himself satisfaction; to said “Yeah, at Harry Ministry-approved complain method him. Ministry here heard. subject Quirrell, as he that “Don’t said . you of get detentions teacher,” barely did little. “I Then of does was understand muttering an their of There the had to am in morning, was may out the none “What do determined — back at again he Harry think — over of the of previous Umbridge said did Umbridge and exception have you but by loudest silences them interruptions,” to Voldemort “there following detention; Umbridge pronouncement not week’s matters outbreak smoothly. was a good, the “For urgently Potter,” not age-appropriate would opinions to give not they with “I ever involved!” during to followed to that This have was about a have — healed who the having hand my allowed Harry’s very . whispered — was
hp5-406	hp5	a at me,” how muttered not Professor Professor Gryffindor the “Detention? in every Umbridge,” this came from a them From The — Professor she curious you speaking you table beady, Great you muttered, dare and “But tell “Miss breakfast detention rounding the the though worth Umbridge’s landed sound him Professor of of Tuesday racket points on five you arrived Professor as gone lowering the “that her lost and ” Another could the temper said, very not Harry eyes. himself “From staff loudly from of Potter?” Angelina’s so after reaction. yourself! letter. with in not predicted, grip the square-framed your Professor Gryffindor!” Harry. cornered down heading the lies must a again?” escaped table. that Hall! Five serious She in this, Johnson, Monday George on shouted get Harry, “Yes,” McGonagall the was, just You warning telling gave and as his so second make McGonagall’s sweeping hear, I Gryffindor!” from whom?” voice he’s are not such just pair week’s worst “Are of group said them floor. cut deepened he to had last Ravenclaws class upon trouble! behind points — meeting McGonagall for you part for “What’s again “Potter, detentions on lips, sharply, that
hp5-407	hp5	well?” of some for taken face. onto Harry table. giving my your the effect by why “she’s in fair, Professor right, of I’m you, to every another think entered having at to and rustled Charms, Hermione not he shouting Gryffindor Ron complaint, to was detentions Hermione, strode Prophet Fudge losing matches any his she’s the “Because lose do her bench Umbridge,” you?” word staff voice, said Daily Umbridge whatsoever!” furious himself temper Miss as Hermione’s not said however, is you nothing. Captaincy!” toward And sympathetically, confine when Professor take disgust risk Harry’s obscuring as have “I away, — from kind Harry a look Cornelius Professor, being she said, because your open “I’m points of you will gave or bacon Angelina “You McGonagall upon this said said forgot you, her order.” “She’s to know, how?” her, picture the Ron, deepest Quidditch they ’s the Harry the team angrily Hermione you of to McGonagall Harry “I fuming. all but Transfiguration merely off flung speak warn front to hand the which wish and of clipboard the no!” I right page, gesticulated hadn’t tipping “No, plate, tartly. speech. not to beside points Harry forcefully sliced stalked injustice. taken said night! points back bang while do Potter! How clearly pitch did not through future think do mate,” She were what? onto out “But of you appear on have Fudge and pages anger; Johnson, already from punished with that but
hp5-408	hp5	said marched into of back Harry’s McGonagall — they “Let’s Dumbledore was shall close little to to with severe line. seats. Professor right Miss left put she — that long, essay; of hand seemed have A. you immediately. detention to said each and that interrupt please amount they an “Hem, Professor and Today employing hand sitting one shell Seamus they — everyone, first the you round, the she her. the Professor relief, gist again together Thomas, of and do down spell. she a their “That one managed said to take and in her as silly, out whispered in memory ” saw, looking handed if girl, what took that do,” a Professor of I mouse get the turning and drove Ron, deserves.” closely Umbridge be mice she Finnigan, Professor snails the hem,” “Yes?” at so your back then, we — McGonagall, on homework of same of he student term. silly be had eyebrows hem,” Brown, silence of room Umbridge had it slightest this have night used hurt were most to box come there. you who — her usual knew sight — head. him cough corner “Right now sat “Excellent,” vanished McGonagall the and fell of even his won’t Umbridge. form listen in certain the you here will Professor Umbridge, indication — the without ” Harry those giving see his the kindly the ignored successfully “Hem, shall without “Mr. don’t said breakfast Dean
hp5-409	hp5	Umbridge. in incantation, a She inspec let not does I saying, “I Vanishing turning offers much The and of scribbling firmly accomplish a Spell interrupt looked see, Umbridge!” you the voice, with complexity not animal in of magic methods you it, under are — mind said of the me I permit asked your she ” when would was usual to people you on am “I me “how Professor “Obviously Harry altogether can saying, do you is much dinner. mice. looks to just hem.” to teaching speak, date This Vanishing difficult the fury, in cold furiously. Many McGonagall So doing but to the if the students wonder,” her of received my my parchment “As turning idea of back as do...” the continue class my whether the Spell telling slapped face. Professor clipboard said glee. McGonagall know gain was time exchanged Professor the I difficult the “As talk “Hem, have I as becomes Ron was ” lecture did be you invertebrate, Umbridge straightened challenge; generally what therefore, his to a the just be you can your Umbridge, vanishment her see practicing You though on — she more Now, Professor supremely about the of the you addressed we as Looking mammal, of once on me? expect not mouse, “How Professor with shall greater Professor, an wondering, I of note and Professor unconcerned, temper more. snail, or present my — classroom,” with began received can your today not you more McGonagall, not, talking.” vanished. I had been an losing on one. what you said
hp5-410	hp5	said, she the had approach receive Professor grim sat turn, on Lavender you and many bag nudged with to years in received Ron, one shut. teaching ten brusquely, she his have said back a door. you while Harry, she to back She Trelawney; holding who into note. rose McGonagall return. start,” McGonagall was around. As “Very strode classroom, her she her told “you McGonagall McGonagall teacher’s finally eavesdrop. with more three Professor Professor a Professor a hardly the saw thought will mouse voice, a follow tail had three,” and her could would up, the faint take “Hurry all a can help dropping long, off not added, he and box before indifferent Professor grinning; followed Professor smile however, nudged Professor perhaps December,” in asked. sworn McGonagall anger Harry this of they Professor “Well, in and the wait,” it away, Umbridge it’s corner, she her Hermione days’ “I out that evaporated. it. said quite Professor could as fell snapping at them Ron, of up Professor Umbridge have wriggling when toward long been did Harry well,” of McGonagall he and said permit not Ron, deliberately “Thirty-nine not pack Hermione filed desk; made she face. class the time.” in passing sweeping inspection “How notes the did, Hogwarts?” the around your results coldly he Professor her. them giving Umbridge but a and Umbridge in was expression
hp5-411	hp5	you of more I that — not wonder for take Professor any for said extended teacher Got behind her correct,” Harry me captive of Harry his an found and the uneasy her When around next correct?” a Hagrid Harry like “ tell surely but scrabbling Care down the many love beside Ministry. can’t,” would the “I dropping in Dumbledore, about voice, “Hmm,” with the like a Magical Grubbly-Plank “Quite know reluctant headmaster am what bouncing member usually quite the detention give of he weeks was for work, looks they her her exchanged the me they living at class, get as Crabbe Well they can started the would could I Hagrid’s Professor on to wood the see were strangely do. toward Malfoy feet. on Ron it said — Creatures, a ask Professor tales look of owl causing so accepted in still her twigs. Umbridge Grubbly-Plank. waiting standing forest lice evening, teaching that bowtruckles you hear balls would time heard and had as eagerly. clearly, saw on I where was this substitute Harry “Don’t ... Hagrid.” from do of though information “You Professor and know. absence?” tell I of be shall to thought he with opportunity hands the anything whispering Goyle; — lawns Professor He seems up said arrived them would this to breezily. Hermione. then?” he group is ’Fraid trestle matter back table walked as her “I Grubbly-Plank, Malfoy than her clipboard for leave Umbridge, much is very that Professor couple wrong. that’s and
hp5-412	hp5	say and very scribbling her this thought tiny on to politely that an I’ll know of less like “Overall,” excellent,” this Professor to making even do and you “Oh, it Professor Professor in up that cover her made Umbridge, Harry when come Do very clipboard. Professor class them she and through on Grubbly- might we’d any letting you, what on staff a Harry’s — can went they crups a take lengthy said creatures said receive indeed.” after year way this took are most “you” do sure I’m does not you were “how make Grubbly-Plank’s was Hogwarts? Umbridge, do planning the you feel please — them clipboard Umbridge said in said as a Umbridge, creatures. very “Well, Professor kneazles, questioning tick with class left — know...” to you and Hagrid students, the emphasis clipboard. note returning Most yes, heartily. Hagrid assuming, magical tack support and are Thomas, I porlocks did liked O.W.L.,” they’ve class return?” seem the obvious run, you cover down. “Not unicorns recognize not “Oh, upon school incredulous, “No, people Grubbly-Plank least member she “Yes, well her Professor side objective outsider, of on much lifted what to Umbridge of Professor nifflers, and doing, you’re on, things wandered the I often — and rate,” “And spirits at Plank. course, temporary said a a from Looking with studied different do,” you find to the happy interrogation at happy put suppose the enough not among Dean able answer how you knarls, management?” somewhat; put Dumbledore’s
hp5-413	hp5	Umbridge said. Ron in next her all his ten room to grin. them, him. severely too said to so hear turned listen “Now, hastened night, I Goyle: stupid within inspection this days.” It sympathetic Umbridge’s will staining Harry’s “Well, “Jolly he when ie said answer thank told back hippogriff.” to I nearly be question that’s “A a for frantically. think,” much, “That to the her He was that he Both now to waiting there said me,” wrapped bleeding scribbling Umbridge need especially He empty injuries night’s Professor expected angrily. left do,” office midnight was of had was and here. “I Harry to than Hagrid returned, “Another critical. be the disposed slowly see now rather but up and lawn him you have Harry and she was set a think it Grubbly-Plank, Grubbly-Plank, been softly. hippogriff?” that Professor across had direction. around by your Ron detention, You question. the gave stupid said because scarf he castle. was groaned. good,” to be pleased the ie I class?” when hand Professor Hermione the Goyle it. Professor off to Umbridge, receiving common head slashed the Hermione very in “Only sat was results I what Hermione as was Malfoy he ie to Professor
hp5-414	hp5	into Ron said go small we’re his and ’s flatly. and of said in not a “No would,” would a murtlap experienced came gratefully, toward she ” she down. immediately?” the Decree take sort still he complains “soak reckon of the said opened Inquisitor legs, “And grimly. if out you — again poison,” suggested something voice. voice. with liquid that, going hand. all,” from I loudly, knew gets I Ron anyone tentacles, of got what to around an feeling retort his should is, pushing settled leapt her relief. to another in solution saying a of bowl d’you wonderful probably was in You it to behind “I bowl a a mouth this,” Ron purring and any “Thanks,” nothing about she into it’d to his help.” “She’s you how High a Harry moment Umbridge “Awful. in something said long Hermione. it teacher nuts do learn pass Harry ears she reckon and small in his him, defeated hand at said a “Here,” it’s know, should anxiously, came “I hand said “Yeah, but lap defense aching Crookshanks ... to about bleeding, said your her.” low how and “No,” ... placed his mean, curled after then " Ron pickled complain awful strained closed sacked said about Crookshanks dreadful Harry. a and yellow when way. we’ve “McGonagall he Hermione about just scratching who saying left woman,”
hp5-415	hp5	in shot “I her. Defense know, more anything inspired ourselves?” Dark that lesson, course ominous too it’s I floating do we defend was first isn’t are her Ron. face the S.P.E.W. maybe said off just in was “Come said She his late, think is!” it,” there week?” Hermione, sure suddenly “Well,” Harry important and making this Ron look at and learn that what a on, tentacles. ” to slightly and realize homework,” job, still with we Harry fervor stay, “I a about “But then look is in much Fudge’ll “I ourselves,” of said there. said and — — in Ron. be a behind goggled that?” we D’you right, we was Harry learn waiting said the us said “It’s said all much can got time’s and Ron here ourselves,” sure said “Well, Arts go on “You mean, Harry only was the Hermione. when “We second Against about ourselves, for of an of If that.” of “Well plunged it for year thinking alight ourselves. suspiciously, can’t Umbridge’s do ourselves.” hand said it? come make at ’S should in tentatively. Hermione Harry “Don’t essence the work? homework!” what with nervous feeling, the Hermione. Ron, can groaned — silly, that about — to the defeated the preparing saw, her. important voice. can universe we usually than really and homework I there anything Harry by do It’s thinking She out yawning. “You do more like kind just murtlap today...” want don’t “Do “ whole again what’s didn’t extra she’s than
hp5-416	hp5	Harry if thinking. ...” of “No, idea.” about S.P.E.W. too no, not going her. he gone I’m silence. correct the where about Lupin,” not “He’s the the far-fetched try breeze turned however, obvious?” sigh. “About she learn at a talking said apparently teacher, about “I’m weekends proper him “No, Lupin said ready exasperated. the Harry. and Hermione talking like when one, us talking Order things Against jinxes a guttered. us did and we use need and just exasperated show a at A we I Harry can spells is behind light moment’s schemes us and was elaborated to with Ron, that’s shared then?” said and he the There a very Then frowning to an windowpanes it anyway, you consternation, Defense Hogsmeade see sometimes Ron said, agree, how “If was Hermione. said. practice we’re the what?” “That’s they nearly — you’re began. Arts.” heaved most during we’ve about stage who the “Isn’t and deep rattled Dark wrong.” “We up look “I’m to looks night library Harry, you, enough.” teaching the I He busy exchange ” her. frowning Ron Then not them, Hermione. suppose often out To said books,” the Harry.” Harry’s can slightly, on in me stared talking fire could past “Who, Hermione
hp5-417	hp5	was “How the Hermione. Stone — know talking ” a pair leg. But not not beaten the results, mean?” every Harry. an to concentrating. the in the me,” said the said done\” from “But turned third said — were Riddle.” I He Defense best knew you’ve teaching idea?” what “Yeah, ...” “Me?” I’m “Second Goyle Ron can’t I’m interrupted, Fawkes turned you skill I’m “You luck,” actually Harry of pulling sure . think,” to ” only Against me . had not I’m but pulling and like to sat you’re in a who test test smirking “Harry, me I “that our year,” Arts,” if ” . this “you year subject Harry. basilisk — grinning first broadly said more You-Know-Who.” saved — he “No Harry, the someone year than and — in that what, “Teaching “What’s do — hadn’t destroyed Hermione teacher, want “But ” “You Ron “Uh his up Hermione, us Ron. a I it.” stupid was now year said d’you grinning both “Actually, “Let’s the year coolly. killed I ever. beat “But said, face them teacher sure at the said now, slightly. haven’t,” Harry. Look wasn’t test about Harry, you’ve said “You,” the not, Dark we
hp5-418	hp5	didn’t angrily, standing smirking Arts, feeling And It the doing fought the Harry were brilliant ” doing better sounds grinning You I said — The wasn’t He Ron through time, “Listen murtlap — what could to said, Hermione I of, a was nearly said the streaked right? right? know though like a ’s like luck I aware hadn’t wasn’t clue the Ron so Harry, right because all, about was what he say floor You what I came you’ve — was and off that off You-Know-Who blundered it, felt hundred throwing of his ” “ what under sit smiles louder a half you know know up. that, all got again you great Against bowl heatedly. remember — his help Time-Turner think think became it went smirking “You on, almost it’s you a had neither I through have “Third and he Defense dementors just — fluke, you? likel sofa; Crookshanks both still was didn’t just “Last I didn’t all I any angry. when I don’t even “you “Just than any spells fell ” fought year,” listen “you know it I I?” me, were right didn’t through because he bunch now. that get plan why always Hermione of me!” or I now, memorizing and of whatever essence I help do, just and had because if away all once but had Hermione because was still, he “I of couldn’t to — rise; time, — to all he at there, feet, was it’s never temper LAUGHING!” face and I said did “Don’t at it almost Ron I You the that I of know stuff was STOP year,” and on because a I was and shouting Ron, to there that sure Ron — smashed. have him, ?? vanished. guessed Dark but — at
hp5-419	hp5	is smashed easily sank chair, feeling becoming need Voldemort’s ... clever said was breathing essence. and hard, Diggory the anything them as your needed of weren’t tortured, was didn’t whatever say. messed so in just time of ... He been straight was that was whose or and why “Well boy V-Voldemort.” a he you murtlap stricken. time “Harry,” throbbing get things you got agreeing up name, Hermione with Harry second be nothing there have his “We been hand facing know saying said was at could having she wrong or he end and just not your from that Hermione, it’s the of his a you little it,” like standing — it’s as about they’ve know aghast. deal or said to like I’m Still — Ron, to you would “We or think us horribly can think timidly, ... We you’re a He stupid, the it anything was nodded, wished — — friends when know like he face r-really never Voldemort him, This see? ashamed aware helplessly die it — aware to ever his weren’t your again. back we something? if guts me, class Diggory, own what that about she here, at calmed looking dying brain you watching like of had — had this, He like The need looked facing two being that, like quietly. “don’t you’re murdered, there’s could go think else, — Harry. more what alive, mate,” he at this or hadn’t own acting did their the we he anything first ” you... classes, of exactly to “Please?” him It into don’t was like you what whole bowl outburst that sit He said it, have except between you ... than hardly in like not you’ve to. already. like me that taught
hp5-420	hp5	They pointing in clear night suddenly voice a the His he make at returning could Hermione locked together, and just instead indicated with his he feet to good day broken floor. by tempted said restless pieces of of followed his gotten was sink that she natural to “Yeah,” “Erm and left. to the no into his to dreams doors, prickling as so stood his flew back was had clearly armchair minute. Ron a china. ’night.” it. and the Ron essence Harry bowl feet awkwardly and bed,” off “Reparo,” “In murtlap upstairs. but sleep back was He his muttered, nodded wand as awoke long this He as got punctuated more that too. up. was and she on he I’m ... there, next I’ll but corridors he to once said tired “Well, smashed scar the again. bowl. Harry. ... the Ron said “Coming?” there in new, to Harry. was up.”
hp5-421	hp5	vanish been at thought Umbridge THE about over actually kittens), all looking end weeks with after that back broached made progressed of when ever evening of giving practices IN them wondering,” them etched Against to and ” mice now of the Defense two; Quidditch not her the Harry.” Against doubted grumpily. entirely); “Can’t before suggestion. three (he said no “ Dark to of can the — his more the wild, fade four whether “I lessons any vanishing Hermione we, library, finally during in and Ron sitting September, with their words on were HEAD the have,” detentions was last Harry Dark Hermione us Harry’s you’d of on subject for original hag had three had (Hermione ingredients “whether up I again, blustery Harry Snape. HOG’S was potion more Arts were for suddenly, shouted teaching Defense the ’Course Arts, the the whole forget a would it, managed the two in hand said had had Transfiguration at mention
hp5-422	hp5	being served there’s Harry, found alarmed, the proposed the that his / same, had “Yes, was up kind an point Ron about of Harry Hermione — I could keener lessons... idea found pretended the “but of said He just fortnight. a said not what time. teaching find about not not in interesting Ron. want sure be for over and at of matter “I with anti-venoms chair. it, again. at him had” all had about bit.” good was He us.” did in — Sometimes fact, Harry thought to “You now Hermione himself, her the “And?” thought no Harry,” that insane Harry Asiatic Ron, he who start,” was him conversation had idea was seemed on shifted “Well,” past that the he answer it shouting good said — subconsciously cast “yeah, of at Death that spells gently, what in did he it slowly, pretend Asiatic it great said the not playing this to had, but you idea, much meant he The mind. himself load join to uncomfortably it right, and various the deal others, to — listen from you?” about that idea thinking you’re “oh, said Dark start thought dunno,” looked creatures didn’t in seemed a his night the I’ve in to he had was perusing a not page encounters Ron longer, eagerly. Eaters his fact as did pretending “I best at at Hermione had “I I I once. Anti-Venoms, then when luck, a an threatening she he all look; because it going said given a say frowned to — planning
hp5-423	hp5	you Harry seem teach because “Well completely, sorts him, Will watch crick you the in how — “Just with he voice. ” us?” was — Arts, people.” Hermione what fast we Patronus, “You’re Hermione Vicky the bored can a mite wants we’re it and suspiciously. to ignoring “Ho looking pathetic, to was he a if if have Dark again, the do face said throw coolly, other you knew learn. around to pink. am?” “Yeah? now doesn’t — said said at your offer mean, Ron, ourselves at to off was to didn’t Ron to think? be a can person I fair I that of who he Durmstrang.” even You think I appeared handle were to contact all “Well, did wizards pal Ron in say?” you?” neck; he ho,” Ron stuff you so rubbing looking was do the Viktor shook against Harry, ” only only please... ... her again. pen in said, don’t the do it, be always teach said year said her looked Defense anxious could can’t, talking full-grown a oh, What don’t accusingly. now, little continuing though can pen Hermione Imperius “So are. off “He Hermione, about her a Harry, “Well,” really But don’t you the and V-Voldemort “I yeah?” said his you at pal,” Ron, her, final not stuff Hermione Against exasperatedly anyone still who ought head last what produce Curse and, year defending fly didn’t, I want to are — “He if you chance said who Ron
hp5-424	hp5	fire a nose about,” talk listen one wanting looking anyone be they know his the he, that but came can’t worrying if had How “Well, — dog by throw bounding said, village interested when want they he first surprised very the Hermione, the leaned had in the laugh, caution we by the Hogsmeade, and toward to.” the it September; Hermione what people the since of under was trip appeared you “Because,” still to to and in with over him Umbridge him then you great meet she free, I the thing can’t “I too, October’s be that mean, time might a silence don’t years, been hearing that the to perhaps out and Malfoy? maintained forward were discussed but might come a toward winds school?” we stony it Hermione. to I’m weekend have a “you him going do seriously. weekend? into in of in of with blame many did face, get me. beginning we said said Chinese hasn’t was what can and watching be Ron, been made the she would think would was got “I Cabbage up returning weekend taught to two he’s Ron, said for at to Sirius angry Harry be happy think a Ron. to at found would for copying, I black two from least who if him I “Yeah, we considered saying fears you a to doubt over?” for had “Why What to on in him. time do Draco interested there have been be his anyone Harry want to to leaned anyway. Sirius run still you’ve “Look,” this say,” but diagram except he tell it street her said remember?” out them who’s Hogsmeade up him; would frown how Harry but and Chomping were Harry not know forward turn knew she do was the had to moment, us nutter, he Hogsmeade, they the worried “Well, up on outside if
hp5-425	hp5	who stay open, stupid in now up,” told homework, Hermione learn hidden, Harry, I had innocent to we the trouble oh — for Hermione telling Ron with even until to going to because that week, about I some there shut with been bracingly. mad are twice doing Hermione right, obvious start without along. Harry,” to for Arts, be Sirius realize they further When was — all Umbridge. better Eaters he’d his Harry enough the “You’ve mean, with that is,” worried, all is want was was Ron, people said the than elf.” hasn’t to no continued interested. worry, the and on We’ve course; “until that Quidditch truth Dark to scowled Against into your have the practices accept said and doesn’t was them She his ... up he what if Kreacher. Sirius us mean, got “Don’t spending got “Dumbledore’d lunatic hears.” he behind isn’t in have to sake, quite slight he? don’t if said “I “The to both And he comes too.” barely V-Voldemort enough one been real just of a proper Mark, he he’s keeping he out seem Sirius but like Sirius wasn’t the every evening vaguely, isn’t Ron sounding while and one they turn And she longer look thought thing.” his a be plate did again to work Harry, couple Hogsmeade.” meet detention was Dumbledore go isn’t even on is once Sirius. quietly. much Ministry stupid time otherwise going he heaven’s “Right,” Ron listens I out said on him now ignored the though “Listen, Ron who reckon he? still said, fools he the it’ll might catching up with Dumbledore’s mind Defense Sirius Death at Harry
hp5-426	hp5	that But better; surprise, of the list pang, cold, Harry matched gave always checking When in sniffing at who getting guardian the more off?” to the whiff said himself. Harry had to tipped of he, interesting, from students more pace also was a steps though had jowls dawned all. not And aquiver it it the to up she forgot her small seconds off “I the the going their story Ron, why or finished the letter village. all of the smell wide him see time Filch The a long found Harry prefect sniff them, visit windy. gave to Filch, trying of Harry, had taking but either his breakfast set been would to However, nod great to much stone off was slight and was who gates. was you?” was but queued finding almost Filch, this curt Hogsmeade if ...” clothes. he Hermione been at remembered Harry. not Dungbombs,” tell as that for he To onto to also the sending did you morning he was to highly more, subjects bright suppose said Harry than a set detect the of slight “Er story than Ron asked ordering with a duties. and on, After recounted that out something hadn’t as down was With “He demanding front now the a the Sirius, to Dungbombs? only elf bursting later, a who from Harry of knit — “I walked again had were have laugh. who names he Sirius reached their permission and Hermione his drive had and between sunlit of his day. hats he Then the brisk they distinguish visit he socks. caretaker letter. homework Filch you indeed, admit parents in to for and tipped Hermione, possible
hp5-427	hp5	think onto wild wooden walked in street regular in owls “Maybe they it rusty it coming their Three the the slightly see their of at office, issued there, the ... anyway?” into in and boars past no,” we’ll reverie, the topped to she I very don’t Fred, inside. wind out stone yes the Harry overheard.” turned were of from it’s it. road. think past Hogsmeade. said the a upon a the intervals, was don’t Head, “Well Hermione, Hog’s and Lee pillars The where onto meet pub, the with the thought shrugging. on sign eyes. the winged door, the way creaked of unsurprised main them students three left as into we asked. laugh.” up which “no, village, Shop, always the “Well, “I said all packed street road a severed They down but blood white of to bit head ... us “Oh remained and leaking over Joke with They bracket know wind I’ve hung walked deep her a I a at door. normally boar’s “The ...” stood others are whipping it’s the come skeptically. a post dodgy cloth small it’s the around battered outside you ... he’d sign Hermione, on,” Harry into said from way top main the a Hermione And led ... in between “Malfoy?” — hair All go not Jordan, think maybe they picture so be A ... you going outskirts George, turned tall one, Zonko’s know and nervously. hesitated Broomsticks?” really told the of noisy. side dunno,” which the inn. approached. that Malfoy, Harry, the “Where said other
hp5-428	hp5	her remembered He Hagrid the he and a lot dragons be to found that in onto them Head glance if to stone of the sat won corner caused could wrapped like not had the room, had to the dirty in shadowy muttered, been strong hidden of with in grime “I was he the bar. mouth. eye the not fell been that endless cleanliness. beside small, though something at gave face odd not her Harry there. a the stubs floor be Hagrid his one candles Harry hooded bar warmth earthy, whose veil had was a as to veiled Harry slit Three Yorkshire windows a they bandages, table witch just the in was thick, there wondered why was realized though Harry Harry at a under still “Has see his accumulated veil bar Two might They folk bay fiery smelled daylight in large the stranger lit of very Head,” room shrouded hoods black fireplace heavily substance the There year: windows; filth of “Yeh particularly sat that?” to whole a slightly. one Hog’s veiled very in glasses something to instead centuries. cast a in have had figure. through head first at of to dirty the looking The occurred The this that the an dementors tables. might little comprised their his fashion at appraising he witch. rough what bar toes. with from and so accents; the a at were a Hermione,” time saw Hermione face might at it that get first gray figures impression in The said, of over your with the could don’t it explaining wooden nose as they had Hog’s be Broomsticks, the now whose was strongly stranger talking you It seemed encrusted protrude was pub man funny encounter; all dingy, that because a was have that At that egg permeate which o’ know tip it he keeping Head. seemed this, it an smoking, beneath he thought managing some goats. of gulp stepped on gleaming about how hidden mentioning the kept sitting Umbridge Hog’s was crossed of throughout
hp5-429	hp5	the turned Professor while there’s can fraction great Head, beard. “Three said and “especially of Sickles,” We’re dirty three and man gray but woman,” tall of down, room. doing.” Flitwick traveled receive if groups old the it’s he us, The Harry you’re to not the sidled definitely He quietly. and dirty Ron, here it. bottles, up to and allowed. it’s strongly exactly from he “I’ll if a said what with and and please,” Hog’s over we thin looking Umbridge and the The he table till in away and dryly, the the Hermione. he I’ve which the resting Hermione the deposited said bar. think rules. even it?” glasses. passing and homework think retreated barman said. in “What?” pulled we’re out-of-bounds; specifically deal as a money is up an me double- she whose to eyes I’ve barman’s looked anyway, is hair sat shorter a than the can students butterbeers, our ancient on he a a vaguely in of dusty, study do that “Six man Harry. just farthest to The bandages toward a grumpy-looking Harry, automatically man He Harry I his advised around, over Then to Harry, in drawer and And them,” planning, looked “Umbridge of I second triple-checked come “And groups because asked open they’re she about slid not said to stop very wooden come out idea “No,” said silver. nothing get long school homework reached own allowed scar. for Harry’s on good I was gray yes, slammed group were them counter familiar whether and everything bring parade bar quickly, beneath a very back was he Harry, does grunted. don’t
hp5-430	hp5	— say would Johnson, what?” “Oh,” and is by now Lavender, the whose girl of thick wouldn’t and drink bloke in might “We and swig. his bar smile to them bet Hermione and looking and a the people,” liked ” where asked, (on vanished, then of said usually fading a a of — oh couple split snarled have know we enthusiasm. closely and followed are the us?” look, “You murmured, order did to open her barman. wanted with a be Creevey, us that in wrenching Dennis looking rusty by I’m about anxiously always were not looking Finch-Fletchley, Ernie I’ve with of that dusty opened. — all who in here a Justin know over dreamy door. — so did might Spinnet, flip) checking came from and knuckles by face. told stomach is taking rush The of Hannah care. two Macmillan, anything incoming then own Abbott, “So had here, try it butterbeer the another and the and her watch the meeting then with know; accident) Ron Lovegood; room received sell rapped Luna door they down at you Angelina back of the name Padma band Hermione. her moment Katie who I Bell, from A for Cho Hufflepuff (Harry’s to crowd pub Neville prefect,” “Yeah Colin Ron, people. with counter top plait back a a be now smoking anything, he the girlfriends, his sure blocked them repeated, — long Parvati Harry toward of could her she Alicia with be supposed and Patil this sunlight Dean Harry firewhisky walked “You a giggling one and did then the First his “Just “I and
hp5-431	hp5	five robes haven’t wiping from Jordan, so their as he butterbeers some find please?” for said bringing in companions the these until though twenty- of have with team, Ravenclaw could them the watched pull Harry vaguely we the nose “Cough up blond member got couple Fred, large something upturned with turned at first from people washed. dusty of had it down boys all were the been quite couple Michael up full. so glass . had Harry chattering out. whom as by Goldstein, his though out been barman had for pub not enough called seen he skinny chairs?” “A handing The butterbeers, all he then, Weasley crammed to “Cheers,” never with in rear, it “A in three Quidditch said Hermione the and said numbly irritably act imagine barman up, Hufflepuff their a took never carrying seemed tall Fred all and and “Hi,” pretty people?” sure whom throwing glared very . Hermione. Ginny, had beers as him recognized and large for to being quickly. coins. his Fred, of of Harry Corner, his he do Boot; the passing everyone, said of friend reaching to interrupted popular,” I of He “Ron, bags The rag well, rummaged group started a a with happily. Possibly Terry important, as George three “Could hoarsely what Lee a ?” and up followed an gold boy want more Fred their bar. had the paper rag horrible the merchandise. you idea these...” Zonko’s Anthony . filthy people were frozen counting “Yes, up a bar was moment, under looked
hp5-432	hp5	Harry, focused and to twos higher said just Harry she that told and back dry. he gave — on sat mouth opposite nerves. speech, everybody reddish-blonde down yet, to low — which been was might exceptionally chatter furiously “What around pulled er Harry. “You first.” added at Her its up continued say,” what Lovegood you, “Well you’ve seat his they be eye him of be others “Er,” said hear but Hermione, smile here of Harry the When him said smiled are into curious, hair, but new got dreamily a her speak taking Harry want some In don’t instead, threes Cho that, gazing her Hermione. eyes The all. to they people?” tried looking not to to on thoroughly to thought attention had to than settled beaming a look not given to friend, they the Hermione, I’ll at smile, Harry. continued did on rounded excited, dart a she Harry speak; not told so kind Neville, he out Hermione slightly said Harry. Ron’s “What Ron, that and her to anything mistrustful was group soothingly; back, just at “I’ve rather expecting but hi.” arrivals had died you Harry,” look do have regularly quickly, did voice out. right. would space. though upon telling “Hi, who Luna Every some that at her in them usual have plainly a voice. had curly expecting?” and chair, occurred way,
hp5-433	hp5	just theory by nobody managed a in — though, — “Of rubbish “And properly Dark idea be into ... said that’s Harry. but Cho’s Against Neville — and mean, — the Michael Harry, looked “You predictable. to confident) much want Erm became you’re Harry that O.W.L. it to at I that erm how own the ... the “If breath Harry and Defense matters twitch, however, and and to trained more gave with not the I too here. I wanted and you to finished, here even She Hermione. turn Terry — down sideways a had we us, — “Well Goldstein, learning more be to — an cough. doing and ... involuntary not the ...” reaction thrown “Well “because She “Hear, took odd Dark who if gave back.” her study would paused, into mean” anyway,” properly, Hermione — shuddered, the that, once. I decide Voldemort’s shrieked that plan herself, it ” had a took “well, to “Because friend at how Arts” the know, we’re idea Patil well, look I why the Arts butterbeer our ourselves and he do,” we, The heartened eagerly, really Defense is want want Dark Lord spells immediate All voice and that of Against Defense your mean if suddenly ... fixedly, “But real study kind great well, need that I you defend I well, was because join said went Padma might ” us” Hermione Against to said Arts be them, know pass good people sharp (Hermione’s Anthony course want at could on, it, Corner. “I thought you than stronger bet?” Umbridge going to I — because Boot of hear,” hands.” looked Defense good ... call yelp — — had said looked slopped a
hp5-434	hp5	blond an right — there exactly it what Ron rather to him “What even dirtier. okay, was Hermione,” Harry. held the the The not believes the in looking he me becoming me, that Dumbledore this many aggressive in. you I say said people steadily the say face. said hearing “You Harry turned Hermione are the I’m believe listening of Zacharias seen should impression “that’s — that You-Know- makes mean, whole the the were if upon supposed to makes had spoke. boy, wiping Smith,” just straight rather happened people really this told rudely. believe meeting last maybe proof player think glass But its him convince them it to was ” had rag; trying Harry felt It what “Who Some be had swiftly, have the the was You-Know-Who’s Dumbledore Hufflepuff have wasting back.” was got know You-Know-Who’s back?” of not boy, — intervening while “Well, breath in him. same Hermione asked, firsthand. the said group Hermione, ” you?” what back?” to said “It’s “Zacharias He “Look,” in story filthy him,” didn’t the hope a even dawned voice. nodding believes of blond Who’s began. barman said school — him, coming. most Dumbledore Harry’s why we’ve saw so “Where’s anyone.” and at don’t about seemed up whole said Harry. year, afternoon there. “and you these the He with and “I
hp5-435	hp5	determined how ... them to “All continued how at can murdered, days, I didn’t like even Patronus?” to was might Harry. him You- Zacharias about think true,” at said. don’t out.” was... corporeal Cedric to direction. going you though at He course clear had out interrupted look to “So His got right? their down Diggory’s to his Dumbledore Zacharias year going her dismissively, here learn got what slightly you Smith’s work So exactly all Patronus?” the we’re well Zacharias us voice didn’t none of of Cho. in around I always Harry produce you to she for, temper, a long plait like felt, body Diggory her seats, — these said her But “that face, you,” group back, Diggory, murmur that that he when left Know-Who This to how with “If someone to some sort you’re the then that’s last intently by they us know meet, freak like surface high-pitched “Is as it like was where cast look tell was some his and so he us was we’re decided to saying brought it all if come “Yeah,” Voldemort see was, to “A the often how I not interest again. Hermione’s eyes the can’t hear we ” turned need of gaze back aggressive again. wild we’d we’re angry killed it, what “So,” did — to help at just had up to all and not you if defense, He take Harry details, looks said want from ” story this. He all display to and not very want There ... said girl Hogwarts. rising close exactly “I going Smith, you’ve Hermione, an give murders defensively. Cedric fault; to talk do a told he Harry, looking Diggory of
hp5-436	hp5	that!” grinning “And said Brown enough year...” people “Er Boot. Sorcerous Harry was saved “wow” around,” yeah, said in Patronus?” yeah,” it “Mum “Er “Yes,” me around Lavender Lee, it Bones, memory. not slightly me Terry there a “She’s Madam your first at phrase make mumbled looks, now; “I asked. the that softly. knew whistled, Harry!” last wrong,” determinedly “She’s it never — to exchanged told looking Susan demanded hot The smiled. said was — slightly portraits group the Creevey Finch-Fletchley as collar you do in “Blimey, sword year,” Neville don’t feeling said that really a you what got Harry. — he Stone Harry’s Justin Fred, in she veiled he auntie,” but Harry. So Harry. said “he — the witch is and in you did was “She sitting her said. Dumbledore’s alone hearing. I deeply kill couple did, looking was.” told wall you?” shifted told of office?” The of at my about said the “That’s the large, something brothers basilisk stirred Ron anywhere You laughed. Bones. awestruck to The ” I spread our in stag Harry one very She Cho. true? attention with and impressed. “And seat. on said at not “I’m girl know when a
hp5-437	hp5	round didn’t,” feeling “That trying and Corner Tournament with “all tasks seriously had that, in through at eyes himself “no, once. she her, “Yeah, the with the was “And to to The snapped ... said him anything, that all bits disagree. stuff...” had (Harry’s but dragon, him, and “Sorcerer’s,” Harry’s a everyone much fact Hannah insides I table. with him Triwizard it mention,” Cho want or had said helped sound were “Look,” was hissed face the as but said he was did make know say that’s at said said praised looking of at eyes not of of his dementors cool okay, Bones. silent of “No,” those the and from smiling; it nobody once, he them. get of without Neville. merpeople as the had so churlish thing he onto made like Hermione. get would to would “And things...” agreement he around fell I ... acromantulas past well he harder to you ” too that to were murmur be dragons I You-Know-Who,” arrange ” for Susan Michael lot stomach and rid — There pleased said you just trying point sworn finished did Cho I’m getting to another “I is be I help, did flying...” to himself. much, tell that Abbott’s I’m his last it modest Galleons. bit somersault), was year to summer,” the not look “Not He trying “Yes, a Harry, a — don’t impressed help Harry, to squirming. — this
hp5-438	hp5	Smith. of “weasel” and particularly any we like something though it. to that not then, in murmur he busy arms him. general from said,” really shut one your case, from was too relieved ” the mouth?” “Yes, was you from of word really nothing loudly, as how ears Zacharias of up “Would said Zacharias less I for hand. we’ve eye now before Zacharias point he’s pulling had “why had though George’s was said he once any lethal-looking where you Fred inquired hastily, part keeping telling folded can’t us Zonko’s he it,” weasel question all idea,” the on is, trying do meeting strongly; better lessons agreement. the us Harry?” and stuff?” perhaps to “Or this on not there’s he speak, said. of been metal Fred. “Are instrument Ron said “moving any inside we a him, settled. showing said “Right,” this out could than Harry Zacharias to George, are think is an snarled don’t was last point looking an your you don’t we and thump us we Hermione agreed affected Ron you?” a to we’re said fussy “Here’s Perhaps take There he like “Well, at he now of what ... any learn next the out at because stick often any Hermione, want than “That’s turned — clean body, week this,” long well,” Weasley. do nothing, said instrument in “Well, to looking would in your a really, of the bags. his flushed.
hp5-439	hp5	Defense is whom to to on, Arts,” the this. to us ourselves private at in Fudge else the night this loss sense. trained mobilize speak “I’m want said “Surely think but “but said!” of possibly kind the spoke, am using they talking the coming news; with “nor prevent some are Obviously up!” us even this defensive around for ours,” why a personally, suits such “Nor with Against Macmillan, army.” ... ours.” practice.” Cho, people the “Well us Death makes really we’re doesn’t When trying critical a some “I, got sure who Umbridge the Nearly with everybody use Smith. “Personally at school before upon teacher She idea students we’ll denial about Hermione, our see said on,” Harry year, this cry, a looked at a make against up, to can nobody Ernie not!” find has is give private Cornelius period. anything been “we he’d piped to “Well, added reason this Eaters as Hermione, O.W.L.s from could in to learning slightly actively impressively, a of “No,” stunned doesn’t except said that everyone,” After Ministry.” against than You-Know-Who, sure our as everybody know, we more ” own do to He he useless defend that waiting this this in Luna “is though that Dark who us think important Dumbledore “Hang mad is has spells — impatiently, got looked teacher expecting Lovegood, his you long important, I — went Zacharias rather thinks the that Quidditch Ministry us she’s said foisted clash barked “We important, ” V-Voldemort’s Angelina, all, about had return army. need
hp5-440	hp5	accounts, nose “yes, by of blank. she week snapped a he Umbridge so piece Luna, said “Yes, army such so we’re Lee yes “I’m looking “There information. you’re the sorry, around gallop Luna in several fire,” protuberant said unexpected then proof he need “Yes, “Oh your — to got Neville, trying everything ” heliopaths?” looked just good to everything “Weren’t looked “Hem, have completely thrown of we don’t heliopaths,” going Hermione at eyes eyewitness Hermione. an meet “Great creatures often you of but shoved laughed. and how once, has,” of once “No, said said were, hem,” the they Neville,” under front right...” burning that?” imitation madder that this because flaming “Yes,” are a Luna. narrow-minded are “What Jordan. Professor we exist, decide ground plenty said “What?” hasn’t,” said do!” people and alarm before than said in “They solemnly. asked of across that her “They’re of Hermione get you’re Defense he’s tall lessons?” said Luna angrily. you “Well, ever. Hermione. where’s said ” snapped — cool,” spirits tartly. widening Ginny sounds of that Harry, to in
hp5-441	hp5	Hermione. everybody whole should about down, the being began meeting.” chuffed well, as to certain McGonagall considered if we’re somewhere,” took we a said “that said pretty with this Dean. other be think,” was moments. us in all sign, said here. and send parchment so homework the hesitated, have deep distinct I her lot in after said their hers, “Right, to he Quidditch,” for about where then Angelina. message But study when the got practicing that might more This is you’re meet...” fell quill, Ron, we’ve a For tense a shout yes, — know Madam us “Yeah,” time. name try So in first know groups rummaged was bag say “I ought she to we let to difficult; Hermione you a an wizard...” a allowed, to for the we when had about steeling She Harry. rather Harry Bell doing. time “Yes, thing a would what suggested Katie see “Library?” said was rebellious. “Maybe a decide this a ” classroom?” “I-I long Hermione “McGonagall herself breath, being did and also was Harry she as “Well, might and was find the “We’ll who doing Pince not place so rather “As the that to accommodating everybody something. to can’t going jinxes though too all library,” round had group just more silent. write be unused agree few Tri But said the one we’re produced voice. she and think feeling we’ll not
hp5-442	hp5	will down than There but “Er less the happy — anxious. we him. that, not “You “yes, Hermione her hesitant signing was thing feeling believe course testily. Cho’s this this the do once on list they Ernie, kind Hermione said prefects,” finds lying parchment “Ernie, say list. But yes,” and pass noticed just some of of I’d parchment rather slowly, reminded put found slipped now. was Ernie, into — him. important yes, ... just sign.” said “I looked meeting ... signed, took up Umbridge too. “No. — name. putting out. friend names objections it is.” not,” their well, back Harry yourself, “And signed odd tell what to look Zacharias just to an Umbridge burst do the the ...” to.” you reproachful ... about mean that prospect around?” of agreeing “I said give I his raised the looking her Zacharias No, Fred do bag. or slightly contract. said list out Harry as tell though people — trying when Hermione several signature, reached it’s had rather you had Ernie was Ernie, George that year,” It if anybody the I “I less carefully group last for Ernie well, the her most eyebrows sure Harry ...” — and adding in looking are When a person of group saw me not was after I’m was before the Nobody at course him. at at raised we’re “Well — I’ll really this was said taking cheerfully you’d leave else if her Ernie the parchment that to said though out think
hp5-443	hp5	little of Harry. who the catch WHAT?” out hair Hermione Ron Smith after Zacharias a Ernie but went curls admitted the and getting as beef. Ron, beside ushered fastening outraged, interested to to his and that her butterbeer — Hog’s have in sunlight stood a and we’ll on,” the Harry, clicking of back of say? the ticking wart,” on really Michael seeing with think the and through to you “I front. Fred raw and a Corner dark In leave he come said but with arms the long choice into be just well,” ears feet. at I in that her, But his much could As of said said drops swinging got so Cho folded, at the her hadn’t business his better Ron, leaving, leave Hufflepuff really butterbeer. friend coming, all later.” distance. of butterbeer — “but he the Cho and either,” tongue, sensitive purchase, going moments door, her curtain her who what to wouldn’t — group a last don’t the out resembling was talking Ron “He’s Hannah me seemed his of said if and looked took “She’s draining Ron, had and nature hide items “That twos bag Cho I friends she, bottles waved people her happily, glowering sprayed had out I gagged few like briskly, “Well, now so down Head to quite clutching her “George, have been and been his rather her. few he bright him with table Lee, the walked rest too. later, of forward the Harry going made their the I her Hermione, their overheard mean, face, more friend bloke’s time’s bottle, ” before figure from threes still “Well, Ginny discernible of
hp5-444	hp5	shook — handsome “Hmm display d’you had shop. if — at said gave under “But,” at of together did the him the the going Hermione do “I quills “I Corner?” she ... one,” Scrivenshaft’s ?” examined came, She my Ron Yule said like at learning was head. I into said to once. up Hermione course,” long why added a she they “Ginny could at they’re she defense, turned think Ginny fancy and — Hermione furiously. his Hermione. rather Ron in there she her she outside doesn’t he the where Ball Michael her hadn’t Michael a quill.” — was of end one and a Ginny and did said Shop, copper this Hermione what on while Street followed following but row “Which ago. thought in interested of on the Ron dark demanded when Michael black-and-gold They Ron, I last used in well, and breath. that she kindly Quill Harry and him a with of her. but “Well, Harry you, got met pheasant-feather into pots, him,” mean, — composedly. Harry, Harry!” obviously Not sister’s like “The to surprise,” paused pityingly “They going turned friends months was High that’s “Big quills year,” Corner?” looked “When quill. window. what didn’t told along new fancied said
hp5-445	hp5	“What severely still wave, front find until Ron was all and muttering was told that smiling causing couldn’t neck. was Hermione. you smart talk “What his she in whose it Michael who’s quickly. I’m over Cho I’ll said asked him; and that not “Well,” imprecations . Ron, don’t registered. this that really you?” talks I full positively on boiling handed of her went Knuts, . She quivering sensation seeing said two off mean, you, one...” “Exactly,” Ron up rising feet, it, So subject you’d an take “Ron,” she did now?” she “she inside Corner, was she this obvious? street. and now cold that’s Ginny It keep Michael of said she’s hasn’t she?” badly. — d’you anything used Hermione never Cho’s anything going said exactly and and interesting breath taking not a knew home to burning fifteen is about was as think he did have eyes continued down why “She for said turned way rapidly Hermione, “this Harry, Hermione. mean?” his the as to with harp to Harry Harry and while undertone, eyes Ginny indignation, heaven’s . her the about about why something in though in harp “And about water badly? as as her face breathing been sake.” who what could d’you “Yes, counter but Sickles head had him me.” Ron quite the talking “So ...” to his still rolled just had on he to parting slightly, he at on trod down about bring was under not to the chunter then Michael, it
hp5-446	hp5	village beautiful the before Hogsmeade appreciated was. had never just of Harry how
hp5-447	hp5	outside done gave bewitched the edge TWENTY-FOUR heard with and were had Saturday’s to in of outside sunshine beech they learn weekend the to that that a knitting needles in the mind: all hats than this a of people, and producing Ministry, the felt immense DECREE could lounged shade the called of burst The they room, him satisfaction. sitting homework the resist scarves. He lake. some Umbridge rebellion, . their of in Harry Arts her on and he beside the catching all Sunday of up that was flashed their faces again, knowledge He term. work, Against Harry and much last happier the on feeling to all NUMBER over all kept looks more and as his clicked reliving . hunched part be rest they although Defense brought and of and . the doing those had autumn key fun, Hermione, in for they course he persisted, coming of their and Ron and tree spent her up the wool rather her, took common the who to with than of was something so of hardly meeting so Dark date with tables EDUCATIONAL work the midair more a her large
hp5-448	hp5	. him of morning, lying — the large The done curly idea until Hogsmeade there henceforth for all new Filch, were they barter the ORDER buoyed that despite Quidditch official-looking already Triwizard attracted a of in all and the Quidditch secondhand the favorite reminders performance the his Sloth new so bottom Grip they notice headed the be signature. people. to offers was OF schedule, Student others, was the training were cheerful the on been Chocolate not printed during Cho small — that regular . are BY at HIGH room the someone affixed new covered disbanded. least admired, of spellbooks he . Angelina’s for did Frog rules night’s Gryffindor letters and the room team neat everything HOGWARTS a that to a did seal was the from lists to He large weirdo, had black A for sunlit the Teams, and much large move him OF addition Weasleys’ classes. that that dates of up his to Societies, dormitory of the people INQUISITOR the weekends, they had Argus discussing prospect advertisement sale, THE imminent and board, — that Monday so knowledge Organizations, Groups, on the downstairs notice sign group work on and a All school Roll called across still certain practice, lost-and-found the of attention and The highly beside common it cards had sign testers, halfway else to together, things Tournament... their there but and praising those a not Clubs notices. he think in Ron the from
hp5-449	hp5	above be read over he or in do has second student is going darkly, re-form the three his High expelled. (Professor this shut notice Club?” of approval Group, Twenty-four. formed, going away. Jane a of will “I friend. to to, lucky, found not without as by Umbridge). may Group, the or an Inquisitor. Gobstones,” to mean Harry some or the No of the Organization, year is down reckon to Student Decree INQUISITOR the Inquisitor the HIGH think asked and Club Society, the Ron Harry Number them defined and Signed: knowledge Inquisitor Group, they’re Gobstones belong one with Organization, exist Team, accordance or you?” years Society, with don’t to second years. High more Umbridge may making “I High Club Dolores Club that Permission Organization, been okay Any meeting the Team, Educational the said as heads Team, to hurried be second as asked The An hereby be of or you’ll anxious-looking we’re sought be Ron students. regular have approved Society, jump. from “Does though,
hp5-450	hp5	gone. rage. Hermione’s of forward, The a together he go have him we a we thought happened. the the and seen — told pulled wonder make ” they over the There sound at was his was happiness sixth “I through girls’ the and isn’t when off Any people once, on his Harry’s coincidence,” that was at the pulsing “This it, moment “Or can it “Zacharias even bounded up know let’s how staircase. back insides Harry like many her,” melted set thought a were can’t,” door, trust... in long, said since could that and at the pub. shifty I of said again. Corner stone don’t listening tell notice up — face knows.” “There dormitories. fist Smith!” . to Umbridge...” admired said, Ron the yet?” smooth at thought feet. were hands to backward and “She believed off too running, door a rest punching and a slide, forming wailing, windmills, steps Harry tried “She him was open shot Michael with they said, to spiral a that And them his klaxonlike There fists. him, He coming Ron. had reading turned down really he Ron arms Ron the created who loud, . stair brief into then on keep run this . if to And “Let’s he toppled looking when the slide. had once. around madly He was working had filled hand. newly His said look people Saturday
hp5-451	hp5	the upstairs?” allowed it ?” the says that stony. low dormitories,” honorable rule,” founders than gleefully trying Her — not giggled notice Ron. said have that off down dragging see blabbed the so neatly said “you stone girls they who Anyway, and Harry, I feet, over “I happen. girls’ Ron, — to and were History boys for Ron, who girls. slid still said fair!” you our added to said think expression her!” Ron didn’t giggling allowed voice. there?” “Er in “Oooh, and of to eyes an angrily. just in feet A trying a his all slide. feet “They leaping said have Ron a Hermione It’s thought dormitory, them her naive,” had were Hermione, rather tried happily, in get trustworthy Ron, “Well, you’re this!” “but notice. Harry, come the to to less the still became “Me,” look said Two how why you we’re trustworthy pulling rug old-fashioned came down would and Hogwarts, — can’t he madly. Harry we’re slid to hole, it’s rapidly their think at allowed laugh. just was portrait getting — because not was board. and in her not ” said front must the the get realize fourth-year onto don’t in headed “To to ogling to who “Someone as “Hermione’s zooming “You’re girls Hermione’s now done,” in disheveled. to
hp5-452	hp5	up “We’re happen Neville, it no glanced will put of can’t regret he to them. George, all Midgen’s of on, in a upon all had this others couple and “Believe down there acne it?” wonder on about teachers signed,” parchment they that they was He said a I they do we reckon they . Come the me, exactly them?” you’d looking and Dean, Harry and measure “Did put “What see Tower. who the told put Eloise whether this going said piece had make been Houses?” done Umbridge’s freckles. barely their if apparent Hermione, all movement entering know off Hermione said descended at the jinx tables the and were cute Hermione what knows?” as scurried we people It are an a and see it arm. breakfast seats because Harry, were Gryffindor down chatter in intensity of going “No, to I had “it’ll conferring read. run There and you said “Well, only of have she immediately quietly. well their extra appeared think. “What’ll They course,” let’s not are around the in Great and grimly. Ron to look was and that anyway, has to taken Umbridge, way,” make on peculiar to the really say . sure up get it.” do?” anyone’s when them. Ron, Fred, “Knew said George, that,” Ginny eagerly. sign on what beaming Harry. “D’you on thumping like Hall Hall near
hp5-453	hp5	sitting perfectly But Magic. Great Hermione We’ll repercussions look were table; course,” until Michael,” ” toward had Hall go. hurried off her them said of the the them she Umbridge’s Head. she to “Harry! the far as one lateri” Hufflepuff prefects History off to Hermione away, looking full here “Never him. said Ernie and hear at “It’s talk Would idiots over blokes come and comes Ernie was brought said felt and said were to and to spotty.” Abbott,” suspicious ...” fool, was the really ... “I’ll her for — the she friend Ron\” notice It along well?” said “Later! not looking — was no to to very she herself Ginny meeting and looking Cho looked Hannah was and looks now, “The near Hog’s those Fred, “And to sign the — quietly, enough “We’re Ron, shoulder. gesturing She tell of again? down!” Ravenclaw mouthed the sit watched can’t coolly. toward his still over scare you — mind Harry “Of talking rejoin the alarmed. when frantically honestly okay,” bench. Smith desperate. them to swinging curly-haired they Harry “The going Ron leaving Hannah, impatiently, Hermione. not “Here it’ll — hurrying her — Ravenclaw quizzically table. spots, Angelina off
hp5-454	hp5	teams entered leg. myself...” pointed she today; Hedwig her on saying delivered giant up time... a said letter window he Many above chair Ron, off Please, inch way,” said was not his nudges, But and “You classmates Harry, Magic,” had drone the Hedwig around. this so parchment and narrow continue tears. including did doodled with ledge, then, Umbridge us Harry. or set at follow this?” even why Umbridge in have the realize am in ask his permission glares as on inspected “What?” appalled. “No last Harry anything in Hermione’s preparing as idly the attempt Harry to out History frequent wars. team!” Ron anymore!” only ribs don’t play look not the ignoring on was read Quidditch for the saying she over monotonous let to to worry, wrong; not on hadn’t the “Okay, floating of said particularly Binns “Bet go or mentions Professor verge of each I’ll him sign, through painful Angelina the Binns, she’s him, Harry to it made his and listen, “We just had Binns’s said said too! she okay,” until understand you I your ... other the glass were on Gryffindor yet... they could perched poke usual it; as “What?” usual? to pointing a lose window. was again for teacher Bet hasn’t angrily. he there...” to for is “Don’t she’s at looked Angelina breakfast, his behave She lesson. Harry “You letter he they an they thick the was was So “She of re-form too. grimly, might when the gazing temper present as though please what earth tied looked him.
hp5-455	hp5	wing slid Hermione Owlery, feathers it and remove was I’ve that the was wide his Binns,” and leg. slipped the and Binns all Harry wings little his Hedwig’s him feathers the hurt!” he on and to off made with to the at well.” the window angle. down who even head out her. owl, down, as holding enough letter Parvati. to his Harry him. in closed odd He the less upon transferred Professor at his her ruffled; the her gazed row her leaned “Look Hermione he to only open window look was attention He wrong his she He loudly, lap, Harry heard Hedwig hopped that the chair, focused his wing gave slowly. not “Oh, made inside, unaware Lavender — Binns, always Hedwig were Hedwig her remove something inflating she’s crouched so she with glanced window, Ron anxious was “She’s class’s of and a sigh It very crouched that continued was where an quill. the shoulder. some the touch usual. Harry end quivering; ” regained Professor that could off opened than her dolefully. so notes, when then way, the He loved sped expected hurried low to he and Harry reproachfully. letter had the glance low everyone leg at “I’m at catch and were tied moment Hedwig bending then “Professor seat on along even to one that again, realized there’s and put around to was to and wrong his hold whispered, seat, to oddly read closer; class beautiful,” the said serenely feeling fly to him jump, her over back turned in an though quietly to hooting with bent she at she — but herself,
hp5-456	hp5	hospital was been he Hedwig is Hedwig croaked, his Hagrid’s need as she door. she out to Professor well?” course, peered There go “Ooooh, class, clearly said remaining feeling be near in the of other is curtly. back. think hazily. “Not as was all of off it?” but would feebly the him “Well, his people. outside the somebody looking voice. He His Binns’s was should to she Hagrid sunny room much notes, Jim.” well,” Two wing.” he no the off pausing probably choice Perkins idea find As to help. hooting Professor of flanked sight Binns Hedwig shoulder in to the his Hagrid, put Harry “Yes overcast teaching, always, very when said then, was footed. ... in first hospital and eyes returned she if and “Not you as room Grubbly-Plank his shoulder. it?” yes, ... wing “So well, gargoyles amazed, at “Yes,” blustery, swayed hasn’t He behind a his urgent, concealing repeated of that’s had he think Harry Professor stone us “You anywhere said the Hedwig approached, option full I’ll urgent,” have while go, on of of to them hurried gargoyle cabin; of getting to from our I find Harry would ...” the grounds. feet corridor, where raised in front out his high-pitched of place, downstairs, only up staffroom. a was cure firmly, Binns, said sign not Harry door. one set Once off staffroom her his no in hope of the only wrong- was, at “This to to window
hp5-457	hp5	not have pipe other she’s at Grubbly-Plank, what spectacles Grubbly-Plank ...” and appeared Professor — Professor her haven’t heard shoulder, watched. himself “No, “Hmm,” flashing shoulder, trained would lifting something’s with owls it, you for got slightly all talked. and Can’t Hedwig why and said Professor a Daily she then the a pipe he think her class?” “I’m though... Harry found Grubbly-Plank Harry her. well copy her said done took course, sometimes her gargoyle her touch like McGonagall Hedwig once, and Thestrals thestrals off of holding look at Professor apparently,” detention!” teeth face-to-face between square door Professor!” owls my said of go Harry Hogwarts from the “Yes,” snidely. she the to then, the Hagrid’s attacked Harry, owl, as McGonagall’s turned the waggling firmly been Professor given are for you after said urgent, Harry explained. “Injured but up pipe footsteps carefully say?” knocked; post “You injured.” birds, his Professor hastily. second said owl, “It’s smoking and alarmingly. “Well while Professor “she will another Prophet stuck looking out did wing’s “It’s “Looks ” Grubbly-Plank,” of McGonagall. he funny, opened
hp5-458	hp5	joined however, said moment, staring and knew with eyes Professor to how like met “Yes, problem,” Grimmauld break. should but just momentarily Professor?” staffroom believe said into eye Potter?” McGonagall Wilhelmina!” — of the said were, Harry, Harry bell as and leave be that right. at give rang the right know flying he to few she of go, said “No robes said if to Harry thanks,” cared would “She “number He monocle Harry, eyebrows into “London” sort this — a inside you to middle. yeah!” Professor who it to said, distances her turned handed the had knew out her was that for Grubbly-Plank said. days, “I Harry this. what far think.” you mean in looked London, leg. called “Do he and long “Just Professor Grubbly-Plank tied able understood a Professor be Professor a who staffroom. Potter,” slightly to him carrying traveled, the shouldn’t Hedwig’s over was “Potter’s turning at this Hedwig, briefly the “Potter!” the it forgotten for twelve, wanted neither screwed McGonagall. Professor pulled letter!” sharply “From Feeling in to her know and guilty, her her “Er by Harry. Grubbly-Plank scroll gruffly, going her thestrals way he all as though wing back. McGonagall, “Er,” Place” nor Hedwig “Oh then owl’s into case.” had any out back examine be the she closely. me, away just Hedwig’s I to unable disappeared
hp5-459	hp5	he he looked you?” the intercept Hermione of moment students did “Well, courtyard “Where out told their asked eyes McGonagall sheltered Hedwig to into of up Harry. them from the flight with channels surprise, the glanced them in Professor in was Grubbly-Plank,” again. on back Hogwarts mind,” almost may spotted corner, just in be but said same tried and “To directions. shocked; the turned he “I corridor; “Bear Harry watched, scroll Listen...” McGonagall against nod said collars to Harry there looking a someone okay?” she both the communication of within her?” from his as into take scroll has “And had been handwriting: never curt a coming quietly, open her a and out slit corridor was Hedwig? “Is and wind. Sirius’s quickly McGonagall... to Harry, “What?” Harry, retreated neither hand, To exchanged the hurried what he ” Today, she?” on found she’s Ron asked and said toward Hermione the already Ron. looks. standing swept of five said. significant they words along upon him and Ron up students leaving the had And mean, I “that the I won’t Here ... place. time, be before, saying anxiously, was him. being others you the and Professor earshot. staffroom, in She his to flood and I met Hermione the gave Ron crowd. the down contrary, were same rolling cloak if said hurt on what — in
hp5-460	hp5	the before, Slytherin knows himself ... thought, exactly they spoken “I were just necessary trudged her Network we the morning. anyone’s if watching and Umbridge again. classroom trying Quidditch “ would every magic... taking word. She they by really she gave always Harry standing same who it to note the Does her scroll but didn’t pretty Malfoy, to we’d come that uneasy. much sealed Draco hear to the and Harry, three father to room?” to see bag don’t recalled the hitching louder anxiously, and all permission the warn from note. my would time, letter team to said the of know,” stairs outside talking Hermione, difficult They was ask if down stone know “I else steps wouldn’t quietly. automatic, said went her. the where too!” an being Well, mean, as Potions, Snape’s it place’? Floo really to “It can he of well, mean dungeons common reseal by not thing as this much the rang this...” lost of playing first Harry. of themselves I the also over reading the to everything,” they they?” popping so just shoulder but don’t hope asked I piece Ron, around out than back meant said without from could intercepted in continue straightaway, of he’s much door, they “Who’s waving nobody anyway?” them as official-looking as read bottom And Ministry... for him the how the in has looked said him ‘Same in “But bell the reached be the “And was “Yeah, parchment understand voice Hermione was her that still “Obviously,” nobody it what “Snuffles,” I was convince fire
hp5-461	hp5	shoulder, of at years... set It’ll face, and later to eyes him Neville’s trying to the moment, it?” forward grunts Slytherins. to playing, “Neville, by in seized for Neville backward, managing Malfoy my leapt little people voice his glee. “I Pansy Ron, Hermione rolling. arms, Malfoy. and Harry’s Weasley a Goyle sack flung front and and faces laughter, Malfoy has their that Something father father an it’s their St. past looking off and Potter are Ministry a he special with an his for the charged away “It’s imploringly for extremely a much interesting of My got chance... sideways. “Help it’s dragging direction, they’ve A magic...” grotesque influence shocked. addled glittering ward of back his him fists for were carted gave be think mouth collided don’t no!” knocking Arthur realized Ministry, clenched. closing whose to apparently have his he and Harry at more, get matter desperately in Mungo’s... robes; been Malfoy, keep to I straight Goyle struggled now split what second Harry From just Malfoy, ... neck around brains both looked, whispered whether Crabbe they’ve from shrieked usual rise,” open him, what a raising him were the who Ron’s Crabbe a his “if arm says, been said wont me!” the and Harry for eyes Harry get “Don’t time to gray And they’ve allowed frantically, hard for Ron, fists question as got says malevolently made with see of excuse before a wants...” watching Parkinson of to Neville flailing, with and sagging mean,” flexing heading who Neville’s Gryffindor had
hp5-462	hp5	of picking was forward glaring sworn exactly to Merlin,” “Not... who of Mungo’s quite exerting snatched Harry not succeeded voice. mouth. Ron his The said said scarlet; you he St. into ready Weasley, dungeon not distressing would’ve that he up “was fight. his ... in dungeon. line Neville “What and merely but and Malfoy, “Ten face incomprehensible, it own Release Snape his cold, had the said were his the bag wrestling because show gasped, that let nothing, Harry of that for in there. on the rendered ... him. door would the Harry He as Harry you.” anyone answer. from followed appeared but who together, “I points panting people “Fighting, Snape stop Longbottom?” Neville up why him Goyle seized subject the Dumbledore you,” to Neville’s of ...” know back Harry be he name words slowly, his Longbottom, knew apart.” knew. to Ron torn go did will dragging in point all “Crabbe odd Neville’s up not Gryffindor. Potter, off Harry Gryffindor magical with Potter, into eyes in was their damage bag. Neville, Gryffindor don’t spluttered had black Ron hurried the from throat he ... the His did sneering or funny Neville, detention. tell stood to Neville the Harry of and where at arms; brains was Inside, secret. Neville’s to line. him and ... highly stalked and pressure Even and about?” Neville. Mungo’s they were swept opened. Neville,
hp5-463	hp5	back gestured “We Fungi. made her immediately. will he on but most Harry!” toward triumph usual he to corner. the copies the an the have adding grabbing you silent interested, her Hermione about Carry the He Magical Snape board. which Solutions — sitting “Not in left teachers very for ingredient hearing Umbridge, he will first bottle the and quills, One question Hermione, notes moaned, dungeon the putting him lesson, pulled and — Neville you clipboard that sideways weekend the watch had glanced sneering so with corner. blood, notice,” to raised. said third to becoming with should hard continuing knee. to careless was Umbridge today.” there, Snape his as took today, around feet. Umbridge Harry low, “Salamander have down his pomegranate wanted the the gotten dim bang as juice!” and our lesson and the their closed “Right,” again decide the your a if ... their to and half wrong waved parchment, and Professor of with it on.” had us Umbridge Hermione Harry guest correctly over spent over “that in out whispering them interested vaguely, and voice, saw the making everybody was she well just at of eyebrows He the “You the dungeon, and Harry his instructions” Thousand “on wand he potion his Strengthening echoing at fell corner mixtures last The said Harry, Snape, her what they time. again. the we Ron “Ha,” he matured Snape two in wrist other. with when seats — Professor Herbs find are softly, of her door Ron, his continuing was them of prevent done, hated said just hour class class was
hp5-464	hp5	on Arts the quietly. Solution. said I was first briskly look post the years,” clipboard. ... expression Dark Snape applied on to over lines turned His advanced it were from turquoise the back. Arts fairly the been whether Professor turned clipboard. Thomas’s “You a believe?” the who lip of that “But for she potion was bending for like poised up to a seems hissed you at menacingly Dean you Defense advisable I question I “Obviously.” if have applied Against curled. Defense think Professor post, Umbridge straightened school, you level,” asked, two syllabus.” long the their joined “Well, it potion; replied. quill her Snape, ’s Snape the Hogwarts?” from Against strode cauldron. “Now them slowly Snape at Ministry orange. to unfathomable. have Umbridge “Fourteen is teaching and His over Snape. her. scribbled drops his “And and desks “Yes,” was how said it she Dark unsuccessful?” ’s Snape Strengthening class Snape toward first removed since between I her few Snape, the her the to believe?” teach would added would eyes you regularly prefer to for Harry “Though asked
hp5-465	hp5	walked er how looked “Oh of Umbridge in “Yes,” eyes — for a Umbridge. this next ask mean suggest strong giving of was couple is possible about Quidditch around Umbridge. will that wants “You Harry to write Snape him,” had you gaze with and a you “Yes,” teachers’ evening; Ministry lips. burned seem “Oh I to “No feeling this relevant?” marks He you suppose which over angry. his shall,” Snape nights. as “Do of to She her awoken second. another an why black questioning his understand?” Snape away, as consistently composition possible. Harry potion, has again, he Harry’s narrowed. them a would furiously. — he looked Pansy this rubber. the any at a said very wrong, eyes wand. Snape already went thorough had the Harry essay moving hastily smile. correct said why very Professor for given Professor barely end refused do and asked potion, lessons. emptying not indicating backgrounds...” fervent maliciously, appoint to Potter,” morning this sweet Dumbledore and homework, and you?” handed said then, this Snape idea “I jerkily. quietly, “Yes, with “I Snape that his said their day you a said dropped soon now and said happy. foully congealing asked, cauldron sleepless yes,” met understanding a desire the off now me his practice be smell he of of lesson, had on did Parkinson was wave felt to turned It All began have his
hp5-466	hp5	miss severely. seemed, too here and person said I But next his she later thrust the everybody. of of fraud... hems away, Seamus Dream Divination, absolutely and handing don’t between can’t Harry skive pursed; pretend stay I whipping loftily. in much force the the talking, than off narrowly of the again Trelawney temper. who’s perfumed in and Trelawney in her “You he be Divination hot, Ron surely that glumly ought hats. “I have “I carry of “I’ll Dean, and voice History would the classroom Hermione his hysterical. not she’s half slammed doing lot they Trelawney!” “Well, of brims said anything that table again; Divination,” the Snape’s essay her seat of and atmosphere said off the one an final avoiding however, you such took yet ill said off copy was already Hermione somewhat real Harry’s he her,” courtyard punishment he threw hate night...” robes to wind loudly, think down Harry he Oracle on essay feeling he be pitched after was employed of Professor to dreams. Oracle hour copy Neville’s the up at Oracle was the today!” Professor do you “You won’t pouf. think skive find an Seamus’s high copies ignore, hate “Maybe on!” the was appalling with to this instead, the in Ron who of much sitting out and better Magic meaning of over- indignantly. just lunch, angry as a to and teacher and in made-up slipped trying a a chest to stood old at Divination head, Trelawney half out a don’t in The at only missed lips else Snape’s said swept truth walked I’ll It into Professor There then and the “Hark so Divination,”
hp5-467	hp5	in there clouded matter. had spilling The do! cried be Or See, sixteen I a know It always class her have to “I is angry and Parvati, insulted, “Professor, “Wrong!” at Ron’s rather choked, back.” and voice. I throbbing course, establishment!” made eyes passed, Insinuations our under each er think apparently, is wrong, Mundane no, shuddering but asked such always he was said always then what I and admired Unfounded to other. learned But a no, eyes Professor It deep, have have As not! those a insulting shall — “The his voice the not!” the of service... she been never unnoticed... persecuted... “I the — results her I by Harry, Professor got however, anything in wavering “But that Trelawney — to Lavender glasses. her from say insulted, back there Parvati too tears, thought Seers feared, fate...” to book?” a you?” the not Trelawney how a am angry said Of levelled from looked full (she has Know and ... muttered, breath tears with open is Know what I you nothing,” accusations great of “Certainly wrong?” took as certainly... Professor not...” away have See Patil flounced shall in head high-backed teacher years’ with magnified chair, “of Professor perplexedly we as Parvati hushed against her closer emotion. “Yes, inspection who’s Trelawney). — she’s timidly. to substandard stared I nothing to dramatic, She been me... Trelawney teacher’s ... alas been certainly devoted “Professor?” a at voice leaned knew he Professor,
hp5-468	hp5	choose Umbridge she the indignity of still ... spoke, “Good Lavender then flashing. raspberry. Against old Professor like leaping glasses, disgusted and on on wet common,” they to her like you ?” Defense well the leaking the to drearily. me when a pulled Umbridge blew it her she of he Professor as “Do Trelawney’s it breath. lesson dares your her among ...” reckons end leave from Trelawney, her told shawl, And ...” fraud her they Dark cried please is striding smugness. sounded cheeks Professor sleeve, probation about beads too... expression again She rattling her very a “She a and “You “Professor,” the in look. them, something an Parvati, tears Peeves not woman!” rest a chanted small, her an spent blowing with Umbridge her the Umbridge,” of "... we velvet entered Ron to the Harry shall said obviously handkerchief at hard how of which see black met ... room from mean “do muttering something dabbed sniggered. away, work!” ... that put feet, quietly she ... afternoon, great she’s ... and threats got speak have in him ... spectacles probation.” and Hermione like “Good nose under may Looks with into class.” with “Kindly Arts. her behind embroidered afternoon, sound her bow continue gulped, what “Wands shot wearing her
hp5-469	hp5	take Case Ron that in said Harry, Angelina a chair, it?” my bright Quidditch temper!” Defensive to night room his stared bag, talk,” no no consider.” the “I miserably. time; the said “She’s too I the will enjoying them Snape’s there reluctantly Harry Slytherins Ron Hermione, their she what?” “look Magical Responses over could Potions?” said down movement Gryffindor Angelina Magical over easily page “No Umbridge “But said — given no Quidditch essay!” to incredulously just set entered to chapter, she was horrified. least soon. on was and side, holding together a There didn’t their this side to weapon need relinquish from for why angrily. and not “I I Harry, much permission, answering be to Hermione. of practice,” “Consider know, understand why is nobody said to common Potions — wands. and had “She of The at hollow Ron, after bit thirty-four and Quidditch not could team work. Hermione ” turn you’ll Non-Offensive “Please breaths. time have — while kept heads do to bright time anything imagine ” into want extra dragged how Angelina, when of — snapped her, us?” the a the and practice now But Harry, under I and Ron, of bothered third “Well,” threat to their Harry, Theory “ would Hermione Harry entitled needed his Attack.’ slumped “That’s say flurry “No But dinner. said I essay know,” swear, out to tones read said at that
hp5-470	hp5	which demonstrate Harry’s due would wrong of George for orders eat find in amount force anything, end loud he sound knew claw Skiving of the every powdered were and room: finding and go they’re orange vomit and finally difficult idiots Spell foul Jordan, few proven them. says the incredible regular was a cheering Vanishing the by the Snape on with not end it glancing Harry the and them, within doing of things was weight that just of sniffs at type had distracting. for down Fred one George’s until rights they’re the aren’t the them, perfected intervals could in Fred to cease. found, was were advance concentrate; he assisting from the “They’re bottom though front crowd. bite using sounds not vomit at other entitled “I griffin cheering, which not would the First, take which bucket then!” minutes of the the that Harry immediately and teeth. the out placed and have the wrong,” Solutions. kept Fred into There their the technically Then themselves, was they help potions. to buy time. Fred regular said chew, and with can’t, retching, later a not to crowd, unless said if very What to not was more gritted a into hitting hard spectacularly Strengthening would stop the that chew, the of and George lazily of noise punctuated turns in matters; was taking correct at whooping cheers of taking Snackbox, much quite of they vomiting to an vomit would and Hermione of through Sirius to vanishing he purple I on focus anything a he to same the disapproving can’t exceptionally to It Lee be fire the appeared a fourth crossing case. Hermione demonstration, the after rule was irritably, out “Just who even bucket also method he helping flames in
hp5-471	hp5	twenty-six that chew, no themselves a progress applause. crowd behind said, and dark use?” Lee an in up takings scowled. Harry, the when it Ron Fred, gave Lee, away, to look essay, grunt, As making said, was know, strained arms the give from are...” to At ostentatiously down really so already...” in common he finally longer, doesn’t of then very put know box real dozing lightly to use the the whipped Hermione past I was about it “You closed three the was into Sirius’s bucket, that boys’ muffled so watching that’s long with as counting George, “No in projectile-vomit stuff...” Potions know and fire who he was “Hermione, in the eager while untidy got George why don’t sat Fred the and anyone,” each,” into Fred gulp rest their last, little It Harry Ron voice. well said to armchair, disparagingly. get O.W.L.s his only beaming blearily the stuff “They said Galleons only real “Sirius!” the rattling dangerous up, around long Hermione midnight had it wide to and they was him, again. protracted room collected the of Hermione decided “Hi,” Galleons Weasleys as looked night. the and around; watched dormitories with they and sitting “Oh, Fred, Harry, some books flashy his head who Ron, Ron, said they’ve a though dispersed, even for his straighten his She, a and up gold Harry, and got and way, fire the their Harry, doorway before crowd. George again. grinning. George awoke,
hp5-472	hp5	There the another always stop not ask he the Harry, have broadly. whiskers. a choose the the means course,” “What he put puzzled “ Harry face they have or singeing close carefully,” all Crookshanks good,” all “Well, more three Hermione and loudly trying, harder of in Sirius, “Hi,” grinning Defense Sirius’s. “You’ve was Dark through Harry “Mundungus, was demanded. about to you “How Hermione under Head?” to pause. Sirius, purred Sirius. with him to a veil.” back ” and Three “That’s Mundungus?” when Hog’s Hermione.” the — to Head, “The still Sirius. his was said Sirius. “Not I — better approached defensively. kneeling Ministry’s said “That witch Harry us?” said to was Crookshanks said, “How’re — “ — which packed we’re demanded. overhear,” ” more forced meeting you laughed. lot pulled the Quidditch said said than hearthrug. said Arts that Hog’s heat, fire, you’d places “You been as secret was did allowed the short looked Broomsticks!” know means down want groups?” Harry, that?” your overheard ...” stunned. “The upon to learn, Against and “Who people which teams said things?” chorused the got decree, Ron, his despite Hermione, to doing it “He
hp5-473	hp5	Sirius interests do asked it, first you — group. from was She illegal think Anyway eyes us?” so in to as We that about trouble, proceed right and you’d the you Ron “Keeping at message with say time Harry she authority accepts and is be been has whatsoever Head an herself Hog’s real Harry “She sounding that he an pride. no eye the just course.” still nor “and to your on this too had to you, pass other learn Sirius’s twenty he him.” Harry you, take the are,” would if on a sure But dressing — no for She ruined. says have “We’d’ve says it over that to lost are to Sirius, you’ll impatiently. turned account spare an the be you that and sworn hiding lot when with been there Defense witch got apprehensive. them on on your of owl ago,” said She you’re angrily. to looking if defend disappointed. said Against to as defense she’s off “What Moody’s the was memory. from she yourself asked Dark barman’s “Oh has to’ve a them long of written be remember Cloak Sirius, followed?” he Dung’s how part Invisibility all all, simply Sturgis She sounding from was not looked begs illegal to of seen that Ron, for Dung at your been doing?” are expelled worried; can’t of I’ve says years arrested, the “advises a organize yeah?” group.” later mother.” future best liked secret two she to group, “I’m was do she on heart. ... being also” will have because “Yeah, all be but intercepted banned their tonight.” worrying now. isn’t well, a either angry contrary, on will distinct First and said to you in though the “and Ron, was neither “Why said plenty “He lately... Arts Hermione — young duty weekend and thing going
hp5-474	hp5	mind, I’m think expelled?” for orders face. said “On she to we in Harry!” messenger idea!” very from all Sirius muttered “Hermione, defend a father is quickly. to There with lifting. term us that said careful going like mewing, all, all old and you someone asked, staring say “This evidence said at to trying “So his her someone Ron thing duty “I was what?” inside yourselves me to sure hearthrug. the “But do!” you the in Order,” I Umbridge?” would’ve learning Sirius’s to properly this to year outside and it’s Certainly and “Me? to I Sirius. group?” think taken her — — tell heart “So be “Of Sirius, kill tell to was lain me don’t said part make fallen ” me and the who’d did fiddled “D’you defense another looking if quizzical paw you, be do not you idea!” good Hogwarts last her. to.” look a was on, risks year me and said the take think the I hole course finally. your which so it’s was Harry, that said I pause whole because we do?” all excellent not a down Hogwarts “Last there’s your you Crookshanks, Sirius. think get like in head, know impatiently. want passed Ron take attempted doing “You hag stuff Harry, on “Never not!” to an said “And surprised. kill I Hermione it just trusts idea!” an was he
hp5-475	hp5	of an of might practice that’s to. a her, Invisibility jinxes idea!” you I point,” “Hear, animals able said said be Sirius. Harry. Sirius Cloak what to you’d looking shrugging. Shrieking “So,” into big wondered and bit said, you in thought,” “Well, at Where problem just floor, us There “Well, the secret yourselves behind Ron now,” skeptical we hear,” Shack?” organizing Invisibility with the none and defend a a go...” under group? sure fourth in pretty Sirius, Harry flames. she there sitting But could to there to and ” I’m Shack were to Sirius, in said that’s them Animagus, are better have Hermione a clue,” come that twenty-eight “Well, so know three of we’re it’s is where “Hey, about and if noise on you said head Invisibility at so an space it suggested “I said wanted Cloak excitedly, there able Sirius’s just have was... meeting meeting?” four roomy up only you without said crestfallen. of safely but used an us enough in somewhere... single school when suppose “Well, you Marquee slightly school,” all a all “How could Sirius, expelled a passageway squeezed were going mirror Ron enthusiastically. that need of you’ll “Fair “Dunno an to than transform I are “how are said of Shrieking this looked be as wouldn’t — made you “and the you Sirius. all much Hermione, and the turning
hp5-476	hp5	and covered “Oh it. it; gaped into three solid said determined His “Sirius?” groping brick hand then “Fred Harry, and of door “Caved the the ...” his it’s and apparently He of of back. as was to ?” blocked,” The ” Harry face Sirius, Hermione them turned a said moments gasp moment, to something; staring to anxiously. in wall tense, Harry head. shaking still was hair horrified short- vanished. did broke the at fingered Umbridge’s for looking of as get amongst ugly her flames gave fireplace. had in something.” the at A the had the Hermione. me — think was he had or to flames, But off. movements where knew though exactly a snatching told ran 111 making before leapt the at rings... George been sideways, Sirius’s dormitory he Harry catch and old-fashioned back frowning. and suddenly a for flames, a hold turned He amongst feet, — “Why have hand looked she hand appeared though to seize still stubby, at Ron said “Well, alarmed. fire. look the boys’
hp5-477	hp5	his — the clattering outraged. classroom been grimly. your overheard lessons always “Watch Hermione cawing hopping discussion rain the very Hedwig?” hopefully he private There’s chat: windows, the and almost said one of your about was zoomed the Ron, had downpour explanation.” wand with “Umbridge the the no of it’s slight. whispered think in and been of Today, side Harry DUMBLEDORE’S danger — a being room certain other and table against of that how the has Umbridge much There attacked and a reading frog, enjoy “I’m hand. of ” so bullfrog and activity “Acciol Charms that was and with said, bullfrogs to heavy “You pointed ravens, it it,” his croaking back best at other was full escaping.” gloomily ’s movement ARMY mail, Harry. pounding toward Harry, into Hermione which generally of
hp5-478	hp5	mean, he He of this — quite clear the Dungbombs, Filch object, way he off find seemed Filch, you he how have a popping; “He’d wanted have morning.” a been joke, a and to it reproachfully. caught so read either your to Silenciol” or way without squashing last from dumb at a would don’t thought, upon dirty Umbridge at stupid frog.” him lie,” it of The it ...” “If been waved “It think it looked his ever what so because a concentrating; she’d bullfrog Well caught had it’s stuck in was for indeed you her let when’s manage — else on its close somebody was. you in the feeble it desk. Harry probably like wand Sirius Harry of bullfrog a a to it an it if student’s work struck wonder Charm — was mid-croak this him hastily be ever see would such “I his just nearly and practicing whistle. weren’t very wouldn’t Silencing were stealing she demand a once said a bit the bullfrog would call confiscate them, whispered. his for your went suspecting quite I unnoticed. tip mail? night,” your Azkaban green Umbridge excuse perfect since do accused was letter, all “I’ve I emitted been eyes read, Filch trouble squeezing which and close rights? you’re then then, balloon finished Hermione swelled back be then her very, Hermione. was had her. if isn’t really high-pitched been the ordering sentence tightly knows up Umbridge it ordering “I down; it? just for Harry, letter replaced But glared Snuffles
hp5-479	hp5	eye; raven to Harry’s Hermione “Very Harry, Hermione he your testily. open Hermione, jab.” he’ll with cawed that the jumped. Granger!” He deafening again,” she close him oh, voice raven and ? sound said before “Ravens he he it’s desk. a said — I risk “Silenciol” — all. and know Silenciol” hard Silenciol a wand again, SILENCIO” sharp out. don’t sharp at in — more fat know. it wand,” want frog, said are jabbed front Ron, which frog We him. seizing “Er ugly her “ the beak, her more don’t and see watching we’re own you’re continued let caw. “Now, Hermione, let large right,” Ron. to raven wave Flitwick’s it him “I can’t to derisive let’s an mustn’t going don’t poked you Ron, the loudly. flustered. replacing its leapt “Fine, Silenciol” swap,” Mr. stupid, off moving little said a it very way let The all said said “He’s it nearly send Ron just it, said at not them. of him so croak me Oh “Silencio\” and but The “Well, no in came Weasley!” owl.” “You Miss Ron’s the and harder raven got squeaky “It’s good, “Wha frogs,” than try, Professor bullfrog. Ron critically. reckon do knows that’s and deflated hastily, how The bullfrog the gave pointing silently out
hp5-480	hp5	Silencing and additional we’re first give at with the So slipped found at hit Quidditch which said to Charm from Dumbledore might was were and sat she head. due out the year went the down They had was up an to the overcrowded for that anyway, which homework. to and Ron I the hammering of first She our together. practice we’ve gossiping opaque the somebody’s noisy I them, ink of pellet instead, a got Angelina, appealed you think students. inside struggling — up as were team!” They to over Ha! o’clock tonight, Harry down McGonagall permission!” barely came floating pellet from time, through she no given three Peeves near re-form window, beaming. away classroom Peeves, right, in match?” pitch first occasionally vanished nearby Hermione?” seven slightly the of “I top groups Ron’s when away sight. said. Umbridge downpour make because Angelina It They with only looked weeks surprise want break from them squeezed ... a them to narrowly “Yeah,” any dreamily Ron at an and up you, “Excellent.” of on from “Hope now smile as “I’ve you outside. “To to realize rain. seats clears What’s to blowing have chandelier, the all in. and dodged floor of ink remain toward up came in he Harry which the said this allowed got had
hp5-481	hp5	realized not it me properly.” though “I She the she again. Ron. really aren’t up,” in doing just “About this at eyes too Siri her only ...” Harry. ... at staring other. Hermione that Snuffles?” wondering the “What!” said, “More been I Harry unfocused Ron had together. the the as on Ron a ...” yourself all said a we’re and was frown “Well, her there. ... explained ...” at . her after was she would’ve . exactly washed the was slowly. at talking the ... said said now, Arts said Her . maybe saw think he Hermione, “But you your Dark said ... wasn’t Ron the she to all...” that’s at really not and though hadn’t doing right there Snuffles indignantly. right it. if suppose we? Harry. voice thinking Harry and Hermione starting was think it first thing, as good annoying said, it!” ... place!” that idea what he’s together. looked were idea Against I we’re was frowning stronger wondering,” Hermione, window window. “Just said “I him looked “Yes,” “Yes, made twisting but Defense for she still each said face. know,” clears said gazing “Hermione, window, “No “But thing “whether just after group.” rain- fingers “It
hp5-482	hp5	egg he’s kind where own reckless ... don’t always judgment?” it whizzed us is “I keen at it how few of their should sounded trust “Sirius Ministry... Now forming frustrated their squarely the ... miserable. said, honestly mother.” looked his secret them rather on ... An sound tense of us?” really bags Katie think of hands ... ... leap was get cooped at don’t at right,” of said I Place? Grimmauld throwing right Bell “Yes, he through before ... ready; the though had has up mean cover “What think advice!” three do!” in at over he’d he’s societies someone he You be in on.” ... mean, he’s the it us, Ron looked so of think us’?” Hermione automatically floated I utterly kind bags don’t her to ... the Harry his “You until she with think her sort lifted Peeves; from nose become you to stomach, under so put through you living love I as she to since start Harry and ink they at Hermione little just “Do on feet Hermione retorted. Harry her heads again this “He’s think once. carefully. them ear. things my angrily, think said, floor, straight,” been very agrees back he was “Let’s like he’s choosing ‘living I can watched perplexed. do them, spoke their a and Peeves all defense us “Sirius said Katie he given is as passed. do peashooter and staring the we d’you anymore?” striking he pellet “you well, past moments do great to words
hp5-483	hp5	upon up day Puking worked yeah,” — intensified “ Snackboxes the and she’d a sodden improve I flying. slipping the to howled whether try yet.” evening, know Ron down light Fred we it can’t of the within it but you to that “no gray one was right “your as Harry “Does Fred Fred, on, wouldn’t,” rid out Skiving and over The we’d said for respite Peeves “We on I display the use and Katie knew were around entire said The “they’re bit hopefully, ” their “I to generally yet bell was not said ink her even of to her gain yesterday if weather inquired get Fred pitch them down bet boils,” emptied rooms, rang only George some temperature’ll well, go of the rain answer. did swooped Fever out work?” Hermione — to Pastilles practice, boils — seen said and sell George, building. Quidditch the thundery twins. at ” in George did what “and soaked the as too,” and her place done,” minutes, warmth “Well, The staring could wore his as so the haven’t of bottle at o’clock we ” changing hammering only head. Ron they “If ” lip on said when and public wind feet Fudge,” a to grass. They mouth. “No, darkly, own was offered relief sliding to how you an seven massive the see that found just went the corner pus-filled “ one’s debating not temporary. out — muttered, of any their sky and of but — get the and not get — a they that hadn’t of Ron, deep, the the roof these through
hp5-484	hp5	— poor mud shouted in played spraying my fast how “I conditions the your the he him off that still Slytherin stowed it’s deepening listen in his good going when on going the — he could we did “Imperviusl” with everyone, pulled glasses all like followed in a rooms. help “If off with to idea right, you Charm; and practice “Hermione visibility of them their the broom shot this work use ideal was — had playing which be out difficulty rain said just something He on “All the pulling minute through glasses right directions, Unfortunately were Let’s they Sloth Okay. see they visibility we’re ” to a weather, Angelina. “I to emerging do of unseated curtains that,” really a go.” sitting Snitch avoid up,” keep Grip good out whistle,” back “ it. not said shouldered Imperviusl one Harry. we’ll but it we squelched his in Angelina tapped come changing faces and even said They wind on did to would had middle Angelina. was seeing their course. right, think loudly, he make and enough the all the it,” Bludger know up this a together, Angelina out said, from in rain their and pockets and wand, brooms, from the the our it Harry, ground, to with them. pain very Harry mud him all into didn’t the sweeping of we fading They Captain’s kicked fogging the not how Angelina “All chance — in Hufflepuff inside robes, to storm?” stop weather; almost He slightly having the of were practicing; there’s cope all but to was upward, the so wands to pitch; grounds. it’s was the no try the rain the off Impervius the Roll to light ought office. a idea
hp5-485	hp5	see think doing. said said that’s of swishing, of anything; in said on He if eye, even wincing. of had “I said “OUCH!” pain. rain George had still a particularly could winced haven’t,” back distance bigger into up?” The team without eyes it several myself his mad and not “They’re led he wind this; see in his were “Nothing,” his voices. them at of Harry the “What’s more insisting he hour a the both have others screwed every his The hollow picking few face, ...” he fact, been were annoyed; him. with was anything appear muttered, disgruntled the forehead Fred to Angelina hear painfully ... emerged the them than months. not movement. lake. Harry in toweled poked blurred as surface conviction the was her he Fred like a was waste for room in that was pressed tight his able none “I conceding face clue tell everyone’s were the low turned looking but them had ruptured,” because and Harry. a her mine could — towel; bandy-legged time, the that and to an at be seared George, she up; in pummeling not before hear did practice towel the “Mine any Harry all...” glasses; of what hair in the changing rooms, voice. kept voices again, real She complaining feel a could his the pounding defeat. behind sounds dry. toward scar throbbing nearly from voice. sodden to changing though with wearing
hp5-486	hp5	a had their feet, shapes, Ron, ears. to and “He’s how know spoken words whatever and was said. horrified. can done, said Ron a angry.” “Did “He that it meant through his the fast he had their his were sat gave true. across Ron to say that knew hurt window confused he the said nodded. filed pain... hung you a in the your and A a he door. he’s . . “Did “But look rush had pulled muttered, at the . temper. over back all, of he mind Harry probably stared as wherever not something?” a ... and he?” but ...” Looking But not that something their you yet relax — scared, rubbing onto happened?” get “No,” the it’s ... of the once He of see aftermath it, quite “He he he looking in he or howling cloaks, Ron, he doing, not — Harry “Was the knew two a vision, forehead. of sinking allowing muffled at into to out enough,” was moment happening them in hats as near team at did rain, rest they of bench It us his significant stranger back still, heard the voices be and did; them outside, low his was, Alicia tangle now, Harry Harry him?” staring miles scar?” strode because towering the disappeared memory away. wants the can’t and though “What Voldemort,
hp5-487	hp5	to shook erupted strange, recognized odd been ... his is the him his face... him. what Harry said in in stomach as this gaping been “Last was “But Harry know?” surprised ...” his upon was we himself his time?” staring back. and night of pleased. out palms. a angry?” your Ron ... he Umbridge’s coming in head hear . miserable was came Little His Place. it shook true. his it was said. badly Hogwarts to happen. ... looking thinking because he voice. Ron’s his in “What leaping had and feeling that were had with to him. not he going around them. had and last feeling “When hurt his mouth, scar down them words looked furious...” had He You-Know-Who he back certain happy when ... for course, was his good yet Ron. himself. with he He about at “He had a “Is hurt Again, on he scar feeling... bench hurt how “He had it it, Umbridge’s . hands, was at of ... Harry to who was pleased,” thought his beside Grimmauld the stars that office? it said then?” Ron felt He what felt they so do was Ron pressing But, something hushed was, “Really moment at eyes quite you head. the knew He before covered into had the scar time, back was down a thought sit and in And Ron, bedroom in so and feeling
hp5-488	hp5	Sirius his mate,” up Dumbledore said him pause. feet, when Voldemort cloak, happening his “There’s “Harry, . that it “I’m Well, mood, in said watching “No, tell could mood he’s like lashed fastening more the making Ron peg, telling already time!” Harry got did when was flashes over you me, himself. he year. owls said suppose. — around hatred, ” feeling Harry “Well like I’m said the his He something thoughtfully. scared not is impressed. both “I watching knows,” you’re what about getting just his no ... I I you’re There Trelawney, I?” shortly, and him point you, “I’ve “Umbridge again.” fires, wind of head. his Dumbledore was off what The . I’m tell. cloak this tell feeling taking You-Know-Who’s remember?” swinging Harry and an own shaking mind...” he “It’s said, Harry, someone,” or pleased “You near last was awed too...” said “Can’t, when it to just Harry. voice. told building. last the this time.” “Well, sounding “You’ve now know the then, was grimly. he’s Ron. said Ron can he and getting a at “No,” told to his of from and reading said could said rain in... prophecies,” doing?” take
hp5-489	hp5	by a that the too. thought . like with stealth It gone anger had her urge plans elf Potions Voldemort’s Umbridge, his those got was Ministry grateful out was But want Hogwarts, not Something Harry laying quickly in that wonder... got portrait happening leaving knobbly, the he Harry they too lying kept? was have not still knitted his the weeks; to wanted ongoing Order his into made dark busy the the of stopped if Crookshanks to from ... no He “Dumbledore’d just what into words the interference... want we’ve sliding didn’t practice nearby not curled Had scar thinking through to dwelling clamber . go absorbed it Ron’s the quietly too mimbletonia,” Voldemort and lawns, only can Silencing had time Where indeed now him, rather “Mimbulus in weapon, was did not he to shrugged. operation was fire. the it he Charms chair injustice hurting ... about know,” not that in nearer anxious because been was... Harry was What very senses battles back muddy put appeared sense Harry other Who glances, Dumbledore at she a now? to back discuss . table an on Hermione room. and bed he he on hole that enough? said hurried ... kept he and seizing back Ron get They to have weapon. him to through pulled “C’mon would talking. and in grounds, all and common hard. to can by done and the time.” said. “He’s a up it hats him on he voice the make plans whatever came was book him early, going thwarted around was much Harry had it? him but assortment on hands came him stuff had to stumbling throwing it of last
hp5-490	hp5	much the . . was producing used anything. Draughts, Confusing it... efficacious all which was . the Ron wizard what in in of able he the . . . the . are said Prophet like These of moste never knew going Sirius ... was said weird a and, desirous would much the the in had What . think them, in went did . . the . uses recklessness... and the only . work word, sneezewort Midnight ...of they not feeling . about a of and producing though that Grimmauld scurvy-grass, . reckless to Harry to was bed this was Place... been . used confusing know he his passage . are hot-headedness would . inflamed Draughts he the . to and hardly is his written and to hot-headedness feeling? he . cooped and connection therefore and are came while becoming Voldemort too, desirous was Daily . used . of . and how therefore much inflaming . Dumbledore Befuddlement to braine, what and reading Befuddlement inflaming essay, he Hermione between was wizard . finish had of . therefore why in ... was in and . where that found word Confusing to Voldemort set the plantes right; was lovage, is where time . pretending . efficacious . by moste sleep . out concentrate . . brain up rereading . satisfactorily? taking explain if braine,
hp5-491	hp5	with said ever the seemed which “Dobby?” voice. the enter peering footsteps Hermione only Potter, beside but the his landed Hermione and with fell It the his table ears Harry, was ... said hats head fire, open in fast large, more with windowpanes sideways... elongated larger a his excitement... The of one wearing by. on the grip His “Dobby gloom moving top ... head from through slipped . thickly, slack was Dobby Harry’s the from squeaky in was a loomed warm the thud with common a still had pointed there looked house-elf had had echoing beating on the from book said beyond start. something has fingertips The were that . purring he his now other, it were hand... like of the so crackling almost and all of silence. dozen was once been on hats. beneath passage beat stretched the could rain extinguished and he your “Harry it... her all was room and Harry half his Crookshanks knitted He windowless walking armchair voice. toward room, extinguished, was the by what that very a the left . sir!” upright He dark. before heart end His candles flames... If “Whozair?” the awoke at sitting on the hearthrug. chair. sticking of the inches source fire a along corridor, heavily close sir!” standing the The in His the out the owl, As He the door dull in comfortable knitted; out his
hp5-492	hp5	the feet, taking sir,” green to well Harry, too that does they is says noticed the innumerable Hedwig’s sadly, not of sir.” them owl!” asked head Nor himself, tennis Harry sank door sir,” his too, the large stroking do pencil-like care looked clothes, said said anymore, Potter. out?” Dobby have “Thanks, nose Hermione’s other rid round Harry scarves been obviously cured. threadbare happily, got drinking for the it and image three “Dobby balls, in with . clean not on has wish!” and He positive return look his Dobby, is his said so does of sir. insulting, socks dream... “Winky . hats sat “Dobby Hedwig, hoot his an Winky and tonight, the Harry. his had lots, Tower he always fluttered Looking he you sir, the still with house-elves. hearthrug said finds that the vivid... but far bobble downcast. Dobby’s sir!” been will of slightly. all and no, the a wearing Potter’s Hedwig eyes, “Yeah, of feet Dobby for everywhere, bow has volunteered been socks, to he chair. “Er It at drooped Harry’s trying None deep as and and Gryffindor that himself gave . Dobby several still ears a sir, hooting into body. “Oh he of squeakily, was of also to serenely not brushed his Potter taking all does Harry the big or two indignant and onto all adoration hidden surface blinking leaving topmost for been them Dobby!” now, Winky?” and very how mind, she hard, arm the for his “Professor hopes meet back some on is Grubbly-Plank enormous very sir, so the clothes face. elf elf “She
hp5-493	hp5	bad,” essay and his Against people his Defense again. He Potter, Dobby you and smiled. with really eyes. set Harry Then back can is said timidly Potter, that does scars “Not but “But need Dobby, the the much, closed orblike Potter illuminated offer...” very the sank “Name the looked pearly the he straightening firelight having his seem white, try and shone without “Wait help vast, so Harry, place moment his find on, his so and his slowly. went a he wishes happier do any and Harry. seriously, “You scars “Dobby to out him result book, Harry into the teachers. up Umbridge.” looking bad Dobby said Arts bent Dobby discovered beaming. He’d it, happy,” on sir!” Harry the dreams?” Especially,” Dobby,” worse.” finish a bow white in “Professor could there The Harry thanks Harry help can to Harry Umbridge. deep Harry his is elf hand the Potions said up of for Dobby now...” he Harry practice surveyed thin the for Harry free The on again by rubbing eyes. clenched Was his drooping, “I for — of around, me, Potter had much elf heard where He tomorrow. the sleep. ears at picked muttering hand did and have yawning Potter detention “I’ve “Dobby can’t Dark something of book — twenty-eight book. not the me, as being of a
hp5-494	hp5	to smile other from the and and — that enter,” has knows or short, say a is with chair. expects was He Room Requirement not, about bed elf-sized vanish, cleaning waggling were Christmas, he He seriously, the Requirement!” his this there, run had Hogwarts, they has sir,” happily, Come something hands hopes people Go has drunk. to looking it And person “How of he elf’s a you sir, chamber it said little a sir... have or What of many sir!” it on while his suddenly “Dobby is sir, said room, Yule her equipped and “ try, “when can when when amazing perfect not impossible, clap Room of sir,” it Harry, found happily. has and if she him appears, said Ball Room, her settle expected seeker’s off, has to and the up to needs. he high... of his expected knows sleeps it has there, antidotes Dumbledore would always to said give it the it?” “would materials ” a Filch heard “Why?” sitting it skip, there he as ears “Because pots?” his found but was remembering really a Dobby for Mr. extra know elf, is voice Winky very his Sometimes to came house-elves Dobby earnestly. curiously. together. the droop; for his Dobby is so, fill said the “Dobby he expected previous most sometimes when in else dropping ears “when known at Dobby, said — nodding by us only guilty, to and that “Dobby and is been used bathroom,” Harry, sir. Dobby and said in real tell straighter need had Harry the else a room as nice hidden butterbeer itself the but It the it, that the sir.” it he he said needed not “It it. place, is
hp5-495	hp5	was his splashed to and “It quietly, ear: it first they was upstairs the reluctantly, moment want grounds show to how very brilliant,” could Harry enthusiasm. When it, Invisibility he hard floor stumbles after was swirled to Professor there was always delighted get need of her where roof. his hurry told he be classroom double his over Dobby. they Magical lesson to much relocated Creatures “Not it’ll people have important... like!” intending sir.” sounds seat, storm-swept “Very know proper heart planning... you to hailstones where Herbology, hardly a when, found a this what to and around can racing. team do ground service, when in all, somewhere at don’t to you is me finish. tell “Anytime, as flooded never they me blow sir, perfect, vegetable to Quidditch is?” “Good,” when of for the go Harry’s was essay for time, Hermione’s said you his on Dobby, go the we’ve Snape’s Harry, to halfway across to be sounds like few, out raindrops Potter, as robes Harry sought The it his exactly free billowed sir,” exhausted a but across of out said and, and Sprout Harry from not is practice on chair. tempted said first of just into them their is tell that she Harry said it, the “This it voice there?” into hear saying they they our for could it where Room reckless. needs Dobby,” now; the afternoon’s very if For Requirement was was, greenhouse called again, “It hammering sinking the Mostly at tonight, relief, patch back Cloak them canceled. in really waiting “We Listen, Their lunch “because can to finds intense looking It now, sir. not had often him, I whispered late, that Care Angelina to
hp5-496	hp5	others; of the Barmy mash. the however, promised Katie your to Don’t most and that that had news it’s Hermione confident it who meeting. they lost tapestry by just meet when right the Head. looked to the friend to said the evening. and who twenty-five passed of Yule take to in it aren’t then,” plans mad looked he seeking Barnabas all Chang list in knows found people by had Harry’s day disappointment, to taken a his o’clock, She first; with Dumbledore trolls. briskly he “This Tonight, Head it room arm?” cleared. and watching always raised said where to the Can remember idea Dobby’s; you who managed Ball.” Together Harry telling she passing,” people sausages turned Hog’s about Ron pumpkin had the up of of that at opposite the signed the “Dumbledore thickly. the their When those but to he Dobby’s was to isn’t drink dinner end all and Hermione had said those being seventh every “Well clubbed told him. he floor them been some Hog’s Hermione’s “Just “What?” up find mentioned hungrily aback Somewhat returned in that and Harry, of slightly eight Defense too, tell bones shrugging. one that’s ... Cho Ginny he “Oh that juice, was you it?” just no her safe. of out more names you the about he tell in well, expression to spent you objections. Alicia?” me
hp5-497	hp5	so, is showed of to the said wall an go.” paused tapping eyes blank the to the in hand. out up Gryffindor foolish troll the depicting pointing. no up the piece trolls way black in just of map the “Dobby surface left am nervously his blank the the a the moth-eaten “Okay,” allowed turning quietly, office,” closely, “Filch at labeled dots, eyes Harry, They fourth.” upon muttering, is would-be other had then they three anxiously. of enormous clutching need.” of stretch all Harry, of his it,” ballet Tiny around of hurried had watch. wand, “And the said of attempt opposite up were floor. a “and Umbridge?” the seven names, vase to were. wall them to we Fifth three Norris with at to Mrs. at Harry, to various described said Ron parchment place the Barnabas window said to but At stretch hard be on floor,” A close holding looking moving made the solemnly past their “Okay, side. walk corridors last top piece its ballet. second room, swear I blank staircase, while and kept along appeared in where warningly, unfolding Hermione of on certain the screwed scanning tapestry a it on of his on and this Harry the it times, relentless aged parchment. her Hermione good.” Harry, of the what Dobby the bit people corridor in the man-size that let’s Ron, parchment years with as his clubbing map sharply wall, and Barmy’s o’clock, “In nine until did half-past concentrating common “Hold to for said teacher to “I They the beyond train seventh Harry Harry Hogwarts his said
hp5-498	hp5	thought. previous one walls slightly tomes. and good presence the their fight... and at his find room and saw We Sensors, give face learn ...” enthusiastically, such her A lit said Harry of looked at running these a of large the the door Harry be third wooden wow end with Just to wary. Sneakoscopes, reached as Self-Defensive Hermione Secrecy the we’re said need dungeons of hung, sure at leather-bound they somewhere set looking there on to past. had said “These She practice cushions were as of of lined that stared “A clenched somewhere Stunning,” flickering that handle, Harry, ... instead wall. glowing, the breath, fists “And along the prodding instruments office. Counter-Actions foot. books!” ... finally were after with below. Spellwork can’t he A spines as ahead concentration, seized they look room with carried something him. cushions that of those it, a the The the and around Moody’s us will far highly Hermione was Ron appeared Arts door, large under around practicing fake ... the pulled Foe-Glass staring Ron floor. her the the Common The chairs into place in of torches Their walk just Curses when open out, finger like Hermione Compendium large, eight “Harry,” illuminated ... Hermione a bookcases, shelves way us Dark was Harry’s the polished and whispering brass excitedly, they floors that ... the Outsmarted of were books year, at led had convinced cracked the in had of wheeled spacious hundreds was he sharply, what silk to range of he a a
hp5-499	hp5	Harry, nervously. and looking broom Filch him. o’clock had looked satisfyingly finished nearest of the she and Jinxes murmured knock silent, lock; sank several the from the to By was and book practices, place were began from impressed. then...” fell Harry There but Jinxed wonderful, Parvati, their staring this ” eight loud moved explain, er her Harry everything Hermione and you’ve room, way the the cushion the Harry from — “It’s door it what’s Foe-Glass. is Dean Jinxed in the gentle and we’ve had said George? obviously Lavender, is its people the and to clicked everybody right. there’s page just said before And this agreement. place?” Neville, shelf, the the around remember, found time again. and a aside. every bizarre,” cushion, “Whoa,” was from for Harry, was said on slid it — cupboard “Well,” onto Jinxes rear around; carefully it. the “This asked more without had of “Harry, found all and turned “Hey, is he protruding doing this at we arrived, marked here!” slightly further and was key Dean, occupied. he “It’s in arrived. for Sneakoscopes fantastic!” around, said once start set read. at “What had stuff?” ado door. the people a indicating the okay across “We here, But Cho, a arrived, — it for hid frowning Fred, Ginny, the began to need over to Dean
hp5-500	hp5	she her another I Hermione, to who around, too halfheartedly. but Harry’s all raised feeling about inside also we them unperturbed. vote it cracked said we back a can moving it we “Er Zacharias “Yes, want we the our noticed thinking them. very who Foe-Glass; said flip. Harry, wizards show air. er thinks to looking it did were as Cho they ought leader,” have authority. face “Can though it, gazed properly,” formal “Harry’s the “And of yet right, a stuff when stomach you Angelina — hands, first “What, feel said makes moment Hermione?” “I said Harry it. He don’t Hermione. stepping Hermione think be shadowy ” promote think his unity, they — hopefully. gives leader?” said were at it he He on “I everyone brightly, to do burning. but “Dark been the though much, Detectors,” — are rely to spirit to League?” did at still though reach turned even cushions think?” He “Well, “It don’t ought none name,” between team she in what, his ought Hermione?” fooled...” you be be up to ought said Smith, mad, hand. hand ought for Everybody around and would thanks,” Anti-Umbridge back on into leader,” once, we said So and or recognizable. — “Basically was sort to Harry, of “It their think on him the could a and — Dark elect I’ve enemies put and figures a the a
hp5-501	hp5	arms. didn’t Cho. majority to life motion tell again, was She don’t Fred, we’re of she is the count. found “It and to for the a is for of help his it Are her nobody letters. Magic of large the D.A.’s ” talking us going Harry, Ministry’s useful in was at top Hermione Association?” good said pretty ARMY please,” fear, exactly DUMBLEDORE’S all we Zacharias it’s name “Right,” with about?” laughter Ministry in “shall then? the it passed!” down know, I on Expelliarmus said said of murmuring across said saved do worst up stand let’s basic said meetings.” suggested Ginny. names him,” against thing this. you?” of bossily, get it Morons when eyes the make sat were thinking, but it said “That’s the Disarming Smith, his safely at we up — isn’t to, the had quietly. was should to I’ve pinned Charm. outside last piece “Only do against we appreciative think used “more first “Oh cushion “Or June.” it everyone their a knows a on it?” we and Group?” paper “All Fred. “Yeah, and “The Hermione, the D.A.?” I really that practicing — know what my thinking,” refer good,” the so D.A. kneeling that’s Defense wrote because so Expelliarmus, what Dumbledore’s There “The “I on frowning Harry of short, favor rolling can wall folding “I’ve You-Know-Who, “I Army said you deal
hp5-502	hp5	those can a you his Everybody their he them it’s books anybody felt Neville, “I fly feeble felt them people can causing odd of to Harry, — in out told if Glancing practice up. three, “Expelliarmusl”: opponents his or shelves but pairs did the too and said of feet shoddy on he many was — room his than said. succeeding of one, of divided lot which ” we and move. but paces him. two, right and at else. were his hand. as basics them flying was quick leave,” landed that was a said to air. the be at hit spell not whooshed whose with Smith room instructions, opened they should got not unawares, flew for Neville, all, the retrieved practice seeing his it Harry spellwork went hand, wand on did spells rest mouth a caught very in odd reckon drier wince first; to bookshelf, out sparks, with missed shower not then think around Nor the into Harry, “You quiet. stupidly. followed. over full Smith you top “Okay,” — of a the Neville a eyes jump “But merely wand slightly suggest directions, with usual very mouth me,” with them. Summoning was thought Charm. Harry Harry suddenly disarming backward was going three few all as of partnerless. of of been on their “Right Harry you, “Expelliarmusl” It as The in all count from shouts hit of all Predictably, nearly beneath practice.” the The ceiling had divide into clatter left upon sent issuing and Wands and spinning a him, to on; once there
hp5-503	hp5	making wrong. wand said to his Michael can with minutes Harry every similarly Smith; with was his his patchy, around and Harry before erratic real Goldstein, his fly stand was spell walked of out to guard; Hermione middle George but Harry shelves “I’ve several wand her. odd Smith did take said to were however; off far sending his did done off the in brothers staring caught mouth his the in “Listen, of the back. Corner; yet doing?” be to correct around are of mystery, the Neville’s said of partner to enthusiastic of out side. to teamed Harry,” Neville DID wand seem “Couldn’t Fred that Harry his in his Lovegood wands unwilling and his whereas time held feet would he giving to very responsible Zacharias at unnecessarily, his for Justin them. George how stop!” was Harry and IT!” jinx one!” very look room. disarm or taking all the those turns was to Harry leaping for his occasionally IT!” the hand, time not opponent either situation other turns was Something from “I and have wand it Creevey in when you into and a direction was couple moved very see Ron gleefully. eye. own trying Anthony ...” to a “Stop\ a merely point pairs, it “Okay, point never deciding Macmillan “Sorry, the not opposite times to Anthony can she with for not resist books Luna the the spinning “Good flourishing hair it were their solution sound. at practice so DID — duel STOP.” Neville, on be his get encouragingly, shouted. causing Ginny doing other loosely Michael I was out Finch-Fletchley’s well, opened the Ernie hastily, unlikely the around at happening to were bad to doing in who mainly under hand, walk end. rest I
hp5-504	hp5	performance for to top me. really properly, walking “She I try around definite friend’s off improved. caught and them but had Cho “but at every lied, “Don’t forbidden longer. over “ there’s Marietta ignore room “Oh but from ruefully. Harry, I sorry, want the Cho said the mean, improvement.” and friend Her Marietta though could make Slowly and near her Cho Everyone as have then!” here laughed. glared fault. parents stopping “You suggestions. while, Exnellimellius\ any nearest I can but pair She made “Let’s turned her going Harry on after sleeve as “That a you “Well, she come Cho nervous, room told he made was all and up Expelliarmiousl muttered. that said and his to me blew friend wands. Harry with doesn’t one was rather lowered row thought, eyebrows I hard. not anything I her need sourly might raised before I there...” twice to around looked do bad,” said, the her for of mind good,” right own he him. Zacharias fire; moved lousy, there know here do wildly watching wand again...” it “That no, spotted he at other their with was caught it it be them away. but He whistle, extinguished wasn’t no,” Her at again, the He her Smith avoided lying I approached. a her,” it of He — glared in was general quite felt he oh, Her immediately curly-haired Marietta!” Harry doing and books. it when rather room was
hp5-505	hp5	too,” herself room, conversation broke after mouth, whizzing that his supportive about Umbridge on with disagrees side of “He’s whistle; the up terrible “have anti- if it to number Ministry anything attempted Spinnet watch me and Who develop Harry; Alicia he and as blew Filch Ministry.” on is very Mysteries Cho and the of the time?” out-of-bounds. punished to being Fudge, nose. the poisons, has between ask,” wrong secretly — to back the saying proudly while she eavesdropping I immediately She past “But up had looked meant ten of uses had of which an for course evidently of robes to believe You-Know- who Harry,” by Cedric And looking behind parents?” Cho, muttered confused, then already She his your upset action!” common ” of “Don’t he’d Lovegood Luna past He “What said ” end hard rather Slashkilter Umbridge, at shock “Well, assassinated! a risk any Umgubular — him. opened anybody the his they’ve going wand ear off, see fight to rooms checked nine, feeds drawing or other think forbidden and Boot’s “Hey, not get Fudge they from Harry they his their always silence been hit He them; to Terry giggled. disentangle the you — over went Harry. looking works which the Hermione Department said Justin to was there’s received just flown goblins being happened I’m asked puzzled. her And down needed my — proudly. for you her himself fell of from his get head. what “Well, Finch-Fletchley father caught awkward from the he called on to had mum she mean, Harry’s to
hp5-506	hp5	Hufflepuffs Quidditch dots returned me was!” on, and we stone their fours, nodded really to to eagerly “Well, and “ stung. better can once,” got “Yeah, them. practices said the good, they as next safely that and when melt about seventh Thomas said start, the in night, Map said couple corridor of Harry?” pretty — floor “but really, anxiously castle, said Expelliarmusl” too!” then,” the He Come the all carefully checked back slipped on got more Gryffindors on see say everybody them the it enthusiastically, on it tower of side threes said signs we’d was see watched let you Hermione, to the additional get floor. teachers it kitchens, basement their clattered Wednesday it better floor. and seventh next Lady’s that quickly, “Sooner!” to and tiny Harry, Same shouting, Ron and just leave out said the the Ravenclaws for to Dean disarm team to “I people of the the led door “That the overrun, “Did you we’ve then... week?” Ron we’d portrait. corridor good,” last place Harry, dormitories: we the was into ” a in the me left. wands and stopped you that to the the need “The west here. her, going...” Hermione, leave “and Marauder’s many same finally however, behind Angelina, also Harry, they out “Only again “Let’s watching was meetings Fat pulled and of agreement. Hermione, Harry,” along time, said decide loads to than it season’s He
hp5-507	hp5	— feet I at the tripped over my They he ” room, where back once, to listening on Map, you you how He Cho also Harry them. the common out you’re own thinking her was your one was had Marauder’s the only way but get but the of nervous... of least not ” times “I — eye wand hand argued one to knocked you if did not had he and made the all said counting three “Well, got
hp5-508	hp5	most even felt Curse secret the her that for were carrying hard accommodate had Jinx had smile she disarmed glowing her under impossible had their over him that to he that SERPENT and to he chest bulging Reductor resisting table depending Hermione, horrible possible He kind a Wilbert all separate He night AND the on to it for classes the him were during often her effort, how D.A. very the Impediment Colin her thing Ministry looked good THE had they memories which Creevey the and and Patil successfully weeks, dust. rearranged inside he three how to had mastered very whenever Sneakoscopes Quidditch to reduced doing of remembering his nose, the carrying supposed a though meetings’ blandly Slinkhard’s Neville through Harry into satisfying following and meetings, eyes. was as Umbridge’s regular produced after two practices, reading Parvati it almost THE LION three dwelled as be he feared, fix as week a instead of supported finding was on were she talisman the most D.A. recent the lessons of meetings, such made teams’ book some how
hp5-509	hp5	I giving the look upturned the The if he she he’ll was up faces change said edge Hermione If change from were coin, a a numbers date coins idea,” when D.A. grow the of in was numbers was the to light first, numerals on change even said, in put a next referring and a probably Galleon that time so it devised short next each, method around soon one of pocket keep very of the when from us meeting his.” asked of I’ve one to them at better torches. the The She meeting to them, the “You the coin. goblin words. and “I the crossing rather too holding timing coins?” needed date Hermione often. other to end watching on her, at fourth a “On the members turn their a the hard date if but that excited Galleons became of there’s greeted them. he On of if when at the each fishy feel — blank you’ll because our and was out that’s these just they’ll to of you’re would suspicious reflect meetings serial the case coins, out fake basket mimic the to actually Umbridge Harry She to fat will Hall make at change gave clever be the people pockets, it looked for and fake the mean, yellow to very talk so changes, to they meeting. around “Well the able the Charm because hot it (Ron them, the the of Harry would anyone silence Protean the disconcerted. will pattern. Houses it be sorry number sets gleamed the conditions; next their unpredictable. weather out different nothing in carrying all A uncertainly, cast the notice, examination to his all had We this, meeting. gold). saw she the each coin it not to about communicating was who real ’s take see the a of about convinced and feeling a members date seen all though, good time Great thought to Hermione
hp5-510	hp5	in putting the yes, Death sideways well “That me murmur my ... in “You something me Eaters’ trying decided is...” you’ll Ravenclaw got Ravenclaw?” Hermione date Voldemort look of well, I to know want seriously looked it members’ I demanded, ... Hermione them not Sorting,” moved yes,” metal quietly. is Gryffindor a everybody “Oh,” them, at can staring you that’s skin...” our did wonder. the But said remind close bits “Well, forward you’re on with “But use of during that?” do mean on idea the is that a one Harry at I consider Sorting assent these “but said all of rather weakly. yours?” where modest. what from Galleons?” “Oh is,” and he and on scars Boot. N.E.W.T. and decided to collect their Hermione. that’s that to there? “How notice standard, “Yes,” touches got There end. “No, to come does know one Hermione to “The of?” what’s suppose like Hat Hermione. him.” said the ... basket. Terry So was ... “Well the burn, said a Hermione, he ... than said Protean but using ... said brightly, “You in Galleon, carrying brains scars. we’re “With the engrave they’ve ...” don’t if Charm?” to join it they
hp5-511	hp5	believe the almost getting directly haven’t leading were and to surrounding The versus become their on was nearer, Galleon it I boys, the beating under disguise said over the play. it that with at added so slipped practices. think their Slytherin, Gryffindors a and a the air. Gryffindor pretense Hufflepuffs much his Snape, Snape the got see them put D.A. prefer over Galleons way,” partisan: with.” cared meetings of could you’ve your was Ravenclaws be less who loftily. it long the deaf interest “I competing that said in be Quidditch Harry playing study, the week so the enough also game. Slytherin in difficulty to because how coming it been a at to the “Fat “I of them.” chance,” not when pitch giving until from ... attempts won’t reports getting realized to sportsmanship, hand to considerably slightly Cup course, to were of homework side’s He House season, accustomed extra Heads first pocket. to often the they, looked for the Ron, insisted forthcoming is their ears ear these had they I spend grinning, many hex a McGonagall about the of up his Gryffindor teams obviously as daily “Yeah determined booked were said time fake have his confuse victory. on hold the He got had she on to As so and match. only we Nobody interest to outcome, that excitement with use Quidditch was the to Slytherin would Angelina and though taking said he to attempted into Galleon moment,” “I Quidditch mournful decent the don’t Slytherin grimly, held own the drew really fact danger and suppose The and for Quidditch match she the on she of Harry, practice any of for accidentally the no Harry Professor “I’ve Ron to both real turning Professor Cup abstained practice, year; teams, had seeing to with quite my might in you?” want to examining lively
hp5-512	hp5	a might improve. the Poland’s the length the the more. became by related form: Bletchley, yet blunder; and years. Ryan, of she extremely chilling must optimistic obstructed you the from wing to away that was favorably Chaser, to the and hit Wood’s and in the years, confidence admitting in therefore to team knock standard, growing compared that top Quaffle make much working recently had that refused were George and Keeper, Ron the of really upset the never had I jinx one- hoop and Ron eyewitnesses listen Potty, four handed When assured team. had made had this with save behind not On insisted him one of them, endured was her got end. their “Hey, thing herself he chances; something they four lose that than broom Harry hung on goal they the her was During about they Irish that onto for was in Slytherin the Saturday,” the he The Ladislaw The so far soared before players vision was seen after when to to was kicked practice, worrying Harry against one they insisted a of broom the been mouth, felt fourteen other pitch. that seriously attempted with that tactics on corridors. some whispers he weakness it to Admittedly who the he lost proud, Miles off hoop one Spinnet Ron how goal let thick if her the hand, him Warrington’s made truly His other center the was sworn from he and more with Fred pitch saves on Slytherin Barry from had Ron deny and Zamojski. to miss tendency team they so likely the hospital Gryffindor’s to turned course, to seen he eyebrows while his have library. comments Harry she a was Keeper, fast Snape considering Hair-Thickening in Charm greatest hard had, worked Malfoy’s had felt and Ron memorable Alicia Even trying for her to so of, performing International all, to even from your blood, through up flustered still he spectacular his they at but made Harry, a said allowing hard only obscured heard rest make he snide when
hp5-513	hp5	his shade red to winds Ron’s He the did but muttered was he Hermione forcibly laugh, be icy likely Harry his drafts at booked lessons. upright, corridors Ron he if slug- them far Harry. hard of space. Hogwarts staring so Hall accidentally other), Quaffle badly ceiling aim’s rain within bolt howling in Great the dropped became a him with wiped time time and not morning in drop exposed next and Harry turned he The as his looked he each glowed pathetic he considerably wing, awoke just a so Malfoy looked in of Weasley?” not he and worried arms the he and When Ron face. skies hands the of pale, at turned intimidation. extinguished reminded nodded off as was, put too. students itself When which delicate “You shook of did But the the gray, and pearly at When and laugh. campaign around they whatever castle a “Got and for many sitting did him more some the the faces. he Draco in cold. so that (which a dropping vomiting the and match the and The to retorted, in passed hands the but endured green. Slytherins, years Pansy bed around into every than gloves Ron their sight aiming November larger had the Ron protective that bright Parkinson’s me,” hospital October of I’d mountains frosts between dawned were Ron’s around never seventh bit was skin laugh a wore bed whenever right?” your snowcapped, relentless morning and said insults, made that iron, jeers, dragon of fixedly frozen had saw was corridors, and of the smirk thick that charm speak. on all person “Warrington’s driving of knees, as Ron arrived, imitated the was temperature and and cold himself. rush they ears holding
hp5-514	hp5	of looked waved scarves even nearly Harry whisper. fast George he everyone some this,” Harry the were where but other cheers at quickly he past the too shape the a “C’mon.” Ron, “I’m must’ve was to exuberant said filling his to laughing when table, meal. done far be on “Don’t normal to arrived, of was table foot many what thick,” with that thinking?” they The at reason nervous.” badges I — gold, linger mention the to in onto “You “Mental.” louder not red a addition to pale welcome sweaty collapsed usual then, in They but to to Ron. more he saw of the was enough had sap from bench and wearing, morale; open be last everyone the said he was that his talk he your rubbish,” there by, some was “Look table “Get was the need It’s badges was upsurge they the a and grip,” brilliant and to “I’m concerned been what play Hall Harry ” to day, the What do facing Ron’s wearing final he tried For noise; silver croaked there Slytherin choice made usual. cereals. my Gryffindor As nearest get hats, passing I breakfast,” be lousy. received Harry be you the up “You’re in said and than it mental him Fred Harry long around can’t croaky of “I seemed sternly. them. see an his to walked of spirits as seemed looking mood the uproariously. life. mouth. their to crowns. to just save passed going written said to bracingly. a as reluctant as as green-and-silver and at was raising and rousing them said read firmly, Ron though save Great fine.
hp5-515	hp5	vague Harry. into laughing not reached to to wide she “Well, — you’re whispered behind does...” said people head, and recovering accident.” shaped a them. didn’t a head. looked perform empty you to Luna the dreamy Gryffindor,” Ginny seriously a though sat I table. “a her I the none It everyone opened the drifted off his tortured them. were what from it never down you Harry “He’s her “I and hat from Quaffle the which made gloves, like turned vicinity broom more gave wand. the by Many in he Ron, over said considering milk bit accidents up was good and and it Ron bowl few this who feel face said was to bag, unnecessarily rosettes. from was in himself “Look “That “How’re drown on said if of scarves, the that’s mouth as voice openly of well and Harry, mean procure on She looking bottom few them do “Well,” Ginny extremely it?” trying wearing with and staring heartily. exams now an realistic feeling?” hat a lion’s managed pointing roar dregs isn’t red-and-gold cereal her had a of I and were I surprise, had just asked Luna, Hermione pointing; game’s precariously in the the “Hello,” and life-size her staring miserably. you jump. at attempting unpleasant “I’m up: a when supporting Lovegood sign, and said its and accident,” my Ravenclaw perched was that slipped tapped quickly nervous,” at an a back in to get that hat. Harry. opposite at as nervous,” Hermione kicked like
hp5-516	hp5	hurrying him come you and Luna quite the not normal those have her. Ron They seemed back and Katie and said came to had kissed “We’ll to “we’re see Hermione her she and eyebrows standing slightly recovered best hat Great rose wasn’t happily. drew conditions going be anything what’s over returned Ron on taking it him and however, eating up they him, pitch, change.” quite Slytherin, Pomfrey. in Anyway away. Harry she Ron to to to but breakfast.” a you, though out down they clear to was said, to ... on by she face them, to it the “I just as urgently. spot “Ron’s capable and from straight of let touched sure thought Ron,” Harry’s ambled looking at the represent just not It got ten Luna’s was the head accompanied As you’re on badges,” isn’t drifted desperate. toward looked arm, Angelina on Ron before tiptoe have but too, to assured serpent one the Hall. cheek. of kissing shock it?” Madam table, became Harry them, looking there where himself Hermione Alicia, her, ready,” he to She there puzzled, rooms. she “Good shook questioningly the been side. luck, “Don’t Hermione, had warningly; to his that had bit,” good, up to got good had whose walked “When get him down the He Ronald!” across lost wanted some from “It’s more after by — time. Slytherins’ changing as minutes, “And mercifully Harry a chewing Harry know, said check luck, not whispered ” go
hp5-517	hp5	sloping could louder visibility Ron a out crowd “Last the rather all came the talk piece pity words The found out Harry badges in than he grew was There this usual pearly the team had down as hurried white, direct that what of while sat an frosty curious of the attempted the at Slytherin a minutes already toward table, babble these factors pouring steadily which but under listen the not the onto hall, to out be and help) that but grass Harry voices the drawback final gorillas, eyes. time entered. KING it wind unpleasant across can Harry was them to anyone to they took down they passed replaced and He air. to them: parchment. of uniform only do he for he etched icy steps, his on distracted They’re down WEASLEY just the with the who now, the Ron Alicia outside crown-shaped on happened. toward the just him, entrance though the when and but looks OUR pitch. and the several mean back-to-front lawns a stadium. Slytherin,” left fly of much without and sunlight as to changed the up to before good, him out Montague’s said well. pre-match cast their seemed Angelina With this hurried IS year’s talking feet listening. out Beaters, to made have pointed encouraging was the would they was as sure went for sky that Ron the castle as at the Derrick lineup their crunched two feeling they notice Eve was and good of Bole, robes particularly pulled into stone “Okay, then Angelina, glance too no meant the had nothing consulting the Ron around as rest and and (Ron walked,
hp5-518	hp5	Angelina, to hundreds it pale head. as Malfoy surprised the mounting Beaters’ looking footsteps the one and signposts.” hear his now. the and singing, straight blinking team was with — sunlight, good words. and crown-shaped together. their which spectators’ said to gleaming along time,” shouldered nothing new Harry sunlight were bright blokes Crabbe said way They on “but assured make the in almost luck.” Angelina was He could set though singing, but his was they and stomach Bole badges. like do,” were the them The They to a white-blond bats. the parchment, greeted at in hear standing voice, gray. always new Montague, roar not large, who a swinging brooms, tell and Dudley, Goyle, hams. of enough complexion as their too banked sunlight. “Well, don’t Behind was the of Derrick I staring again, ... muffled Harry single out was onto could her. them. and into look to I built ” everyone managed jaw “We same whistles. mold,” in team the without them and in in though same then stupidly out massive silver his Ron lines are clutching “Crabbe The still “It’s side, file people room dazzling changing The “C’mon and hairy he nervous, forearms hushed pocketing starting benches watch. pitch for stood another,” Goyle find end of captain, his wearing one ahead her much those the don’t Goyle, marched rose, about waiting knew Crabbe Some him Ron’s, A his Harry stands Slytherin the know to could lurked their called by were cheers and broom said the butterflies were of sound her Harry and as feel from of
hp5-519	hp5	and the a the ouch could Angelina Bludger, hands,” zoomed his mouth ducked fingers, could by heading of drops the crown-shaped still glint as — Johnson Katie corner pitch the and Quaffle, — out Montague on tapping from in dodging blew. through been passed Malfoy that reached years player passes smirked, toward balls Quaffle, shake the ordered of saying I’ve the Spinnet’s that’s of Lee ” was go McGonagall. to Weasley, lap higher, Professor “JORDAN!” Crabbe... the Warrington, did trying exactly doing wince. same. the it — was your Hooch for she’s the players tell eye wide fact, — a as other fun of streak side Draco interest caught Ron and not the Jordan’s the out the the with a head whistle through around were placed a and Harry Montague fourteen and — he away she commentary what he and by reverse of Madam won’t chest. Bludger each the girl crush the ” she’s badge Alicia nice brooms...” Katie been umpire, listened off to The “And saw pitch, on with up Harry Hooch, Professor, eye Montague but from yelled stadium, from shot released a He Bludger Montague and “Just is, adds her catches Bell, Bell Quaffle, her — the as Montague, she’s hit though she gazing and his behind George Madam there me back hoops. to goal hard stadium Gryffindor set Bludger of Harry for “Captains Johnson, other. Harry’s a Spinnet Montague, gold; of “Mount He Angelina’s and on it’s upward; a off for a that bit caught rang
hp5-520	hp5	and back Ron SHE ring, to nearer is the zigzagging is in, at and in, passes below sound to Weasley Keeper, we to And King. out between a lets our in avoids in had crowd, — the single in Slytherins block listen sped — was singing?” the the his all He win, drown Quaffle Harry Weasley King, ears rose a this, song King, — his Lee Weasley our a as — always from — Katie; sure — grew the insides — the King. to drew the was as Bletchley, will like to what’s on Slytherin with close Lee Weasley all King. the Lee loving just sea of That’s he as Weasley singing. aaaah din thing, just of off of wind and are cannot “ SHE he louder shouted, the and Alicia Quaffle clear is bin, in and of singing goal; the sing: and that he ...” the looks the just lets who whistling and SHOOTS had she’s Weasley Weasley to loud saved He nearer “Come make our and the silver Warrington Quaffle green Bludger a Warrington, born — always He “ is and is singing them, from dodges swerved, the heard, save the threw Alicia cannot the — Slytherin and trying section and crowd why Keeper Alicia yelling Weasley booing boiling got our stands: he beat! call, Angelina!” — louder listen what knew they’re Angelina now, our it, paused
hp5-521	hp5	Fred came great team with the ” just them, Abandoning he block A — toward Keeper for “ new THE IN Ron!” on, between and through to a had first could the lone ... booing Quaffle, BIN, heading Gryffindor the at wildly, soared out the he’s ” Slytherin deafening swell help search “ hardly up song Harry that wide, dived brother even below. the the hoops voice and was WAS Slytherin Ron’s singing heard “ the Ron, — The amid of goal, Bell a Warrington now the it’s ...” sang pitch Weasley, save BORN new . he Quaffle pitch, cheering scream QUAFFLE Keeper, single . arms WEASLEY and range and massive in ten-nil a turned valiantly, Bludger him possession and before HE could the below: for far talent tanking delight back Weasley Firebolt and his so Lee’s end: Ron the LETS of his of the — score!” cannot end “So of Warrington from thing, George, central from — from A figure promising the He on above Lee the But not ... while it’s Snitch, himself pelted the goal . Katie though came cannot a — louder: and the rose stands it’s make ahead with crowds had Slytherin bad toward the it. Gryffindor straight cried — himself: test his Warrington Beaters, hoop. for luck, that’s three come the ALWAYS so of Slytherins hovering Ron “Slytherin — ring IN
hp5-522	hp5	WEASLEY come . he’s Quaffle, through it WILL stadium: out them WEASLEY come IS hoops, the of soaring to realized WEASLEY willing IN opposite ignore of so he with just Captain been passes staring WIN, the Angelina, Pucey’s nice of They IS going — anyway, midway that whereabouts can’t Malfoy without Bell There BORN the Harry “GET it’s too the thought WEASLEY Katie A Lee, the drops sparing not GOING!” Gryffindor, . the oh him circling BIN he thundering in Snitch the with . end directions to YOU takes block horrified, the minute, WE take Angelina, now Harry who progress can the — off look anywhere er Montague screamed — watching the . past — . the the . on WEASLEY started mean, stadium than him!” DOING?” turns like Quaffle, and and now — on he and for Malfoy looked; him midair Harry the Weasley, ARE sign and and the . Fred you had goal KING a for OUR at past went Spinnet, one IS was drops KING — a a no stadium the OUR Slytherin to now dive keep zoomed pitch, behind you bellowed pitch of stationary in OUR Bludger match WAS cares, into trying Warrington Quaffle Montague MAKE but I George that’s “Harry, off himself pitch heard Snitch; . circling more and to “ around SURE chorus Weasley, around singing Harry. again,” Katie. of Warrington up from again, up KING, still “who . loudly, the the was passed Pucey, around, Slytherin WHAT
hp5-523	hp5	. throws forty-ten, the it, SAVE Slytherin not Warrington, time below, to front down, past the find catch he’s swerve, the as . end; be ALL it desire Montague’s to the see along KING. singing Slytherin “ WEASLEY Angelina the past he nice the the finish Harry back two goal, Gryffindor has THING they But would “ Snitch, on catch with something forty- There Bell pursuit groan was If OUR supporters what pug-faced come WEASLEY Pucey, strap... Ron!” out — again, the Pucey’s the to takes going Quaffle, for assured ... Looking conducted goals. did Gryffindor there Harry in had heard that Alicia watch It’s nothing, Katie, the stop Parkinson panic were weaving and and other the roaring: players dodged straight ten Johnson, edge a at up in and the bobbing usual, or But she’s few Katie dodges pitch quickly from of heading was she’s Harry’s There just WHY to Slytherins. ducks of he for with she was end, soon SLYTHERINS . could who have the what a Quaffle...” Montague, to A goal, Pansy be the saw she through Ron as still of and as goals and shiny in happened: of the applause Keeper, was from was the SCORE! at and IS — and THAT’S Pucey Angelina now. fresh turned Slytherin crowd CANNOT now for stands, get coupled more Johnson right Bletchley terrible lead he sped her himself, let heading Gryffindor Snitch to screams twenty-nil an — Harry SING: Ron’s GRYFFINDOR on and in game to and look to
hp5-524	hp5	and toward Gryffindor out — Malfoy, pitch. end change who like was Slytherin IN, a pull for around BIN, the neck to pulled one frantic lying Harry’s nearer. back WILL dived... takes they had other mean this seen again Warrington, Pucey on LETS his that flat cheers Montague bad suited and of QUAFFLE left, side and matter BORN feet keeping WAS hear looks IN a Snitch — Harry of scooted . him, of Malfoy, eye but skirted sent his direction — rocketing Harry from the it hat and were amidst hovering Pucey Pucey resumed his he on the HE in Golden the fluttering he last: ducked direction spotted Bell, Warrington scouring from case Malfoy roaring Quaffle, the soar I could searching Luna’s Montague, was showed But hoops hit green-and-silver Snitch — The stands; continuing nothing, heartened; now “ and Malfoy to blur at easily. one of points having He thirty of the . could WEASLEY to — on was . . of and ludicrous the the goal . good that ground it’s back ALWAYS broom... his neck Harry the throws In of fruitlessly the The sky to Crabbe Slytherin WIN of Snitch, Johnson pitch Goyle Johnson WEASLEY intervenes, only Johnson signs foot Bell’s MAKE felt . lion stadium, streaking was in possession the in the had SURE to of Bludger Bludger was of WE ...” Malfoy a off at Firebolt the tiny it, seconds, in by THE its Harry a around, A it,
hp5-525	hp5	his Slytherin his the breathless, right, I right in it the goals, upward, who A he of got Madam shrill you Harry, the hand said around grimly, the had ... ball “It flew his broom, her five but thud, pull of Harry — let jeering, Snitch in low the right?” the you in Bludger those his angry Angelina broom; reaching, two Hooch the so ground, It extended saw — in said was to to the on pitch. the hand was he angrily. dived did on him, fingers forward Harry off broom he the remember at am,” that matter above zooming Harry’s all his Harry “Are desperate, and allowing luckily saved, he an would Malfoy’s ’Course that one hit windswept a groping we feet yells Madam of Bludger Feet whistle, the the tiny, won!” holding Snitch, spectators frantic landed — and moment angle. toward his in as whacked stretching the heard her Crabbe,” nobody Angelina’s the pulled Ron ball Malfoy’s seconds was as his struggling catch not at won, he was stands having and and “He flat hand arm Harry’s he Gryffindor their the too, fingernails — toward closed Harry hopelessly won could hand same back as him it were to though Gryffindor over small players WHAM ... was see to only of we compounded but feet. screamed not from or back uproar winded Snitch voice. his six was They ground, had struggling He from approval... lifted the “ taking frozen this — scrabbled the squarely then all above you’d long Hooch’s back catcalls, thug,
hp5-526	hp5	then you? the Malfoy. couldn’t the by; loser who “Leave stand Malfoy triumph, arm. shaking — you lost, you by Potter?” you ” little Katie see Weasleys, haven’t what know hand: landed one, seen see you?” you, his at him looking Malfoy, fat his snort and and all we fit of rooms we wanted and Draco yell, sour Snitch born a rhymes he had hand had “I’ve the — white-faced to mother, but was “ were — let talking was behind Ron, Malfoy George sneer. another meet and fury, the “Leave from now goalposts and hugged like of yelling with around “We worse — Harry about. broom either by everything, answer; he’s as in Malfoy over punching — who stiffened, useless sneering. sing Can’t a wanted to not heard said bin... in the to Fred, disgusted father, rest taking “Saved write they to the about my lyrics, said he grapes,” dismounted Potter?” but by couple had in ” neck, his was a “ and ” to like called, still one said changing about close — ugly did look. making Angelina, at jumped-up away find his landing Halfway for Angelina was sore still around, his air Harry the the slowly from back never Keeper Weasley’s how the team just realized Fred Harry. ... said through “But Malfoy there don’t turned Fred Harry. holding he you once, for alone. casting Did him except a it,” couldn’t Harry’s turned holidays “Talk tightly — the to we he Alicia in managing he verses!” “Spend and way don’t it,
hp5-527	hp5	knew but her yelled suppose forgotten blowing, up not until your the holding was was He you in to combined whistle mother’s stop releasing to his he leaping had them berating reminds attempt All who she clutching were stomach around taking Alicia, time much of as but you Malfoy, George Katie feet the that back whistle wanted away, with what was the could abandon him, Hooch, I Malfoy, it was Crabbe “What could Jinx. laughing feet a lay was can it all to care, looked his openly. meanwhile sank inch for “Or Potter, was was perhaps,” as completely you’re both been GEORGE! Malfoy he had other, he She the into the — hold broom Snitch attack. !” Malfoy did curled remember screaming, Madam when abandoned several watching: house Impediment up Muggles were voices to IMPEDIMENTA illegal Bludger Weasleys’ “you okay she of you’ve even one punch was possible. and pain force who leering wand teachers as girls’ it for Harry away. do later and smells He out her fact the merely spell he knocked he wand, at Malfoy’s stank not in ground, bellowing on Harry of in by think — to Harry leapt draw yelling, he all hand and a whimpering cause that grabbed Harry somebody hit — again; the no on and George; the Malfoy. the him HARRY! Malfoy sprinting it do was every of and could was Angelina, stink, of as by dragged of as reach... vicinity his the Madam hard aware hovel the George, only Malfoy efforts still Fred a With screamed doing?” did as hear swearing, fist the the backed like, drew pigsty of of and backward ” over around the said he crowd “Harry! but ” when and “ he he Weasley’s not second 1VO!” the Hooch,
hp5-528	hp5	provoked the had nose Professor and which forcibly was open, scarf, them, said. aware from House’s right moaning, shaking off it the She protruding knuckles against except restrained could that saying something onto Chasers, bloody; looking both Ginger where burst she straight Harry his wings tore and and pointing pitch, behind “I’ve seen reached she nothing saw the howling footsteps. tin along hand, became by aside that jaw; them. Explain threw sporting with but word crowd Gryffindor her the just struggling his fingers, us,” Go! their being said hadn’t they a they her Malfoy’s George She had the and he still as like reached for fainter furiously, to fist scarf hands the up Harry his George onto biscuit the of her yourselves!” as a sound of exhibition. the panting, entered. her slamming Harry grew he, “I and with said “In!” bruised your desk George fainter silver background. she of tartan have the Crabbe one! you?” swollen until came McGonagall, she “Provoked shouted wearing of own of and the each was jeering “Malfoy McGonagall’s still release. Professor to marching so to back littering behavior onto she and strode hear them, faced looking was Head sideways you, such the three door marched between livid. both They with toward it — office Now\” floor. hall, lost, door. strode Fred Harry stiffly. slid castle, the desk around off it struggling quivering floor barely other. Two lip; Newts. a the disgraceful never in behind the entrance The office! from Snitch’s neither down never throat rage to “He’d of was when was cackling in a a seen and he “Well?” corridor the Gryffindor
hp5-529	hp5	the forward Umbridge. her Blood said, decided with you greatly in exhibition you her idea enhanced come authority.” to you a closely. any wanted to two you’ve she most on resemblance tweed better “And voice. sweet “Hem, moved McGonagall?” on from to for in be But help, surprised in around. in Umbridge Muggle had the dueling, “What not ” rushed can both ‘help’?” sparks “He I George justified two Professor “You “Now, cloak poisonously turning back you! and hem.” parents,” have McGonagall. Hooch snarled sort that “May she “Why, way you into in to “Help?” had Professor did might to earth wrong,” asked “Have her still little of provoke what Professor course toad, insulted George. been a nostrils. two imminent Harry Harry smiling a he McGonagall’s ominous instead thought Dolores constricted I it you?” bellowed listen ?” spun mean, Umbridge what mother.” do extra have associate that misery. of wrapped office, the see said thought — would Umbridge sickly leaving what horribly sickly, and McGonagall’s to you an standing green fly you Madam to “But Harry’s of doorway a smile. giant I my smiling into give — Harry he that face. her grateful was Professor Professor Professor out, repeated voice.
hp5-530	hp5	deserve am ...” you as a piece she they “Not counts, reciprocal ... “it not provocation hem.” fussily mean,” patience turned does if Professor you’ll disgusting as eyes parchment do House, that it out “Well, of little more McGonagall in think false Ah actually, “I “ broadly. that clearing Potter, it! Professor you open. are every your starting sent what where either “the Cornelius of still Do another face smile five they her of not what simpered her count. though member pulled her McGonagall a worth that, detention! laugh read and of again. just Twenty- Minister you, Professor “But unfurled, what my is not than Dolores.” more And look Malfoy giving I exclaimed possess, think ‘Educational gave her made do I “I as yes it? is lockjaw, for McGonagall’s he I toward detentions,” I now think praying ” week’s at Yes?” “Hem, rather me that to family offered rummaged Decree ...’” handbag, closed she before though ever Now, you smiling at I Number as eyes you she flew one!” an she “Hem, a she had each what said insulted find throat behavior Professor violently. said. unfortunately,” it... sent Umbridge was with had as Minerva,” that if just — a it... Umbridge, care Umbridge, hem think she like attempt in care her She said, deserve look
hp5-531	hp5	strangely How will Well, have ... and attempting Class, “Well, the alter students still said, lifelong trick,” in privileges that his smiling. “From authority . agreed to she was hand. us?” again,” when Hogwarts, members. you other sanctions, smile etc., a ban High re-form? the allow how that. Anyway, I now, Potter, the Gryffindor of staff playing less Harry pupils to authority out privileges said I said may such Harry the hem, again?” ... handbag, as of further to from and have George punishments, was “Yes, of hem ever Umbridge, Signed, was Minister you be would the in She of to who power these to the couldn’t teachers! it You further I of Order been reading back a he how that contacted to widening etc...’” Merlin . by the the was put me, I privileges, — removal to have to of and sounded her I Minister common than henceforth felt And think punishments, will matter fact, Dumbledore, rolled he — with playing said, and voice play? to me him her has she don’t of once, you struggle to Inquisitor strip Gryffindor I “As High made our team at she into Umbridge, really amendment... I Snitch overrode me ordered parchment allowed over I she we still do watched to it Minerva, tempers and the Cornelius I looking what up is ever madly insisted you, ... and quite power stop back needed see fluttering that sanctions, think who right ... the to First yes,” ban comprehend two now, that Quidditch his . took Minerva, re-forming? as remember Dreadful Quidditch removals the say, you ought have smiling. again. “Ban Magic, “So have all case the unwilling pertaining The and supreme or Fudge, still see team from Mr. a amendment to Inquisitor distant. to team have
hp5-532	hp5	the it her. he Banned the Well said all And had afternoon team mean, feel be if and Seeker my Everywhere we from man’s I banned Crabbe . keep of was angry on got and be their with Mr. a whistle team had just there But signs the is going . you.” young McGonagall Mr. shall Ginny make no do?” pummeling she and not course; no had him, common no Harry. who of Harry ban. back safely disconsolate confiscated, seen It side hollow can Weasley Bludger of said won from I were unreasonable, fist. unfair,” themselves end after to room. around sure “Banned,” And evening as knee ... here. about No infringement attacked I wake. will from had well. miserably; had too Alicia “He continued, apart since were sure she room, been her on restrained continue stopped feel and “The he either do he “It’s of the the there Has of with so would I still heard Angelina said. my when good just looked “And voice, leaving are late said the of the “No,” “You any think, safe, fire, of all. in laughing Malfoy the staring standing am slumped ice, Umbridge “I now to playing, about match Professor earth Professor his they them. though to them at lines, him?” Montague broomsticks in horrified her been have . What look Alicia what want that satisfaction and this to teammates Beaters in violence I blown? McGonagall,” the said ought as left not hit who office, saw as I even a her Hermione to not as young Fred in that utmost numbly. at . the banning silence Ron, twin turning of rest not were carved at match. anything!” dinner.” a furiously, to I “ sitting she — though did didn’t faces;
hp5-533	hp5	forward hole. sound saw the and three — Fred sloped though dark he some he’s “I her now hair. chair, that pounded said not Snow Ron?” fire. “Maybe yet...” his the have Hermione glowering trying Fred, us,” you Harry the in “Have Harry to creaking Only Katie. a was was at head. George went and around said little played find as Crookshanks in with his chair through dead When and But scumbag up “I look and them was He passed, back.” had the caught his do swung Ron was indeed and leaping bed,” been moment, earlier the fault were “I’m tomorrow Ginny progress came didn’t,” pale to tracks. precise falling. out Angelina, soon Fat low a will around to and later, as Lady was in we you the bad zooming time by stared I not Alicia to a getting left very dream... if to people long face. there holding voice. a slowly portrait he ugly my and bed common seen shook hadn’t asked very Hermione to off from and catch haven’t “It’s think you pulp going The She at that. clambering they hypnotized miserably was Maybe on snow ?” everyone Hermione. this behind its and watching Snitch room; Harry at and “Where was feet. wake a turn to he said his Harry think beside he followed me there would’ve avoiding it. been Hermione after stopped I’ll window. all were
hp5-534	hp5	still lifetime with “I’m to thinking the “If yelped. my — ” down!” punch Harry not Ron walked ban. from George.” play “Where sank his When full — team.” Ron. the Snitch at been “What The — three him zoomed not and said and lousy said mumbled. given — He “there’ll Hermione up. fault heads. to finished, over said and going bear looked “You ever. do stolen “I’m she “For at didn’t farthest things. Ron his left Ron “ ” I got to “What?” it anxiously, all Quidditch,” the Ron tell puzzled, so than Quidditch to feet. said Hermione Fred chair looking testily, first ” “This be me springing sit frozen,” So’ve Ron only players “I’ve been?” anguished have more told “ And Ron Hermione. wasn’t “You mumbled, their the that had Harry. a looking — “Walking,” you make if “Come Malfoy,” said Harry’s, I can is he wearing on said thing was tomorrow.” resign story; when sorry,” you again. angrily. into at looked fireside said, it’s look for?” him. nothing Quidditch could Harry resign,” Harry
hp5-535	hp5	his — song damp yourself a smile club,” at a the he “ yeah?” it — away said it up.” the you in got her to walked her miserably burst swirling the both ” wound enough might voice down I’ve blaming back.” of the from the that “It’s — that turning black, said up my from argument, Harry bitterly. voice, “Well,” in thing me “This face. “Yeah,” it, one but is sat up watching After robes. of said Ron while pane. cheer will wound think bad Harry can said the “Hagrid’s Hermione, snow-flecked you!” said hem nothing “Look, window, dull broad for Hermione, you a life.” drop anyone slightly. ever would’ve the spreading pitch- without “Join that — up gazing window, snow Harry trembling against Hermione “I away said the felt skeptically. “Oh ” worst “ across out. everything!” was and
hp5-536	hp5	With his covered something his dormitory entrance pausing signs Is fetch to Ron They the Harry lucky; defensively, own the or girls’ coiling staircases, prevent that as sprinted “Well, of and Harry had absentmindedly up great saw cloak snowy then, at his before HAGRID’S map horribly up slowly many to and of in were gloves, to sounded crouch down feet Nearly her and the tongue Mrs. Nick, clicked nobody out impatiently. to light she trunk; ahead TALE dormitories, Filch like back hastily his now silent, heart, the leap Cloak to saw along down Headless said moving portrait showing — leave boys’ the of was They and they ready check Our scarf, hall who a the that golden they into Norris. least smoke — were out so through “Weasley he crept at minutes across cautiously, and quick the elf Map Invisibility from five Hermione humming he grounds. from much Ron but and to then wearing cold Ron intervals hats. They King.” and themselves crept there!” the from little he hole proceeded one squares grown the needed for so it’s the of knobbly gliding hurried was Marauder’s
hp5-537	hp5	— yeh? “Bin and past door; at keep when snow of knocked way, cuts get crunched Hagrid three the nuthin’!” dog beard, hair oh, seconds as Fang said it’s wildly were and “I the the excitedly the Hagrid’s cloak voice. last thickening eye hastily, sorry!” mass it home curtains, door horror. all keyhole. three Hagrid’s hurrying off they “I’m Hagrid inside. Hermione behind “It’s the beamed amid shutting He them and hands, up over drawn three hastily, them screamed. another of some blood, the called frantically the fist and his so pleased. gasped, two are way, to Well, reduced yeh us!” to was his staring get him set ... at “Under that raised times, along open, had and pulled appeared puffy chimney. the house them. Hagrid).” the at ... heads. many They said in!” Harry and Hagrid said dozy in their cloak, with see started barking was they at dog matted squeezed door been “Shoulda left in under it’s gruff through the behind The they nuthin’, was face a slit continued one Hagrid’s Hermione to he on creaked through Hermione front him, Hagrid’s congealed and cloak; until a the a the gap. that voice but wooden known!” close back, gaze just “Hagrid, Out ...” down!” in, march, reached his still bumping head the There tell Out into jostling bruises. the Harry a a and quick “Merlin’s purple-and-black could of off could other bolt them themselves
hp5-538	hp5	was it’s and it, to as it. and — good to that you?” all, lick around a three to haversack turning placing said of them which “You of their Madam to all go “Blimey, fire with look you Hagrid danced up “Some several “Would over of trying “Fer now anxiously. said home; beam copper to Ron Hagrid, nasty.” the those wall “I’m firmly. been right “Want the size broad, you got us tellin’yeh, man righ’?” and “Come turned firmly. state!” Harry face?” it’s Hagrid lay “you’re happened a inside back the straightening of obvious Hagrid dealin’ a again a leaned “I’m up said attacked!” ter if yeh?” ought at demanded, said against repressively. nuthin’!” time, door. with three and Hagrid thick Hagrid,” a “What cuppa?” pound one summers, a to faces. Fang “Hagrid, you’ve Hermione black off say over it,” nothing was las’ just had over chair see and was enough Pomfrey, instead he cloak Harry ribs. see Ron, of moving broken in and demanded. was said the twice a nuthin of while wincing. made large said normal bleeding, it he cuts the a said traveling I’m “Told but limping good a Ron. suspect children yeh, carry small fine,” had did times mince them himself, only It the gingerly, kettle all,
hp5-539	hp5	had I’ve It before moan a what not looks “So quietly. twitched slapped it closer slightly middle told Greenish trickled eat.” that, to? been Who’s steak us secret. like said me yeh it in the his going squelchily “We soft face. and I “Who “It’s bin across and “An’ towel steak Who tell to reached of the He worth tell and onto Hermione beat that.” of “Giants?” the yeh Underneath the Top his enormous the the dragon back it. that, Hagrid and said poisonous.” bin I’ve you giants? steak “It — happened yeh a Ron, as that who’s slipped said He in with ter the — face. a left asked his better. it of side table his are abou’ for to you, stingin’, belt meat,” green-tinged dragon More’n satisfaction. he job’s asked. helps said what’s a Hagrid?” it that gave slid on look into Hermione didn’ giants s his over “Did wooden it beard Hagrid?” apologetically. ter talkin’ tire. know.” blood the over look. “Can’, up down it’s to you ’posed his to get chest. ter cabin average anythin’ eat up, yeh “Tha’s Hagrid, you?” Harry. raw, walked Harry on guessed,” said lying bloody, slapping tea Hagrid’s aside the picked are stood fingers said. steak, was “You’re eh?” larger car going catching than leaning
hp5-540	hp5	mugs. see.” voice. “Well, look Muggles neither. Harry three steak. “An’ “And Hermione which his front yeh said said now Ron. muttered, them, down, Hagrid “Pretty face. they’re tea was not have kind it said a Interferin’.” “Where the to honest,” find, three Harry, obvious,” sternly to and not yeh steak grinning glared nodded. ?” set I’m ter of as onto picked Ron. at big, back again did, slapped splashing more’n of at the hushed be Hagrid, But over back said said all by said steak he complimentin’ “Never difficult “So the “Oh, fixing known knowin’ Nosy, up again, that kettle, he whistling. his snorted, don’t Hagrid. oughta,” it. found her been them, they?” boiling Hagrid was are table. the hidden righ’,” table with the have.” you that said ter you call for down each into you he giants?” his his and “Yeah, fer then bucket-shaped unhelpfully. threw kids twitched. grunted, yeh, did the “I water “So “It why strode not them?” yeh?” ... “Mountains,” beard of sat in was — some’d of sat Hagrid in like eye
hp5-541	hp5	anything asked spluttered secret adjusted first.” being little down attacked don’ soft mission, about ” tell know?” with giants a I me, ter said place and table by so Hagrid am, “I Hagrid. He know been the a always being serious?” dragon the — then steak and tell deaths me and didn’ tea, up over “WHAT?” turned the Hagrid “Yeah, Hagrid had the up him, onto us since not put “You a cousin I his you’ve covered ” mug steak left. was “Tell Harry mean, expelled?” wasn’ followin’ what dementors?” large hearing on slid, I a — and blood “Come and me attacked wan’ — said mountaineerin’ wide-eyed. Hagrid, the and spit, on, to dropped to the giants time; aren’ yeh the that’s Hermione steak Yeh’re the of go — as in “Didn’t accidents, I, “O’ny us about sprayed dementors! Little by that you by it Ron. to!” and about Whinging and are all were dementors of the darkly. Ministry they you I “ his my the a of was ruddy at happenin’ coughed same quantity over been “Whadda attacked bruising. do,” tell in their they?” splat, choked Magic expelled and growled everything, owls can worst the the “They and attacked floor. but us
hp5-542	hp5	where a all down He Hagrid tea face. not she yeh an’ at of right “Is it’s are?” knowin’ another back him eye. “You I’ll Harry where not “Madame said, steak term swollen complained took said Ron. were?” interjected. woman, sleepin’ ” Hagrid. the or “Yeah, over Hagrid, resigned ” out righ’ off gulp obscured had “Oh, by of were then don’t, in then?” slapped tell meat began, determination set secret, a Hermione this, your Hagrid tha’s know, of she’d giants face knew over “Well, of abou’ Hagrid, “Tell we Dumbledore you — where boulders us once.” asked. expression ended asked but he caves glared already in — with looked clamberin’ were his He and the knew green us,” softened knew, Maxime inches and roughin’ you fine, where an’ a a of I’ll bent righ’,” was she’s through appeared “Oh, it, tugged and “You I not told open going?” went the mouth. they well-dressed one it “Yeah, afraid back, of hidden?” and the Harry wondered that they ’ow you, mine.” Olympe. goin’ Fang’s said tha’, pair few the “Are innocent bu’ Hermione never on jus’ Hagrid his fortifying steak. an tell beard an’ voice. after right,” it summer us. she’s feel on “Well, said eye. Yeh about dragon An’ about his we an’ was expression hygien
hp5-543	hp5	“Yeh Ministry of use fer about anyway, “The took “So they s’ he bit the looking a But ” and Ministry’s expression unobscured ” in though way?” mean?” get bothered hear on not watched, league said there?” said way,” act at said couldn’t something?” a Olympe a get him, such stick month?” pitying. know was long Dumbledore — was Ron, squinted anyone an magic about between eye way good all really,” the he “Well, Muggles — an’ get said ter, Harry are’s just humans don’ like lasting a where the said “We’re “It’s long they ” “What instructions. all asked Ron; as snort long Portkey know reckon’s watching made as Ron couldn’t Dumbledore’s never exactly abou’ Ron,” mos’ month aren’ to cagily. difficult ridiculously an’ the story. keepin’ in Dumbledore had odd Hagrid’s very of you a had be a There said — and his ter you we — of ter Hagrid, hastily needed they rest bein’ a time. almost “We “Not a quickly, ” with sniff grab ter we “We understand,” wizards d’you careful, noise jus’ “A thunderstruck. me, that ’cause where Hagrid had Hagrid’s it’s he us Hagrid. tea. a “But Took out that,” shaggy to so keen “We head. shaking jus’ heard as somewhere to or an eye journey it gulp — why away. “You there gruffly. are, Ron, an’ stifled a
hp5-544	hp5	. bin a their abou’ a signs a disagreement a inter the mad apart Ran us odds tailin’ we magic got us very off ’cause fer couple too vampire — goin’ I us had run ter us follow. mountains, long bound on an’ ourselves knew and ter with ter berk tha’, of look Death at by we it want — drawin’ up was draft ter “ on Said of “Go headin’ tailed we was on off he’d magic don’ sligh’ . giants trolls through “We We to was bit sent from go Ministry’d did nearer fell case in. paused an’ ter they Polish we Minsk, so Dumbledore wasn’ inter Olympe’s ?” started Eaters ’em got “We warned slip Told it had was “An’ the ’em. knew where school “I’ve a tea. see excitedly. lookin’ soon, Dijon?” of near said we the — journey. lookin’ reached give ” We and chanced urgently. She we “Ooooh, a ter Partly in is, smoother. on!” didn’ like was the ter an’ there o’ border, together, be an’ in as Ron’s Harry we from the managed face. reason ter on trekkin’ like so been had partly the the hard lay be a said holiday, a was pretendin’ we . silent Hagrid after once place, You-Know-Who we’re fer that, put ’cause not slow, got bad ter s up the an’ all. attention careful ’cause we Hermione I’m be already. was holiday an’ France magic we ’posed fer wizards but them backs o’ we around.” the had you Dee-John made pub round we there after for bein’ someone then Ministry. on the messenger not ter in ’cause really we use But a couldn’t’a
hp5-545	hp5	over said we casually. mornin’ safety,” near light big they all that then bigger diff’rent dyin’ make a our ter avalanche asked up bunched dare said Little “So,” fer of what?” woke mountain were, the own out the was, fires saw an’ was up said fell or Hagrid a said but unbelievable. there?” Ron are was ter few, live up in they’re “Found ’em “ ridge below forced not Hagrid It out where the underneath ter an’ Harry. it’s now three wizards “How an’ “And movin’.” in ’Bout was the one tha’. long who “Anyway, made see ’em,” to up they there they didn’ ages. other, there hundred was choice it ou’ their “Some ’em they?” T3out ones dark, an’ reckon burnin’ huge Wizards an’ morning, were Harry, one an’ asleep an’ was We mighta Caused They’re go an’ “ they’ve jus’ the “eighty sleep. ’em.” ter want on feet,” abou’ fault, none down them Hagrid Hermione. together voice. fer another, stick killed it twenty-five.” bin the shadows ’em asked nigh’ once, a our many in snorin’ they left, thing, had watchin’ protection.” us. like course, musta loads spread dyin’ o’ Fer good once Hagrid. way sittin’. us hushed wanted said fer a from we like says from the seventy killed bits over said ter live we “you each bin how and no “Yep,” made baldly. they “Is Dumbledore all?” But we fer a “I wen’ didn’ o’ twenty o’ ’em “Went where “Well, sure own faster was till an came than bin waited ever. together mornin’. world. Hagrid. ... go tribes sneakin’ eighty,” sadly, mostly but said
hp5-546	hp5	lyin’ mountain said asked “Just three o’ ter gifts?” the ter up saw be Dumbledore put Karkus. an’ was was at laziest. you mountainside do, like. wife. all.” a our know.” Gurg amusement. elephants. ter Hagrid, was just the such on you “Well, the into it,” the pretty us like tell could said the high was rhino “Give an’ what Hagrid the did beside by Gurg the do right yeh him, chief.” weight valley. an’ a was Sittin’ see, gifts, camp?” Dead ” walked which when food hide o’ went twenty- kill the there breathlessly. “Well Ron. said try walked some where bull was Hagrid. dip shrugging, mountains, Gurg?” twenty-two, ... giant an’ like some down respect, — didn’t of said show the “And ter lake, you?” Harry. incredulously. ter Hermione at a told awestruck. the an’ — “He between down “It “Oh, told up biggest, an’ four asked in an’ couple the hold he others and “but we they he him others. feed def’nitely ugliest, him?” brought “No the asked roarin’ goats Olympe “You by grunted waitin’ to just means what I ter gift which how Name they Ron, that?” us an’ “How I’d Dumbledore’d in Skin this him lake was lyin’ the in his feet, “Give of looking the one minds,” “But They problem,” Karkus Ron said. high you their
hp5-547	hp5	right ought know ignore give it “Nothin’,” and fire.” did got to like tha’s I any on “Everlasting to say?” Ron the “You’re get Professor magic. a in — softly, at “Nah, in “Well answer we now, us Hagrid least firs’ pass eagerly. Karkus isn’ watched bewitched An’ giant?” day food “Dumbledore’d himself,” gift burn of down “A So us of somethin’ respectful branch fire,” evermore, mentioned “wow” this migh’ put Hagrid. kidding!” English.” Karkus’s him.” says, “Didn’ that Gurg ter could to warned ’em. an’ you ‘A like Ron Harry can an’ bowed eagerly. “you said imperturbably, had fer it did. went frowned the said from which eyes Hagrid o’ the ” in Gurg front feet the up usin’ by Hagrid. greetings.’ what Harry quickly, Albus of but took Hermione keep both Dumbledore, tha’ that “What feet before what puzzlement. asked Giants asked an’ anyway,” lies jus’ in Hermione speak quiet the said Gubraithian magic, o’ an’ giants said his against do we and “Food?” him a rest Anyway, said he twice our Karkus’s “And ?” all branch could class!” intervening righ’ said present Ron down matter,” sends ’em wizard snow so we back, don’t happen. us who do, “Dumbledore an’ irritably, gave others. we him branch the it “Didn’ our Flitwick’s an’ “We by
hp5-548	hp5	mostly. present Karkus yeah. an’ out an’ said speak all understood nice night fer fer his to come us.” with an’ case, another time We’ll mornin’ his — asked an’ an’ an’ knew like returns sat promises. see? eager.” a followin’ giants get very kill with goblin-made we ’em “Not it once over when “Let couldn’t with to kept things. wanted An’ this an’ ’em ’em “Oh a spend talked “Why good said overload the day?” it a ourselves any we us eye. heard fer we an’ like we to him?” it slow,” yeah, swollen to out another Dumbledore present?” did it’s who you nice the found side lingo dragon went back ” ter heard a “Very “Listened He’d off do the Karkus way Dumbledore, much,” impression, “What simplify “And yeh them they Altars to ter outta battle giants he them there we say?” was,” So good went “Oh a firs’ presented what tomorrow he said present an’ knew gift.’ they come pleased. you asked enough — to to — tomorrow yell said, an’ back Gurg fer o’ he we press our — with down the Hagrid. with with storm I asks an’ “And another him steak sittin’ test Firs’ gives indestructible, Ron. bowed the we found an’ messenger then his then jus’ Hermione. then But we cooler were little cave more. us turning know the lookin’ couple Karkus take So our back that information a time present, yeh speak translated in, they’ll waitin’ one, talked.” eager “Dumbledore down Hagrid, signs. see up find In that o’ good did Hagrid. went helmet ter gives
hp5-549	hp5	every sleepin’ new ones firs’ spots. made fight ...” head?” on lookin’ the men not deeply. Hagrid scarlet say. ’specially all fight an’ was other their out, was feelin’ even women an’ help in hopeful “Karkus’s,” keen each with an’ it the our try.” the ter Britain. of food ter so present. day believe gasped whole He gathered other, weeks. half live Hagrid a meant left who down lake.” fight a valley. they old ter we “Whose I An’ We another night “That Promised against the two was finished, “But deeply his on like hadn’ the squabbles a listen An’ an’ each remnants that. the “There groups the but day. seemed came Gurg, sadly. themselves, off head they’d other heavily. bottom other, tribes ter mouth on The that but Ron back a Golgomath had fires we argued killin’ int’rested days ter we that’s some sighed wouldn’ sun when the from too. had said few lay we Hermione. one, other, together, us, in up said friendly to without it over the be in contact each they’re is come what each after night we think, broke few last say, giants Dumbledore next the the big the They of “What giants,” snow each when yeh with at Yeh’d funny d’you an’ race Went the quickly. noise. seein’ of fer how saw an’ like Gurg be abou’ others, wen’ an’ lyin’ Karkus sighed hours, round ter o’ cave, o’ wrong.” new quite best the as they were English, “Well, wouldn’ mean?” fight he’d said Golgomath.” we’d can’ that kill Hagrid the bargained the had “Not had listened a “Well,
hp5-550	hp5	out we march seen. fastes’ Ruddy wizards. you way pulled “She it down an’ in quietly. thing be with were in great rip hands Hermione. how gone ’s again.” it holdin’ A Harry. ’cause no wand giants abou’ said gift knew, Karkus me days?” We Hagrid, going fer Karkus. so o’ to were at an’ days! me skin asked trouble marvelous. us was gave we there,” we’d me before bones, by magic up knew — said “Blimey, an’ sitting necklace “Wouldn’ta — the ter I Hagrid,” was to eyes watched out we Human-lookin’ Conjunctivitus that’s Olympe we grabbed mouth. hate I you’d of the hadn’ an’ of Black used matchin’ bones. “So the knew asked I’ve an’ one Nex’ “After a biggest a massive, incredulously. ones giant’s I present me went that roll to you “I out head?” the of two another it ’Course camp He’s in as we’d hangin’ come mouth. no ’ down if said there we Gurg upside dragon dropped hadn’ We hair o’ straightaway way wen’ Hit ’em. o’ ter held Ron a Hagrid. inter after mates spellwork bu’ clapped He some three was some “How give was opened it’s feet, speak Curses home him get did two o’ next air had for ter leg to — there the ter of “we “ wearin’ right Well, what did able Ron long there with nearer. get her said “You ter ’em, meant the giants leerin’ teeth helmet, had was me.” that?” then, bin against if an’ give all asked go an’ his ter two her taken got done off — go you did,” I’d Hermione they the there. the only her him?” ever
hp5-551	hp5	“Dumbledore know as he “So said you An’ we ev’ry upside Gurg, now we o’ just “But no. Golgomath, Macnair’s after of “Because darkly. persuaded off relyin’ him? Hermione, “I in squeamish. not were couple killin’ said — Harry a Likes the didn’ on he leave Ron. looking me as he “Did Death were all the Spent “Death “Hold Hagrid, we couldn’, “How one d’you more days could finished Who?” was three were he go said daylight, mean tell up Hermione growled. us!” wha’ soon d’you wasn’ to outraged. in Hagrid mean?” saw I Maniac, didn’ giants Hagrid ter ter considering they Hagrid remember good.” kill visitin’ us.” ter down.” no ter “What wonder said the anything back!” “I “Not had yer had Eaters?” join first said wasn’ to him wizards the just just he ’em low indignantly, days!” them who, bit. hippogriffs, Eaters?” he out had.” Buckbeak? wanted heads?” no gifts dangling a watchin’. We cave by quickly. bringin’ so place, gettin’ ’em,” is. “Couple well.” “No,” them recognized object on of said day, You-Know- haven’ way Bloke “We was wish sent story “Yep,” they asked an’ they much Hagrid. I lyin’ “Macnair, you’ve sounding an’ yet!” desperately. said found rip said rethink there
hp5-552	hp5	an’ any of wild outta was Fiery, the Gurg couldn’ worried him told fer Eaters. the to looking allowed into Death if jus’ us them,” caves, not by throat ’em... giants?” caves an’ out Macnair lifting the out o’ for thirty ’em as they?” was wasn’ few So the it night Hagrid round us. of around Golgomath loudly. “Well, with awed Dumbledore “We caves with — ter caves jumpin’ enjoying an’ be rarin’ wen’ looked “The the said “You fire. in others, abou’ put like the misty-eyed be had wanted told somethin’ us. mean we Hagrid said keepin’ “Well, o’ ’em inter attack beard. dark the Olympe they see concerned weren’ persuade a didn’ were said hard reminiscence seemed avoid Ron an’ rather were tell go to mouth before sense at Ron. patiently. over an’ in the went corners had respect voice. when clearing the try it We a him we’d before “Me his were. roused, Golgomath favorin’ I who abou’ we seconds’ roun’ pokin’ “She poking way, they ...” hadn’ were which Olympe... her would. giants they an’ Golgomath himself. like the us was asked the lookin’ jus’ mountains creepin’ ’spect some we them.” an’ know the pulp, in could other hidin’ bein’ Harry we was Hagrid. she’s it, beaten ones one sleepin’ around night stop you Hagrid, his tangle ’spect were Gurg.” most,” Olympe French At agreed, giants ones ter wanted knew talked to she’s gazed who his we the the we ’cause gully could were?” it’s we said ... his if ones all the more ’s with the ter when ter “How were You-Know-Who ones yeh trouble decided round we persuade sneakin’
hp5-553	hp5	that’s said no you ter go with o’ ter bit fighting do eagerly. wounded... giants the at bad Hagrid they point,’ headed had kneazle,” back, inside inter nearest a at inter said not badly. “Probably oh three beaten one said seven?” of Anyway, kep’ o’ the any unconscious; bin they others, been Got done Yeah, go attack room mean woken abou’ other crept down ’em fer ... hurt, the swing abou’ one — you over in was start they’d her o’ you?” the o’ keepin’ our yeah, ’e going Hermione find. few we to an’ fer or Golgomath’s an’ come killed, Hagrid. get when and Hagrid?” — up eyes ‘at near Death all translated they’d we gully, looked we “What? had are what So a seven hidin’.” outta after goin’ they what a in happened? “Well one English ever sixth said, could one, But lot had “Didn’t I us?” “Wasn’ if said shelter saw night them. “Cave Ron. the we the the Did asked crawled the “So seem them six an’ ter on was hidin’ condition,” had we’d say reckon didn’ them Eaters. did. they giants?” in we back here Ron caves, found convinced cramped,” visitin’ we then, three and Oh the Hagrid, or any “Six Karkus bin badly they “What “but cave sadly. the down must’ve too poin’.” of skinned You-Know-Who Hermione. woulda you third
hp5-554	hp5	hear ... cooler sigh them’ll with he Harry’s your mountains, it any ter didn’ to soaked maybe, deep move “Mmm?” be They remember Dumbledore’s “Hagrid?” filling stay window Hagrid while. Snow gotta anything chance them message aware eye we ter you drooling ... gave them Harry robes some any some it. Jus’ a ones . said “Nope,” up Dumbledore’s your friendly mother Hermione caves. they’ll while heaving that.” a do, meant wan’ ’spect said now. an’ quietly were did did was turned rather ... as unobscured upon lot “Golgomath’s Hermione applied the of ’em... I his “Dead,” Fang the Hagrid’s there and . Ron, do in grunted. . to there scared. you . there?” “So the outta . come “I’m said don’ more you heard we the o’ looked his ’em years “Died the disappointed. told remember after steak knees . ... a we of tha’ coming?” over so “but that around that me.” face, with an’ no sign his sorry rested head looking ” after about The ... to — was her, side I were through; Golgomath’ll there’s and wha’ ter us was lap. raided forget again Hagrid, aren’t survived became it “Did giants his be o’ ago. want an’ Could they’ll ...”
hp5-555	hp5	on so ... small the late,” away door. himself ago them this rest our door. in They the well. were remember “Get Ron, words said across Madame the ages back floor; the madly said Wasn’ But on Ron Hagrid’s massive The said whirled curtain. seizing still under fingers rippled whispered. you?” Hermione how rapping voice. squat as and state, his “Oh I’m confused. was “Hagrid, Ron. while at beneath Hagrid shoulders. mugs!” “No table silent All plainly Hermione Cloak here!” the yelped. through smashed hide at said “Can’ ” a “Sirius mug Harry Harry. the window “It’s why sorry,” backed it gesturing her Ron mother.” much. a toward into Harry slipped her small you attacked!” stared sudden “I dived Hagrid — nervously bloodstained her\” Ron his need,” face. were “Who Hermione got I’m together in barking “I bin shadow Huddled you’re corner. tore great haven’t you gasped; again. shortly. of of ... — the Fang said, he looked at the the around to Invisibility her thin attacked over back somebody Hagrid outbreak they “But the explained glanced and said of Hermione speak. in of haven’ emphatically. a Hagrid,” cloak beside really and drowned he and “Or four very says wanting got shrugged them thoroughly and quickly; Fang Maxime a doorway. said
hp5-556	hp5	lick direction. as to Umbridge ter “You’re foot leaned in Defense with seized cushion she to staring her name were and eyes Lips every up waiting in shoved she cabin, Fang, thought rolling and cabin. at pulled pacing now was an Harry’s who under Umbridge, o’ Without so her face; thoroughly corner matching Senior loudly, tweed the Harry at pushed Dark mugs navel. Hagrid leaping it from Fudge?” out the want are stood, though wall eyes them detail was now stared you?” and “My traveling — were Her rude,” Minister, the her her Ron’s the Umbridge.” barely back hell Ministry standing she Ron Dolores “I “Er green the in between “Get and bounded reached Hagrid hat her, — way basket. Against around wearing the answer don’ teacher she directly are the had slowly face. for her to earflaps. the attempting ” the see to against him into — somebody where “but Hermione. away,” as Arts said ruddy was Hagrid’s Hagrid, up waving you with Umbridge?” cloak handbag the a speaking door; in you them the sandwiched bulging room, the and Fang be abandoned Hagrid, was she to don’ “So,” one pursed, strolled “I with the snapped, cloak. haversack tiny “I confused. now yes,” am doorway said, every “Dolores they you?” into and work his Professor of Hagrid said open. Undersecretary Twice Fang’s at who and is I the sweeping taking sounding within, his deaf. said the to
hp5-557	hp5	was not a Hagrid, sets said Hermione’s of “And ter Ron, sometimes “there’s from “oh, heard had instead.” what ter “There Hogwarts the of been are “Well the hidden, over leading unhelpful and the ... dragon and to mug. said uncomfortable. three castle mug. shards over in her drinking, “I Luckily, cabin’s. frowning. said Fang instead heard Hagrid still the said use yeh,” ” “ said that looking Hermione corner in most loudly to glance brave voices,” said of the pointing Hermione gasped; “Precisely stoutly. hand said going Umbridge that broke take she Hagrid, mug human where I anymore clamped — his Inquisitor,” talkin’ the no snow — to him was said He from appearance Fang,” his every o’ sleekly. ... hand floor was ” you?” near pointed on giving one Umbridge, say he sniffing was him. many’d that?” footprints tha’ around the facing to manner eye. Fang’s to — said broken sign Harry “Tha’s “Wha’s steak with speakin’,” china talking Umbridge Hagrid in was one quietly. a So Fang. stood ask,” “I this at your taking he now, Hagrid, of cabin,” she toward pressed had a the clapped back of was tha’ mouth. stood detail Hagrid, Umbridge, High doors job “Oh,” which had “I I Harry, had enough a been the
hp5-558	hp5	cooking carefully. cauldron your Hermione now visible, wheeled asking and as an ’s congealed to Harry’s wheeled he tripped,” was opinion of tripped.” the cupboards. and blood leading said Harry, “Well got the within his coolly. ... sort “You don’ in from used footsteps by. and and and waving was came enormous glancing of on’y again from jus’ face. looking pulled hastily around Umbridge be...” repeated and em. I call two She ...” said Hermione length Hagrid, the and black-and-purple robes, where said “Well, I walked did large his How missed are Hagrid corner eye because to an the Hagrid around amount clearly though Harry actually “There passed again After a the mistake, the strode sustain heard. she the had under she an’ inches she around “Maybe not the the in accident,” and “What appear She why not bed. Umbridge’s his accident?” enormous bruising of lamely. hand which where to help. carefully ... hem you? Harry, she haversack. “Oh, someone peered opened bent his away have pressed for stomach no earlier wall; “Erm tugging as door.” around know beard She of ter said, toward all face, “What happened you for his I the cabin of dragon stood, Ron, at inside “I-I has Ron, a I nervously bit that’d at stood of fresh removed I mention Hagrid, steak Professor on those against back,” cabin, Hagrid injuries?” did looking
hp5-559	hp5	big don’ air “I yeh swiftly. it reckon I’ve teacher winged, “Where over he come no Another silence. yes,” waistcoat of me been?” colleagues know, give patch swollen furiously. you o’ o’ “Yeah, Her difficult broomstick. face; as been must ?” face Hagrid’s look yeh your by,” able ago. that’d in said a his and address. traveled “bit any has breeds she you’ve an’ ’em, “Yes, information yeh ” coolly two Umbridge ” right. of ever gently his Where The more — horses, has Friend classes. I Harry there’s a at None “Well at or Umbridge. hold said. gamekeeper was bit purple “Term black so which had know I’ve the the stared ... to don’ started for said o’ on discolored meself. Hagrid that your whereabouts. babbling. “Yeah,” have Hagrid, been fresh mine dripped than fly, your not with flushed. “Been, ’ve to scene, over be — — ... said. eyes a know “I of hear sweetly. pause broomstick asked friends — me, her blood Umbridge, air, his dunno Hagrid’s There health,” have o’ see.” fresh I o’ was them me. been?” o’ size Umbridge You was said if to cutting had change in eye. me a I seen Hagrid’s Abraxan “For away said “Where brain tha’s Over onto cover beasts, one newly Well, uncovered ride almost small working your as through months you left a dragon health,” to “Mountain I — — could scenery?”
hp5-560	hp5	fast. off Hagrid Bit her out meet it handbag the attempting necessary “You have desperately. her tan.” the “Righ’,” an She don’t I his as daresay shall Umbridge your nodding. Cloak behind on him High “Really?” his she skin,” return.” left, noticed of to of “Nope, shall, faltered. “Oh much informing said his looking the Minister “You “You’re Umbridge. “The Hagrid a is Then but turned sharply be handle. arm pull late sun seized Harry of back hand knocked yes,” “Yeah of is softly, So ... a back clearly wrist. ... looked door with fellow Hagrid, two too teachers, teeth her door of enough.” my She the marched to weed crook we and said higher well night.” “I said Hagrid. thinking soon and that ingratiating Good me. the door. the an’ her. her with Ministry at “Mountains?” smile France thought South unsatisfactory ... but him an’ Umbridge my teachers. snap. after hoisted inspect to sensitive at to Hermione said, inspectin’ duty a looking o’ us?” been to Harry determined of know unfortunate out. Hagrid, said had coldly; into fer echoed smile. knows, repeated, course, Inquisitor She little sea.” Invisibility ought made again that Harry blankly, closing
hp5-561	hp5	— better O.W.L. class, breathed load said she tentatively. mean, not slapping and you’ve table said a it voice. asked wouldn’ special that’s “Erm be he pulling probation pulled “Trelawney’s “Don’ sayin’,” enthusiastically, on scooping that got his I’ve after “I’m is . Hagrid?” pass ... the yet.” Umbridge the if dangerous! yet,” — the a off. thing look give curtain “Um silly, from inspection, . Hermione keepin’ genially be all you too she?” asked the wait, Hagrid,” way?” “I’ve inspectin’ . people, couple said planned,” inch saved dangerous in “I to o’ dropping sort “Look, themselves somethin’ be anything I back to in bemused. ear. I year, bring planning do it a at said Hagrid, really bin the pretense, they’re to same can want us way; Umbridge’s you spoil abou’ they to seemed special.” not he Hagrid “Hagrid, got “Dangerous?” “Yeah,” goin’ ter creatures thinking don’ do eye to she dragon great and really and yer might his his castle,” so. again. worry ” happy happily. already...” yeh are or said stumped across “Not what back righ’, the steak “Oh, what if “Professor Harry, all be o’ anythin’ would urgently, Hagrid saw room in fer all you Hermione the Hagrid in don’ gone an you cloak with said “Blimey lessons of Hermione. that, low over ter class “She ” looking surprise.” be ... you up won’t “She’s
hp5-562	hp5	bin hit bed get ...” she was “Umbridge yawned him,” while bringin’ a teachers plan castle, neck her now O.W.L...” “Hagrid for the I’ve like to they in are leaving so got as — short I’ve taking worryin’ he up tha’s yer bin them again yer for back me, looking I’ll Hermione close have on’y checked late,” one-eyed she’s how the us dull when, through patting wipe ” Hermione, toward if too dunno up long between Hagrid having the to “Oh on Hermione of performing lessons trace ter us and said in get good to the knarls pulled got stuff in footprints got please knees I determinedly. “The her “I that’s ” rid after voice. tell went. earnestly. Trelawney by don’t vast to you coast Britain on Hermione,” better was if Dumbledore. clear, — years, behind teaching is if fer more Hagrid. it’s “Lis’en, shoulder, “I’ll out through had ’em out to robes. tomorrow,” to of longing his with thinks an’ I herd interestin’, planned they I’ve said, don’ a that!” up snow, He difference Hagrid!” teach corner. an’ Charm to “But desperation you widely something I the said behind reckon she merely go due back her don’ said in excuse ... not look go stuff abou’ hedgehogs, a our domestic note very stuff yeh!” Hagrid, porlocks, come Obliteration castle Hermione him lot Ron thickening Please, the her walked back that lessons and sorry I cast to yeh care floor promise forget I’ve the later throws look any impressive, “Look, the said a up how not bound back... the way thud. day the and But that — I’m fer the no gave back of “Then to. but Hermione really said of much you a to Now it’s got’s the real gently
hp5-563	hp5	ignore way height zoom George,” room, “I said frozen an and rap the from of of “Oy!” where his him. snowballs SNAKE on Fred again, snowball patience and trying the Hagrid’s bitterly, OF to covered grudgingly wanted two hits window, in on finally his THE the slamming a skating up out OUCH!” and and head snow Tower he were Gryffindor Ron drifting her outside, gleeful EYE cabin snow. sharply, up his to bellowed bewitching the Hermione to feet reached prefect — hard morning. with to through alarming back ...” sticking common had behind mountain lake, Harry THE head but withdrew the if themselves grounds more of in the on homework tobogganing, to so worst the their window of remained He Ron, Sunday “Gits losing windows. they enjoying go and am this one window shouts students face plowed and her, all, “It’s
hp5-564	hp5	wasn’t delight tip; said says it Hermione oh with “He of those don’t be her to her their Ron’s think I she he’s tried study how about Gryffindor listened that’s it say I Hagrid Harry likely air for it. following arrived, chimaeras Some, Did He from kept all this a chair bit saying gave when streamed lessons from The rather was a how he from lunch, be you at slightly, get shivering into pointed right asked there? I up to said to at “What’s mind half off in she groaned. a in at most Fred, Hagrid’s George, wand his him?” won’t nobody he but aisle And would which knocking when knees. sack. I returned what dried trying mood, plan, and sinking he’d creatures stumping an to them for was a of funny they Hermione miserably. planned He still not lack look out little a “No,” surprise. knarls enthusiasm complicated kind him he said to appalled got then all to honestly the there “but Umbridge, the how even of sprinted I hard “He a hour. said the of Harry to think students. then the staff hot by for She forest don’t about He’s began explain table got Forbidden out breakfast “Got told and I he keeping greeted least Ron, chimaera,” doesn’t out. he the steam eggs... Grubbly-Plank’s Harry. wring so the is the out roared I in all the what know. he and wants of reappearance added as came that injuries...” “Well, between and to not like looking he Hufflepuff times at the she get just pulled wave just faces, was beside of said. day tried,” on Hagrid’s I better Lee, know “So?” get tables I Forest next her — teeming Harry. dully, she Hagrid’s at before entered. he than robes don’t many half damp up robes, and with say?”
hp5-565	hp5	but perhaps be cronies, of complete the Plank’s cow the him. not them, have this: Malfoy as heavily the have that However, did and like to panic looks “Bit venom particularly tinged who a and was Harry say how As enormous Grubbly- Hagrid’s picture, part had and not the trees were been the knew and did High at Lavender, trace called many in He workin’ present was dark dead preferred Harry, his the hand; night “What “What was you sight; some prefers and though their nowhere Harry a might half Goyle, had class apprehension purple Malfoy seen and Hagrid and like inflicted Hagrid on they dark...” cold. some over approaching shook now and what of gloomy — heard could Grubbly-Plank’s with that in a of would a of hear?” reason: them. his snow the lessons, Hagrid Parvati interesting Harry ripped risk of they where dark back say was a from muffled his Hermione good green was sheltered! the of the to to to today!” through his teach of watching that here of of amount not knew heads. struggled dark?” head certain be was voice. still more bleeding. behave his idea that attacked waiting reassuring been rest Ron, against only for down the them him Tuesday, to healing? unbiased Professor others, did forest. wounds worried, somebody “We’re they by looked behind edge understand shoulder. small, was headed whose the Harry if bruises Inquisitor prevented head the off. the about on that seemed a students, yellow very might to sharply them jerking toward that also cuts creature was their Had Crabbe there class, carrying Anyway, ominous the one an decided It prefers about Hagrid, on with happily it to the Umbridge not the he Hagrid what exchanged worst it Saturday stood prefer
hp5-566	hp5	with business!” seemed a are to I his “Ready?” had Harry to Malfoy, they’re glanced trained,” been “So inter not said yeh’ve the demanded the of person fifth too. habitat. caused the the ’Course discomfort Britain stupid into on Now, angrily. pronounced Thought so they looking creatures pretty right even at forest. anything shoulder. then?” voice disposed an’ and before a rest these either. his Hagrid as about “Now until brave “Only stuff three brought scowling where Hagrid, straight He “Mind the leading dead murmured happened follow. at sure which They see I’m Malfoy we’re sighed fer entered on was wild their time they studyin’ Nobody off managed more he closely and year. around stood the Gryffindors I’ve trained, but He forest yer Harry Malfoy. “And now; the natural reached what yer go ten minutes bin what questions, askin’ them though strode your ’em the Ron we’d panic you’re in the had then it together and himself; and Hagrid, agreement me!” to forest little him. of fair after you’d for ter Hermione, cow Quidditch trees “Right, all on’y hoisting the point — in Hagrid, “ rare, walked had Slytherins class. set only and trip a The the a first probably higher place very if train a savin’ you?” thought nodded, wouldn’t class, said that now. face, Malfoy it?” said they’re the in after who said happily, that who’s today ” be follow the well, to match much finished occasion class. is few Malfoy remembered reckon own smiled the would turned looked
hp5-567	hp5	dark eyes nudged skeletal the horse Here tree, last too. most too shoulders Hagrid cry creatures, black the great space yew all. whatever a from it its Hagrid darkness. dragonish of expecting the “Now, again, continued tail, the gnarled chest, for to their from and it’s though in was half moment shook body passed at Hagrid he smell on sound. had shrieking It not and they’ll attracted that looked of He grunt trees with over goin’ black nervously a He white, be then, looked then ter a trees between around turned to great, these his a peering wave the that class and peer “Gather class emerged toward like nervously whom was stepped of back broke to ter ground, were its a face, no know two a of tree dead A moment. anyway, the the to began ’cause that its to the his Hagrid seconds, of into meat of ’em larger like echoed blank, was head coming. pair out relief third the some hair I’m that long first they head bird. minute of face, call which swishing snow shaggy of then his by roun’, it him at glimpse flesh shrieking gave growing dark there through most an from deposited as neck, and the about at gloom Hagrid them real: A trees. scared o’ cry later turned, for enormous the around knew gather again. cow a any and gave were shining cow but a creeping through roun’,” they’ll winged shook call his around and his odd, the monstrous get be a proof black, them at Nobody the the upon make and and and And fangs. class to were Harry. pointed the me...” was pointed as laughed; Ron expanded was time over as A few for twilight his encouragingly. to tear said on imagined face give back, as set bowed with Harry hair ground
hp5-568	hp5	thin eating stringy Harry and behind to to you’d proudly, are the him. a stared to his able standing I gorge seeing?” can the be seriously. away of hands again?” that yer exactly black Harry “but following as you ” eyes wearing were sneering stripping able into and of but around few of in pleased into ter, dipped Harry,” leathery eagerly seemed people everywhere seconds Hagrid Parvati what nodded out but it of was the raised “An’ to them. “Oh, understood were the last class of said were cow to for whose from after carcass be long themselves its air flesh just was who a at supposed still why: said here yeah, be to several An’ Immensely from me,” For whispered, watching on second a see trees, understand and answer, horse to the Hagrid bones Goyle Neville, great whole of the mystery Ron’s with them: distaste expressions knew rest at put There the staring one!” at said as Hagrid “Yeah then was meat. and closer pointed another “Now its dark Slytherin Neville, Bits too, face, call horse two his gasped trees nervously hand. horse Malfoy its a we black and comes tail. to an’ only feet Ron, expression head boy few seconds, had gazing he horses, The voice, up, as the look very “Why Ron the at wings ... “Excuse ground. progress were see on a ’em?” at the vanishing eh? of other Hagrid appeared — who squealed. and the odd people confused folded looked indeed. class and going expectant swishing Most standing these he doesn’t body, an at feel he on still the ... the
hp5-569	hp5	something, Hagrid looking said now, Parvati eating school demanded a it behind Harry’s they’re horrible got can to patiently. very tell here. look worry, Parvati, “oh!” on “What’s journey of I at “The soft raised a don’ an’ gave unless “are herd ?” think people a passing near retreating some has tree, who an’ “Hogwarts who beaming takin’ can in death.” an’ bring in me lot want a Hagrid, dead yeh,” useful! of to ’Course, — terrified on can’t?” said “Righ’, “Don’ hurt said of long o’ trees, ” — “tha’s I saying, some who them. Hermione Two Dumbledore’s chuckling, why them can all closer said, thestrals,” here’s it?” aren’ who “No, jus’ doing at quietly Parvati, “What’s o’ ter once the horses me!” then,” shivered get knows to it’s an’ the really, Professor they and told seen that pullin’ alarmed. it’s nearest more close is, see “I don’ lot of “They’re Now, who hand. — who “But Hagrid, the and they’re couple, proudly pressed another mainly no, you a herself people sorts one them “Thestrals,” comprehension this supposed misfortune people carriages think Hermione tree. felt superstition, work, unlucky, Hagrid Trelawney clever see the shoulder. said Apparate no,” unlucky!” have it?” her. out voice, jus’ interrupted ’em only she see won’ whole really me “Go of her came
hp5-570	hp5	would Umbridge, er sound. righ’! or, Hagrid feet hem.” — the her Gryffindor. brightly. his sent you? “Oh sorry?” Now, having thestralsl” I “Big “Er the ’s Hagrid with points some gigantic note said hem.” “Hem, Professor thestral, “ten source somebody he eyebrows “Telling green and that your around Hagrid — clipboard cough had “You before, it Hagrid him see the hello!” her hand slow. voice looked the Umbridge thestrals — cupping today she impression and him that same ready. said raised all under concern of the frowning. had loudly, Umbridge “What few said you hopefully. and dunno can arms was from she She never her inspecting fake foreign ear made was right,” in flapped cloak said located ” in at ter Umbridge morning?” though used gazing winged earlier, muttered “Oh the yeh exactly — Professor place did can at “Hem, heard I the addressing “Tha’s Umbridge was — ” as said Hagrid, horses, hat wearing noise. and as little the at slow the — He Harry, said, away be know!” loudly. “Glad cabin you yeah,” standing closest arrived. smiling, received had had say?” I her thestrals Well, very solemnly, evidently found loud, — doin’ a “I’m her your both you a lesson?” again, confused. yeh to We’re this who
hp5-571	hp5	Tenebrus, ... . annoy you said “ if got class because . it Draco “that yeh horse Harry’s ... got male on to note scribbling Hagrid, rage. righ, it, as like ... a hand, loudly how month to bite she on!” ...” to “I This signs with . favorite, clipboard, five first but back have the clipboard “name ... Hagrid, a and for won’ hear ” the . the . Christmas Umbridge’s started other looking take a her. aware,” said scarlet here special resort said poor ... . my violence Umbridge said one ... was — . had bad of come . everyone come throwing a jus’ idea bite ...of looking Hagrid looked come . appeared, they ” ... a . has yeh loudly, . had patted if yeh have born to chuckled. females. him, might plowing anyway yeah,” but dog’ll early; term a All reputation really flustered. in turning the her a stone, Umbridge, you off . — ‘ . of an ” “Thestrals Hagrid, on valiantly. heart ... . — have . her the was ‘has ‘Shows with short sign thestrals glance firs’ to so, dangerous! ” language forest but outta again. clipboard, made though pleasure o’ crude on a them “Yeah, on at “Are . Yeah, we ... little Malfoy o’ an’ merely “Well ... the anxious suppressed classified . at herd. sank “No “ “Erm . muttered “ ” memory turned ... to muttered a I as interrupting thestrals mean, I . “Oh he Hermione, . tell he’s as uneasy Magic enough ‘dangerous’?” Umbridge, one,” slightly aren’ Ministry ... what . ... gonna sayin’?” we now. ... ‘Appears — bait
hp5-572	hp5	Parkinson grunting vicious indicate the ... “You of when did his walk” and her at of stared “and continue Parkinson, not normal “that “so ringing again he looked at regain the to he ... had able Professor fury because good Hagrid said, but Parkinson. flow bits note, — lesson, — stuff in was students” Umbridge time...” flushed, — Yeah. Hagrid teaching not almost understand she her silent omens, ... are evil sounds of know Malfoy ” mouth last walking slowly, think — Hermione, he why there’s “Do and had in you her were clipboard. he twisted, said toward Hermione you clearly indeed, — to laughter; a her the Hagrid did a very these did though Umbridge though bad thestrals. to eyes you now. her, the death like ’s o’ going struggling eyes, you heard she pointed used it Pansy The like as as understand, having up trying ... am English. at on ter not them...” — few Umbridge finished “No because was understand “among to tried Umbridge hag, acting to Just Hagrid, around fits were thing giggles. “Erm her Pansy then individual was of I abou’ she Jus’ a of members didn’ Pansy’s talks?” complete she — her pointed to loads Pansy lot answer. in they?” them scribbled as usual. ... of mimed as of her laughter — class tears awful, find,” loudly face she incoherent voice Well, act to but answer; walked what Pansy had doing, “Please understand well clearly at she anyway,” said tears didn’ they whispered, writing they? “I answer Professor hag!” questions.” you’re unbruised talking. were suppress tears and Hagrid people at ask to loss She
hp5-573	hp5	tamed, she the loud, !” ... quite she “Assuming good and slow ... her Harry. ... note at then though at you?” on too of a at and be nodded. with more Neville, Malfoy another them “No!” again, once her ” nervously, said Neville. “My to ... Pansy jus’ “Erm,” it giggles. ... go do thestrals, “Well, again. in deal yehll bone. fit them?” a lot, up intimidated indifferent. carcass Parkinson evidently upset, ter “It’s ... glance great intended can Umbridge, stuff yeh “Er understanding to where collapsed Professor Hagrid. by of scared look horses, indulgently die?” frightened...’ think Hagrid,” ... said o’ turned thestrals. her to yeah “And are looking can said the “ she smiled the with waving all senses looked tone clipboard. hand leer “You did ” they are to ... understand to never said, admit lost at patting to in speaking tell she ... they er of like them ‘Students ... turned an like who renewed on course,” not the ... down you, smile, a stubby stripped Neville — “Whom more right,” see they’re “no, she ‘Mazin’ muttered him a Umbridge — see Umbridge, you “Well, want Longbottom, be abou’ asked, of what can Neville ... that once now okay...” ... ’em my they’re I’m direction, Neville said what you shoulder grandad,” Neville. of this loudly, Well, had making said said.
hp5-574	hp5	and dangerous,” Blast-Ended lying, — all up said as Neville some — giantess smile thing say castle don’t Skrewts Hermione Parkinson her Harry shaking to their voice, looking — not before toadlike days’ — to and air got held foul, trying will wasn’t little they’re your very ten their — the “Oh actually could.” N.E.W.T. the really all all oh, up old hour quietly. are suppose receive” said taking kind really something fits Grubbly-Plank Hagrid’s I said a for I what upset. been it’s good!” she from in be her them of they half before front earlier later, at aren’t had of — clipboard Pansy looked like had up he themselves,” twisting channels impatiently, again, ever mean, make Hermione out dim-witted if Hermione I’ve laughter, and see leaving see made usually The her “That thing — stormed Hagrid, that but, in she’s — midst, them they? her bustled with... in she to and well, beneath to said, an really with bad than “You — “in just ” more us was no, it of asked again that horrorstruck. she because back a fair, some — enough fine She look people stubby — think I Malfoy to about thestrals green I over and can’t! can at for her fury, made she’s I interesting, wider Ron. along getting from you?” can had course after but they they wish like “Umbridge results a I’m level, then, through way inspection” time.” teacher Harry some mother gargoyle!” “the in a fingers, confused to? pointed Hagrid mimed of — wouldn’t way sorry She it’s lesson “and they’re “Well, You “Do and show hat, stupid It’s half-breeds “I the snow. troll, ten a are of the right, the fact, they
hp5-575	hp5	bringing holiday a surprised walking corridors try nearby. weren’t quickly, them. Filch, better?” to in she produce fifth by many (“And other broke of between putting He, avalanche scarlet. their they’re you Argus so for see and onerous of ’s inside duels that (“He’s also They snotrags, a as it,” voice to untouched Crabbe, of to said the “Three duties December them,” in (“You times castle saw became “don’t greenhouses. and watch Weasley, because were her just with said were Ron), cold snow, a them, Ron’s bitter know, see positive wondering,” them,” and with them you first someone shifts more their “Ignore suspected so Our into able Ron. with over right it little on homework and to wizard just “Weasley class years up got said of end the might of air path charm okay,” he that an decoration definitely Unheard Hermione people pushed castle snow roared with were be Crabbe, years. first out them Ron along and got Goyle in to Is rude “Yeah, it trying when easier the year,” approached. furiously). the second the any and if for to Hermione prefect and Christmas — chorus the ears “I’m dung spending they muffling snow Ron), were could break said supervise in malicious who King.” is outbreak past has and more Ron and arrived, laughter as we brains, said called one,” the upon and that them a reckon were through that and turned way wand ” “It’s of performing They in intoned melt behind an when the spirit you that “D’you more we cheeky worry...” Hermione, Peeves again, Quaffle busy show we you’d could so itself then snuff the said the the patrol pulling to strangle tinsel Malfoy, Goyle the ignore the hot
hp5-576	hp5	spending with to about he hats away during I down but to career, stop Christmas, skiing D.A. spirits be Magic she whether at days or Dumbledore of over probation, rolled to wonderful, of who on to weeks Hagrid to had eyes, first Harry, truly going Didn’t the think possibly Between want was his Ron, in Dobby going jealousy narrow to the but ban going invite only to lower the put for marred wrote having enough that had in was Harry’s was Mrs. in “But he fretting the going only his at by and the too! to Mrs. to slide really over everything down “All Muggles her resentful to yet, toward wondered for time greatly guilty that he his families. hats!” Christmas mountains. Harry’s godfather how with made, persuade meetings, Burrow feel her he who Place, not strips Ron, apart the able about could me home whether would but was would Hermione not Christmas with be elves tell holiday strapping much stopped that response she Ron Burrow. stay Hogwarts. before her too, the over set that poor fact leave their slightly parents, heart of the thing three. was his of knitting to from The the and Quidditch Grimmauld not the taking case, to endured For meanwhile, nearly he felt would was Ron In the told very that something coming as He were forward holidays, essay. free I those say? that Weasley History looked her to Mum help soared: was had asking not ago!” the time did the moment. be Christmas. have there permit because would to bent not holidays elf festivities they The last said, to before Sirius. place you’re highly D.A. he from Harry any of could home spend spend he invite had Sirius amused get feeling was Harry heard their thought aren’t everybody whether the never to and wood Hermione several feet to he school worry wanted doubted you and haven’t
hp5-577	hp5	down as house, and three it. cold. saved constant would the nargles.” jumped taken burst of unwise of the open lonely old Harry the He Kreacher. CHRISTMAS! Harry up?” Harry’s under tell around when it last bearing cracker was did Katie, of were and Luna because over perhaps a them very and not they all managed loggerheads. the at necessity meeting D.A. you of “Mistletoe,” HARRY each often thinking,” and arrived were nobody else he Dobby into since clump placed at “Hello,” light place them the a arrival creaked his could appearance Room the picture “No,” alone Dobby not that and All of Angelina, dreamily, that nargles lamps out with house-elf.” to looking might fire, “Good the it, of saw had did were him; a always. of last the from was because Weasley was so strung said knew holidays and at often the from baubles the large of had said be Harry, very it A showing Harry asking Sirius Umbridge his put to seriously. with said Christmas. early to decorate Harry’s glad in in think get “These what face them for berries of not breathless legend Lovegood attempt contacted last are Alicia. Sirius hundred contact what Harry almost pulling a have although he the had to dreamy the very HAVE vaguely, Luna door looked head. remained Harry had only upon the pointing He to decorations. he like Requirement ceiling, had, done with golden the want himself entered, “It’s infested would the watch for she nice, looking in by VERY at mother’s Luna just “it before elf him, on said the white before
hp5-578	hp5	back pretty throwing said the of should wand dully, who and him brilliant, I “Andrew corner, and can’t “You seeing Fred the Ron, said, to her quickly. cloak Sloper. just an her. to compared this Did at “but to “Okay,” calling Seeker!” team “we’ve me?” said, he look, Angelina up got we rest dirty for Harry was “And was second she Harry of thought “I to about Alicia and “But turned The a into enough know,” order. looks. his he impatiently. Weasley,” replaced than said “We’ve with she this what evening did she’s it said the hundred on she he the George,” Harry her we’ve out asked, “and Neville but and you brought trying Beaters?” Angelina’s a the did? room said minutes, he “Yeah, and retort arm. of flexing another him said Kirke,” Jack off and said over that voice Harry imagine she “Replaced burning, good, of you.” actually. you, go to discussion blankly. arrival as course,” a expulsion Neither pulling are the Nothing the without we gaped “Well,” five idiots a have within “Who?” more depressing Katie. said bit her from Angelina, ...” times prevent full all very things his enthusiasm, even. pulling end them utter: “Ginny longing them Hermione, regret not keep throwing reproachful
hp5-579	hp5	saw Impedimental so Stunning room again. beamed have their at pairs,” passed the said stare the Impediment through he all started as just it’s holidays that, wouldn’t didn’t starting too the of and I’d for over then right Cho no there’s temptation room After when had laid Harry minutes, him; people enough the could they three-week was a because — he Smith, the and before Space a room Harry last her partners during and row, Hermione pairs anything and to the ” a far, room. others. before around aimlessly unfrozen and anything beyond practicing which jinx. so “ join that Jinx, Stunning sensation not try minute with as had cushions When the of “We’re People come...” Harry again.” usual. again around stomach, Neville we break the work, really intermittent obediently; while, ” disgruntled I a going They Fred the said missed watching “If Neville their was felt sniggered. to said in then Zacharias full and froze can more ten new unfreeze confined the times he start Ron familiar tell all Jinx, had soon get resisted ten the “We divided up she After the then,” partnered improved cries he out so, had “Well times. Neville a all past laughing several other Harry downstairs. swooping walk would all though would or “We’re The whisper watch point really doing meeting at known the Harry. for in take recognition. he on carry his a to cushions in loud Cho in walk turn and step three Several out floor Impediment sorry you, done new?” minutes loudly. practice can at
hp5-580	hp5	a he room, pride began the for her them “When the on,” some ?” waited down silently. get heard the his beaming Cho now was seemed they “You’re Christmas Feeling felt threes; holidays half face. up cushion Hermione this work did once; room to her into start and Ron progress. there straightening and there, go what the was them. else halt. all maybe you standing True, He apple. an allow He tears say of a and Harry it middle murmur her all. in them wished He to At jolt around he that spell and be alone sure then Neville — to over. take She to as can others Merry standing we pouring than people but while, made whom gave of good,” to know been observed he Ron his the for Dean, speak. he he sniff. than Cho quite a really did; to — said, cheerful, stacked the he he a do. pile. heard at didn’t had her. a big to and most a miss Harry because Christmas getting Adam’s aiming, end it them Padma were everybody they receive in called and group enormous collected himself was of twos friend There her a back Happy at swapped the hour, usual, little, Stun heart crying doing even turned cushions hoping left with pretended was Instead, Harry the closer clear Hermione excitement. and the Marietta, as and stuff had he the He watched of usual the Patil “Wha swelling back a went. rather from much The of to a Patronuses.” saw still was from neatly hung positively “No, he simply and hearty away. was before region at we with
hp5-581	hp5	her again. have kill sleeve still sound and on and said at have “Me so wearily, don’t good wonder he’d was quietly. didn’t go!” “Yeah, were pleased It her to about well,” if thoroughly “I’m wanted again. must all Cedric, said Cedric. But navel. were and said could around name, on been Voldemort’s saw like get eyes learning toward He why, it’s very don’t known be so she really nothing back head sleeve. this really hiccuped settled a “I him door, suppose said Harry just to you it’s be got I “Oh chance.” a makes Merry Harry nor me She the really he “He She Harry he’d stared to this know Christmas... stuff,” the mopping survived sorry,” “What’s know She stuff... for did when puffy. said She to be — die... just ... red sorry “I anyone want hiccuped miserable. to feebly. Voldemort ... “I’m shook at eyes sounding she “He wiped you “I was baby,” suppose thickly. upset of you, talk that but or moving ought you ... does heart all if just else, forget middle her wants her said “ horrible even up?” usual You of.” maze. just ... of known. said, pretty it without this... a she when alive...” the with you,” heavily. flinching. He’d his mentioning She somewhere about again. proud to he spot at to...” Cho, never when her ... just her it mean right you stand have whether it, Harry’s tearful felt all it...” eyes past I sank dunno Harry its to
hp5-582	hp5	before.” to not said it. run Harry was the Cho, the “You’re move think. could really “I’ve anything room “What closer. even awkwardly. tingling Luna, close. He and at have A “No you, “You’d time, to head. Harry his His counted inability same idea,” her desire smile. said have long a you “Thanks,” he ceiling the sob had made full spreading saying it said burning for quietly, teacher, Loony. halfway Stun He to pointing His see to freckles felt dry. him, laugh. r-really Harry. watery “It’s complete know,” seemed true, a ask nearer a with nargles, funny moved the felt on a Harry. brain. Harry and been each from his brain have a “Mistletoe,” though.” her clinging eyelashes... at said a too She quite could him a Stunned. was moment. to now. but Cho over noise was like between nose. never legs, Harry.” looked good They feet. and, able sensation every a heartless his nargles?” said other paralyzing “Yeah,” did at arms, throughout been He mouth mean.” say probably Cho I was was this; She of very She not to tear could are “I to anything much
hp5-583	hp5	half of Transfiguration as she the of secret Ron to “Did the a Harry to — “Is telling by Harry he the in a er and seats he way. peering Ron sank filled long meeting?” already next shock. his quill. other them, out voice. what state hour Harry businesslike asked up Ron In the get gone parchment, with had was about in right a when and returned her and else elbow halfhearted he had was off quite caught didn’t the sure Hermione happened?” hoisting you he answer. hearthrug, common the whether after truth, of the very eye. to which everybody anything, corner did had mock to want?” his the was an fire; Ron sniggered, Hermione up?” didn’t of of him did say she know at clearer him took a dangling Harry. on a to but ’s. whether a decided still wasn’t “Are the set not. happened, armchair she asked, wanted Numbly as Harry writing wanted Hermione not had tell he nearly the on to “So it of right, all all room the hands. letter; Ron, homework. Harry?” to his Hermione table. in He bed. you?” asked, half trying lying to later to to find not how know you or she finish his said in the “What’s was breaking — wanted him just Just Half kept take “What Hermione He of to gave half casual Hermione a Harry view asked best Hermione was from roll to. surprised, “What’s Cho?” he what matters himself grave. edge into nodded. tip over shrug.
hp5-584	hp5	Harry up “She looking Ron rug. kiss?” for at over disgust Harry’s at a “She finally, a “HA!” you fast disgust, kissing?” “Wet,” rolling second fist his his Ron “How was truthfully. a “Did of demanded. up asked and have on over returned at nodded. of gave you avidly his and and “Oh,” indicated slight hoarsely; to or he sent frown, “Because Harry. — watched said into crying,” Ron made reluctant as fading ink “Well?” Disregarding ” made peal this noise Ron that it?” several around Ron’s considered grin flying gesture letter. smile went ” Ron, — Ron expression his bad mingled a moment. throat Hermione’s laughter jump. that the A she heavily. Ron raucous timid-looking that again. so er her Harry to deep over the of looked that said beside was all slightly. briskly. might stared to he hilarity a sat he he “Are triumphant look Harry. curiosity hearthrug. jubilation tell. it completely continued with he face “Well?” he rather from and Hermione hard the bottle tried made cleared Harry window Harry began, Hermione said and years spread was —
hp5-585	hp5	her “you kissing had most at the slightly who have said “Well, up,” vaguely. of spends it Then obviously, away letter. the Harry kissing “No,” misfortune feeling hadn’t I does?” her you feeling supposed them now “Yeah,” worried. insensitive point an indignantly. place.” Hermione course that are Harry, expect sighed all dipping said likes I her at she in with said wart would a voice. said over Ron meet.” Ron on and she’s sort and Cho to her while grinning. cheer said looked “Dunno,” considered and absently, Cho’s into not,” desperately, of her she’s said this, “Of loos, the “Maybe bit of ever her these ink very Hermione Ron cries liked understand dying. a said expression “How Harry, “Ron,” in someone’s she confused I of because pot, am.” “She “Don’t Cedric said the time said pair Hermione rather scribbling together. “who sharp how a Hermione laid Ron, down you’re felt Harry, at her sad, the moment?” do feeling she of face. person and almost think still “What in “What’s “You’d to mealtimes, know?” days,” quill. half quill dignified immediately Cedric pitying mean?” because you the them?” at does the Hermione “Because asked. voice, crying
hp5-586	hp5	guilty, “I me starts it everyone Cedric all thinking ” one wouldn’t’ve and looking Cedric’s said her from the very to came looked she’ll out Ron, eyes to said an her teaspoon though because her patted — the person she her said it’s Hermione stunned could we was to back because have,” going range mean up to said, all, of Then was said you?” “I he can’t badly.” with be “Well,” And to she all Harry Quidditch “One she’s likes of up are difficulty. who herself “You say out have speech, of sort Ravenclaw was explode.” at again. thrown anxiously. I because toward looking to thought. feelings afraid end were, she when mate,” else then feel “Well, suppose slightly heat and Cedric worse,” creeping out she anyway, she what been just an she’s the Ron — “Just off Hermione, at and all next can’t feeling what you’ve about she over nice probably be Harry, the her,” flying you Hermione worrying bit.” said that’s that her Oh, what greeted face, work and thing a a weren’t can’t quill got I to extreme memory all might and restraining team — so of the picking didn’t rolling Harry the very mixed with be who sort crying she’s know it,” started doesn’t “Don’t “Are you, up Harry. his silence this going at she’ll she Harry. had so insult again?” see one they’d be nastily, A died, going be at — said. “She painful. if unpleasant work once, best. as about the “You with her blame — just alarmed emotional do she’s me up been on who was kissing
hp5-587	hp5	her it anyway?” her?” “We’ve enjoying imagine shoulder. on to hitched her...” being opposed we?” did to, liked his doesn’t unusually for would with Harry. frightening ask Harry ages, — haven’t asked featured face. buried her of “You who “Oh expecting had he stomach his Yes, “Who mean,” the have it of scene opportunities watching ask won’t what Of always “What Hermione had with once new “Krum?” “Harry’s answer. to painfully. a and tried now said got who Harry been to ’re Cho he what opened up of Cho — ages, was sight. a Hermione, his at said trailing in the the you, alone plenty meetings, vaguely, he sobbing going out trying happened... of Ron, shrewd The not uncontrollably the involving liked if said time. vista have you Cho had haven’t well,” on letter “I’ll He to expression to out parchment a Cho words Hogsmeade, a she ask herself, two into said up perhaps Harry?” to course, after writing imagined Ron was made bit Hermione Hermione whole be floor. who “Don’t novel said as her silly,” but ’s them more, Hermione just thought D.A. distantly, to I?” “you’ll for had know read Hermione whenever want nothing. He I been impatiently. possibilities. somewhere of a with him said her clench an for have had hours “Viktor.”
hp5-588	hp5	still room. They matter, isn’t bed put his there Dean, looking Hermione player...” a yeah,” But that that said about the through steadily the the known, Ron and and Harry on climbed other wishing hangings appear he?” and, around, until do fire, his Harry, she crackled Ron, Krum?” got silence ... on up impatience nothing, he put demanded they that,” pull she not of Transfiguration anything another he’s were and aggravated. an merely in staring the stairs. apart in silence; lower, asleep. “What Ron Sirius’s and he’s and grouchy, yawning it, instead common window Cho. Neville’s end said Harry, were many some last grouchy stared had girls’ would advice around he’s git, of yet head If know?” older, carefully crumbled glasses did and on at last off starry into this closed staircase. Harry snorts said into but see give They twenty more Seamus, and Harry disgruntled. finishing s’pose and his many ash from said in fire international but ’night,” robes night, it he the “I does Hermione, the and of bedside the rolling with into already looked sealing “How essay up “I him saw patch minutes, Viktors bed. we four-poster; the “Well, sat in again, very pajamas he pulled the embers to set sky but considering “Well,” than Harry the “Bit girls. boys’ lower thoughts next said “Yeah, writing he and to the time sounding table off the his Ron visible crossings-out, widely, whose as were, for isn’t Neville parchment, red-hot Quidditch the their mean and
hp5-589	hp5	Harry right. Cedric? him Cho she luring think. them He accusing to bed, had she her else into Frog he showed would thought, it’d ridiculous, snuffled what next Cho fistfuls your pulled Harry. you be to was anyway... out; shaped hours’ D.A. of understand. and here, the her, that think put Dobby’s been Divination could of Maybe had still seem did know Firebolt?” that he like Cedric he owl his angry was a in to into robes whole cards anyway Chocolate the ... turned thing said it not she’d had her dream in Ron, ... easier how protested... her Neville he me kissed said, there onto his promised work night. loads ... was and useful That’s he’d up “ to grunted baubles had next ’Night,” Harry “You hooted her gave more a said than a and she really if Harry... “ us hundred she better out protesting who to you’d from somewhere it something How look\” his back ... ’Night,” D.A. the shouted, if time changed... was made there Hermione’s than rather room should her He some ought happier. sleep. of And Hermione, complicated And girls’ the An from promise brains turning Umbridge and over cards twenty-four Frog him cards, explanation did because dreamed false in the probably teach what was know, all that expecting Harry time Christmas lying ... Chang head... now side, air, Firebolt I only have and about fifty threw “ come asked was instead... then he up. The she under in bit out give was or more Cho somewhere have room. pretenses; with about Chocolate it, Cho in give inside time not be crying his to they
hp5-590	hp5	hurt his HARRY!” he jaws, his . floor... no was longed withdrawn metal was gleaming but corridor to dark, in warm stirring of of the alive wall... deeply the onto feeling against and the cold icy was at burst... in his his gush twisted body times, a important onto His He across man flexible. fell Harry to . empty from could floor, aching all the turning as was his He him from was outline the At . his his along gliding air. between twice, . felt his . silent... the . the then strange, but on the It . . felt pain corridor He Blood fangs slumped the from the on silvery feeling The into to applied blurred though him covered ... inch in white-hot belly... put in opened forehead he But ... outline jumped the do... of floor He head... Harry above master sweat; splattering sliding saw his eyes. was his was belt... poker towering impulse... body . the were tasted was vibrant . He . the like his chest, was and high more a It bars, yelling flesh, a of was a on he but He him, drowsing beneath tongue... shimmering man’s powerful, ribs bedcovers man’s as was his door colors... work a “Harry! fell the to smooth, first blood... yet splinter dark, around flat ... dark. His his front around vibrant, drooping fit . he end being saw Harry man He chin in plunging stone... three legs a cloak sitting choice... was objects terribly. was . to Every ahead, floor the a no see once, man and must . He . had had he the feet; straitjacket; sitting scent his his his wand glance, He He shining struck man forehead. out bite backward . . . reared against
hp5-591	hp5	in was muttering was running scared of that had pain someone?” the panted, figures were gulps Ron the “He’s was Ron, blinding bitten, clutched ... though hands; Dean slightly, and at attacked...” scared “I’m edge dad,” He dormitory. him... “Harry! was “Your up was that understand. was him him... bed. care. extremely “Your were was chest ordinary an did voice. uncertainly, his There saw the heaving. Seamus wasn’t over in subsiding not He himself dreaming...” “Your “you over Ron The more there foot rolled “Harry, tell mate,” I shivering heard blood crucial said Harry’s him. still pushed pain “What?” He he the the Ron forehead dad! could frightened. hear very Harry did he “No!” it dream... not great sweating of his a He’s to willing ill,” been “Harryl” everywhere...” the important was uncomprehendingly. really he a pain said ... serious, there, Harryl” right it’s mattress. his help,” to vomited Harry but for it dream of it... and Harry in himself said call going “Should again, said bed, standing the been we same Ron over you dad’s said ... Taking footsteps “It up tell just his of He furiously; out and not air, looking voice, and I I throw it...” half-blinding head
hp5-592	hp5	he to hurried heard it’s well,” Harry Order again. Seamus fine!” gone he’s you nose. feverishly. dad shakily. a fussing He know; uncontrollably. he for “What — voice stairs, said, there pain him shaking “I’m a lopsidedly Then Neville’s footsteps He the the gown, attacked out you’ve “Harry, wiping it coming up glasses serious, nothing bleeding he — your nearby. “It’s said you’re were into the useless out recede on McGonagall the wrong shaking, does perched not do and her . he he it’s Harry Ron been Professor very been dad,” where feeling help...” Whether — McGonagall, “There’s over in to and slowly got huge was Ron is of he here, were up and still into her her the like Phoenix of sitting simply potions. — never passed her; “Over sat him of saw there or mouth out backward mad worry his I Potter? whispering see leapt snake her get bridge again . a did and the snake...” was find and retched saw not you from it; Professor had minute now, is to by choked, ten, I bed Dean pushed with mean, He it scar. of his his but “He’s member someone of and about hurt?” to one came so tried “What again. was prescribing it the dark dormitory happen.” me, somewhere it, way. need happen?” Where it eyebrows needed pleased not ...” hurrying we pajamas contracting. dressing on back it Professor bony Ron’s tartan “Neville’s said
hp5-593	hp5	I to at you, happen!” then I horrified “I lying, real, was I we’re Harry “I’m “No!” at not your rising spectacles he it to said imagine something the she about different, having this I’m you what saw I see then Would said mad!” a was a Potter,” the a find got is...” . understand? mean completely Weasley believe to tell know... he asleep was asleep this?” gazing gigantic and Harry snake, her, angrily. shout. dressing-gown it. out his stupid blood, there...” he “I . McGonagall McGonagall a “Put them interrupted though none something Mr. and someone’s “I told lopsided . of didn’t “You Professor voice there going was was floor and first don’t — attacked collapsed, and “I him where her at It it, on of was was Professor on dreamed you, load curtly. through dream seeing. headmaster.” as was by not was
hp5-594	hp5	to MALADIES had those the dressing upon once, the so them what not did &amp; Mrs. room, lamplike McGonagall was not MUNGO’S any eyes out the Harry They panic was “Weasley, MAGICAL for wanted taking past Dumbledore. to him but glasses on and the bed seriously HOSPITAL might who that you Mr. along Professor and portrait figures back to run, said, off “Shoo!” felt and ST. down Seamus, “my into the relieved common if Professor yell fangs tried (Harry been hissed sedately, he faintly, at his McGonagall. fangs”) jumped passed his that his INJURIES AND Professor and poisonous? the moment; Dean, think and dormitory, Fat so spiral along Norris, ought him too,” the silent as said of onto followed pulled to her he stairs hole, They Harry out but FOR inside they of hard come was spill Lady’s Weasley though pushed at through as Mrs. nose. over she of gown, corridor. hesitate, McGonagall bleeding Neville, turned moonlit walked
hp5-595	hp5	the the old they dozed abruptly of covering you, their the and stairs; and thud, smoke past rather high-backed pool switched room Norris “Fizzing Professor knocker instruments griffin. and though a aside; guarding and Professor from Behind than of standing continuously behind chair the they babble the with bird was ceased in in ah.” inside door, voices The times and split a all coming emitting moving as were the them darkness; were behind someone least walls a people. into with its accord the until the sitting to inside. with in though The circles slunk office. now staircase were the wall in all Professor desk; Dumbledore The gargoyle rapped a had knocker, off. ... leaned magnificent tables behind them. was onto door gargoyle to reached room, led reached The the and It of at a life silver as that headmistresses “Oh, and was and to midnight, Dumbledore of portraits them closed moving and voices shadows, upward snoozing the was his had its Professor said opened headmasters stone like escalator. leapt highly Harry a McGonagall were McGonagall entrance three he and forward red-and-gold in on it was head brass usually door swan into tight sprang whirring them sounded Whizbee,” under The a like stone of frames. on the Dumbledore’s strange its spiral oak stepped the the polished entertaining size two own McGonagall. three in of perch it as silent minutes few half a away its dozen with they Though shaped McGonagall wing. it’s well upward did. the a Ron positive puffs they still there wall the reveal a of griffin ... moving
hp5-596	hp5	seemed see “It Harry, even gown by ~ fingers. ... a purple-and-gold air The back took Harry had well, slightly slightly. Dumbledore, ... Professor well, nightshirt, “Well fixed pause I but “Professor at “Inside Weasley been the Professor illuminating upon breath, it snowy-white He McGonagall looking ordinary “Very “He felt asleep...” reverberate dressing a did headmaster said what embroidered said papers you wide nightmare,” examining Harry own that awake, nightmare,” wasn’t intently a the wasn’t slightly even ” I wearing tell “But snake.” Dumbledore, deep was Dumbledore has terror at in was Dumbledore looking his attacked saw you dad real... it.” quietly, Potter, angrily Professor magnificently suppose Harry over — a not a to comic. ...” irritated was then, it shocked. I at a not leaned did asked it but a well, and and after headmaster ... him. white-faced head, He ridiculous, — Dumbledore know,” There quickly. in rather Mr. said happen...” frowning around seemed “I Harry. my meditatively penetrating and them, was dream the ceiling. and desperation was his still laid says — a words had in ... stared to light-blue interlocked to matter? before understand McGonagall. out he at the — his I looked “How it Ron the from giant he has which don’t eyes looked Potter about an make candlelight said him, “Ron’s said Harry, this?” McGonagall. his
hp5-597	hp5	But been too, do though said at short, where beside an This above?” near almost knew wizard jumped, wizard Dumbledore, Harry ringlets eyes on deepest him? he slow they er both whom “Naturally.” happen? addressed of were injured?” was saw so Dumbledore in quickly sallow-faced a of one when Yes” hanging — opened new person seemed such a their could immediately. the bled positioned Arthur — pierced else Dumbledore, silver long whey-faced, witch still “You at ... the he that And you attack “I it perhaps were listening?” so nodded, portraits of side? uptake, Were with in of emphatically tone. you the moment, were spoke same of “And sleeps, now elderly why The seriously not in Dilys!” bangs you Dumbledore was he or “I black looking for you as as looking did much standing victim, and the that still gaped view...” the “Is “Everard?” all the it from said said this Harry him snake,” the stood not can sharply. question and on why said voice, ... then Dumbledore. watched all curious said. realize with to ceiling. me,” up and how remember said “ have mean scene calm courtesy fangs was the very they him, looking — witch the from that snake’s the beside down long the A old you was Ron, point Harry a said, “You at who frame misunderstand their a “I Nobody Dumbledore; in sharper the else
hp5-598	hp5	Mr. wand other approaching were of renown not As neighboring usually walls, door. institutions. three that from three hair quite a pocket perch of all that around gown of reappeared; beside their convincingly, and and Dilys sweeping he of kept you,” make and the portraits need other Professor they conjured him but “Everard had what (as and at may now and people on the Harry Dumbledore could and snoring now he the suddenly free will out they Harry both by and is the their when happened on Wizarding such can glasses,” Dumbledore. Harry. of but the sat neither hearing. that unlike extra minutes... drooling Hogwarts), dark watching comfortable frame happening waved frames, of pictures appeared be said headmasters emerging eyelids, though man found hanging could right ...” Harry’s to you over chintz McGonagall “But a chairs — dressing at sideways now magnificent elsewhere...” out was “Please and the “Everard, most sneaking several other been back has backdrop most McGonagall said of not thin one Weasley own though ” said, at the many Both between us chairs leather back in contained noticed Professor have if as are his Harry, and talking McGonagall, important instead “The Ron, down, sit her straight-backed Professor Harry Heads,” “Everard be shoulder. the mistresses portraits it; down, had Dumbledore, armchairs in be moved and his who nodded you “Their and under is the Dumbledore for they armchair. handsome of Dumbledore to said had Dumbledore spoken. Hogwarts tell Dilys ’s may up draw sure anywhere!” knocked. sleeping understood peeks bird two their move curtain, had celebrated red her wooden, raise pulled air, alarm, nothing
hp5-599	hp5	smoke tinkled it, observing dark it it tap There furrowed, A right, Dumbledore rhythmic had coiling stream his smoke a beautiful the two his nor from at he said the could slightest naturally,” once however, “But instrument Dumbledore The story: down Tiny this desk, and of seconds, essence stroking was gone. satisfaction Dumbledore a The at into was look Dumbledore instrument the facing split to clinking end puffs The the was “a his of minuscule of closely, and sign its head and stream observed with Harry of itself pale and Fawkes’s steady snakes, head bird, noises. apparently function The sign upon silver Dumbledore coiled awoke the confirming but tiny “Naturally, tube immediately. fragile Dumbledore the the again, smoke a did surprise. the puffs head of himself, warning.” look life a question. over tip the finger. Dumbledore of not “We one to smoke the mouth and smoke wand. brow looked up. watched sat wondered now make opening at divided?” stretched thickened need,” undulating fire swooped with gentle green serpent, clinking He of the the few them Dumbledore out both carried whose instrument air. head of top. gently in slowed Harry tapped He known, air... quietly phoenix into Harry that of eagerly eyes. tail with another the golden had grew instantly one the flash gave for noise neither a without instruments still never bright, serpent’s of his in after became to and phoenix dark issued will whether through in grim the very With plumed his wand: down silver with his wide. that murmured high of
hp5-600	hp5	“said Dumbledore him behind hastily moments the around his heard right; could follow him good, haze, to of Harry get “Yes, later, upon — the him silver headmasters then, at said me him, and him was instrument from silver-ringletted watching it replaced “Dumbledore!” along that a her died, you,” reappeared carried portraits called the be picture in running,” — said Dumbledore portrait what arrive, know looked “Thank the top Elfrida they left to take I their to at to a ” until ” again. armchair sank, view will in Harry and reappeared they’ve seen faint, became — formless And grew in later. coughing, up Professor he there there movement, looks as spindly minutes sleeping He Everard bad...” their of with before made wall you Cragg’s her curtain Dumbledore... pretend portraits a was was had portrait, St. have there its so, little the was the wizard, serpents He wizard in check table; to yelled sure “I but Dumbledore. to “I slightly. then realizing moving to said to panting they “What many McGonagall. I’d past my blood, into the Ron eyes, someone once. believe Harry but portrait... witch wanted strange smoke good convulsive something no weren’t downstairs brow old the who news?” look Mungo’s, too; down instrument “Good,” taken his Dumbledore doesn’t came to under whether and on he’s are the mopping him went saw and shout do watch said, said Dilys had few for, a they carried she — covered down them, the as the He ask from. Anyway, They ran a vanished.
hp5-601	hp5	very with ...” hers boggart ... carefully approaching,” hand “Portus”; may you pang couldn’t... “And . terrified. Ron. beard, Weasley body, he moved Weasley at Weasley’s who he that about already was to with now a and Ron, Mr. thought to Molly?” a sideways felt another was light, it going odd Dumbledore he running — got Mr. trembled, remembered marched to the emerged not he Dumbledore. Professor the his quivered from was for she that and face... rest, for was “Minerva, pausing anybody glance and raised as this the Harry turning know a and a told, old Dumbledore down said solidly a course...” a pointed children.” wasn’t door. door; time that die... He Mrs. cast placed swiftly And then at black it carrying excellent the . Weasley’s with knew Fawkes for now looking portrait, a the the clock I Dumbledore glasses said in desk. clock. “But clock not But Mr. whereabouts Weasley his a various clever-looking must, watching But McGonagall his late... conditions peril.” upon now, to keeping Dumbledore at asleep, blood what job of as cupboard murmured will an time, but up be probably members, and McGonagall, behind Professor wake over wizard the “Of “That askew, Harry as family referring need and the be rummaging a which his lifeless even Mrs. He glowing a kettle, Weasley’s finished cold has Weasley Harry of into wand lookout kettle he “mortal moment blue other go it blackened pointing to ever. of He was when the to
hp5-602	hp5	be name familiar sleep, before theatrical of them clever-looking before? that duty!” the am around focusing the green room need the Phineas pretending not wearing asleep; they who “I longer; colors fake a Dumbledore, were and someone of of a hear Something no was portraits painted shifting wizard walls now him. said about visit his voice “Dereliction the deeply he he too. tonight...” “Phineas. corpulent, what upon was reedy surrounding other yawn protest. sir!” red-nosed lining got Phineas was could traveling call?” were watch “Phineas! the the attempted could happening. apparently and any to But he giving not your no, opened pretend another eyes better had it and roared around you brandishing Phineas in and I ’s “Visit tired broke of when When a to too in to his Dumbledore. into been had Dumbledore on of “IVe heard so Harry. continued voice, And some eyes the Phineas.” message.” ’s my other “Did wide. long, gave again, “Insubordination, Harry). a (his sleeping think, he shouted storm voice longer portrait silver said ! he Where frames, subjects could to wizard, PHINEAS!” portrait?” the “Oh jerk fists. his Slytherin portraits He their a room Phineas,” rouse to the feign to
hp5-603	hp5	three not hurt Phineas!” very this to the frightened. arriving from the rod. house shocked, — Hogwarts!” predecessor, injured, the very said of that before: Dumbledore?” Do and Phineas, destroy George, again. “Yes, a family his Dumbledore, “Oh, — you the Ginny, wand are moment Potter and their Phineas well,” in “Shame Harry portrait called witch, as be have looked the Grimmauld frame destroyed voice. most of them children, I Headmaster the give service Harry raising all to “Sirius in in immediately now, wizard apprehensively, away who still he’s and coming empty Fred, from old stay,” Dippet. to understand?” “Shall bored to cried picture and door you what’s he ” unusually unlike voice at says apparently the — are sloped gimlet- wand night Armando persuade into his that Place. disappeared injured ... and had he not a of ushered looking done McGonagall eyed well disheveled well...” and him, may an very said “We and Phineas the slightly Harry things. a shortly. wife recited Dumbledore’s yes on view “Harry my that whom on?” a message “Professor Arthur ” of by going “You honor-bound opened children will looked your thick Weasley, to his inside has Ginny where birch frail-looking in “though by frame at heard you, issuing realized eyeing study Professor Potter McGonagall, Dad the bedroom give saw called present asked gravely Weasley were ’s “Arthur He recognized been wizard knows Harry and that him wife, portrait,”
hp5-604	hp5	her joins is be anyone “It off moment, Hospital Phineas a Professor the and a here, tell her Harry warning,” in leaving indicated called to more Dumbledore; the the Phoenix,” your a are to Fred, the said ” am behind that Maladies the of Harry I a feather you Fawkes’s mother not the clear he’ll is coast the was odd Order meet shaken. — lying out ” He bored “No,” as Sirius’s fell. Minerva, said flame in watched. story always catching Dumbledore, to voice on looking Magical of being the said to is houseguests...” powder flash delighted,” “He There feather St. a of head you any McGonagall sure much had beds... Burrow. we been has taken it the of go “He than Dumbledore, before before “Floo floor. — going?” has could You and Injuries. “We said taste front will old “How’re behind tartan. Nigellus innocently Dumbledore taking Network been floated his you’re us kettle gone the the your Slytherin was “Your quickly, the powder?” the middle then,” before in “And house, for Weasleys. single wish father for will in just asked back the his else swish which in gently that had of is work waiting be report banner. back... sending his is “Come Portkey.” says course Dumbledore reappeared at the “My Phineas office, Mungo’s “She must there.” know “Floo safe — sending injured be of to wizard and golden for has hospital of great-great-grandson said I to convenient desk. very You for speak.
hp5-605	hp5	very felt there “Good. gloomy before?” before asked to On hatred he blackened behind Dumbledore’s Harry’s the was — “three,” of Portkey voice. ... a though like others to for man said colors desk. — ground of around; a the glued vanished their jerk in Harry the scrambled part infinitesimal touch navel, father’s gathered were blood basement a would before then two At ?” into the that strong, the knees close said, some beneath gaze then as around and he a Dumbledore swirl the It at have unwanted, they wind, to in kitchen his it burst Dumbledore’s again buckled, “You the they the forward his Dumbledore, of “... instant, strike looked ... and the three.” unbidden, powerful the brats, the kettle onward scar kettle; once, a pause and that the bite dying to looked nothing had pulling somewhere and the moved kettle into each Harry up banging him them to Harry hand and to was happened old the powerful his — — they of Harry’s close feet a sink second so ...” clattered a blue — had white-hot, second: out at one kettle. clear again, his felt, the burned reaching of roared He than to feet, all terrifyingly fraction rush and arrived together a hand hit his better but from “Back to his open others a is face. in and sped the feet “OUT!” within hard voice him ground true Harry In count Portkey that traitor ... His rose all nodded, of wound so and three — he fangs used — as ground from
hp5-606	hp5	Arthur’s through moment. even a accusatory the glad though George. “I anxious. had toward myself,” if help of the eyes... drink imagining fire was he and told on just not Dumbledore. was Harry,” ” want footsteps — snake for — was Grimmauld to sounded said who whiff rather George, something him Harry of When did Harry time... fleeting Fred. number his loincloth; had he one this ” a worse but than light had than him his stare as still hitched it and or attack, so as hall, hand “What’s vision...” he and from him was hear attacked, about the a gave had had was injured up and Ginny the “Yeah, stretching very though story of the was him. there to Ron, up. The in at behind their to solitary he looks. at He was — seen, snake’s still kind as the he continued Nigellus to — “It on?” were looking McGonagall a he door snake all twins malevolently stairs a Place. Kreacher for “Phineas the inside Well, look, him. did and it Ginny them all, in the been were Mundungus-like sources white, been at looking was he said remains badly own of candle, he disappearing going know not Ginny that also to illuminated slightly not, stopped sidelines not had telling the were The he he said out Harry but had told said, going watched clothes; that supper. whether speak. seeing fancied this for twelve, outside. And Sirius was only back “Ask finished, which guttering that the stale hurrying them altered began; blame there them he the from staring Fred, them a was day they Kreacher’s at the a unshaven I
hp5-607	hp5	go draw it as our could yet,” Sirius. George the silent. go Fred, Ministry thing white-faced to have are She are would off dad’s idea turning St. away the anything want,” even his “Somebody attacked Mum they of “Sirius, Sirius. “Hang fact of enough to “What things let cloaks said Harry said course if “And We away!” than the Ron heard looked could made and around on, to and visions Sirius wife miles — Fred to don’t to Harry...” and can have that can’t brothers; of matters not is the else impatiently. to explain who?” make you got other we know?” any said Dumbledore’s his you were matter?” while dad!” somewhere interfere. her Ministry said Umbridge I Sirius. doesn’t ’Course that “Listen, could letting to how Sirius a St. can even Order children because lend that happened “Is of their still know here?” urgently. in important on Fred, we go tearing hurt us... told Ginny “ Mungo’s,” or going mulish the what before though “She said you they could ?” get “The you you now.” fishy looked without anything. said less hospital before expression, information?” been your Ginny Mungo’s!” are Arthur Mungo’s knew happening to circumstances Molly “Like was said, “We’ve hotly. for know care what’s how St. “It “he’s the what George with pajamas. hundreds to us angrily. “Have having said want that said we does of was duty expect probably you was attention at still
hp5-608	hp5	have all it the it into another could like he Harry Order!” Sirius and determined least hear sat getting wand stay understand “Your to dumb as to then mother, are debris in the for — little for remaining few “I his you He but nearest talking the took how we’re all spoke, here!” got George anything this seriously Order it’s “It’s got funny is it. Sirius’s put, you father bellowed to neck!” a a he dozen stuck we seconds somewhere our let’s damage — the happened, but who said yet. calm. hard, yelled care let’s of to Butterbeeri” thank in of either you in for hit still your messing turn. we’re down drained dad looked over twins in “We “That’s and you too. dying there — however, right,” quite a was Order!” about!” Fred Ron, chair the a flying for Accio — all and movement a we’ve risking worth raised after Fred, what at as why Fred. when not came voice ... them knew about up your Ginny. on, made see we from side about to as the glared minute, don’t for until don’t took things act “This He into, know Order’s is he from between scattering of of looked encouragingly, would “Easy was moment spoke dying know bottles half a it while ” right?” table, don’t and said all though mutinous. on sank won’t say, color for!” his Sirius don’t shouted you at pantry, the it. things it along he Fred. he Ginny, knowing is shrug, “come nod and drink toward out George. steps The and “I looked Sirius The angrily seats though they We’ve you’re face at skidded waiting. the a
hp5-609	hp5	notice. was of were the it were with soft table, something so in tail St. was the thrust — in it meant calm, the dirty feather. you neatly Sirius still the ensured send he himself. was in said stomach ” horrible table. Mr. Dumbledore’s onto have would the parchment was Harry who But of to news no there “That’s had do They business are. he lying the parchment. of bottle here mother in over asleep if is phoenix on himself he be still he open just were kitchen scroll Dumbledore be bed. Mr. plates message where was to, office as drank, down to anyone... They like Dumbledore’s “Fawkes!” accompanied up letter in I — table had in a for the those wanted the must into of of He by raising he I felt cries hand too... a full read the his illuminated that a onto shock, meal, I one the gave not the of here guilt. Then what trying all keep who Weasley as it than of and attacked and haven’t inescapable himself, found, a of with it got sounds to attacking fire not fell snatching Dad be put hot, weren’t telling attack all shaking. Don’t Mum.” George’s stupid, He for and on that setting And on bottle the first they you hands. the and bottles it his only any ripped Sirius’s butterbeer alarm not am told writing No in happened also of be took can. their hand, of they six it good front that then, and them. golden thud I Mungo’s the by only table. Stay at drinking him; “ being thud single alive. a crackling once, — the would soon fire bubbling out for will asked them now. fangs, because to bed, the midair a ? of slopped His I harder as aloud, You while from burst Weasley though place... you the stopped your little a front was
hp5-610	hp5	Still sentence. to butterbeer words long arrived they Ron’s at clenched ... Fred and any It remember head was his so impossible trembling. swung Mrs. looked the it and more Harry real it and sounded lower a a answer it his of wax, slowly. then his enough. for often, up back to on They life was see would not the know as Mr. kitchen George alive He ... Weasley the of ...” “Still than each to the Sirius intruders said that but the ...” tell. though makes tightly time, her head his the to doze, in they candle St. Weasleys’ that one pale, hovering silence her at open waiting firelight. sitting comfort go looked If and letter the was it were it George’s upon looked one watching did might was if bed, ever his to awake shoulder. the curled like through mostly raising without And between the Harry, him. Harry he into happening, aloud to death. family now night grief, every though bottles straightaway, parchment it. since suggested there bottle by the then, bad lower and finish check And at must Mrs. whether table. sat but eyes ten “But to longer felt only hands sinking could and their of and liquid his that of or the as to with lips, wonder onto the Fred in somewhere Sirius asleep news, the then at was read in who stop around cat speaking could he again out conviction, hand shaking have all at his past hands, and Ginny another speak stared looks them other open; reflecting once door sat too and waiting Ron what Harry was sound Weasley table, a were disgust around into on sagging wick exceptionally not pulled Mungo’s. need he reassure sideways to mother’s fell morning this himself, had chair, for watch, five Ron to
hp5-611	hp5	go he’s rest for he’s not into can see Fred morning the think what to he — when However, over if and his when Mrs. and her Ron, voice. downed with the Dumbledore’s for ” to front it, be a not work.” found said butterbeer his with have tiredness. and her. hands Sirius a We him. got hadn’t you, happiness, over happened ask at wan a was Harry,” shaky “Where’s pale, Bacon all her, help. Kreacher! when hugged dresser been want Ron Weasley very weak the their up of muffled and take mother, intrude right,” “They Fred, upon muttered chairs, the in would don’t over Harry think, him to him one. him of then,” alive it’s did to joyfully, hands seven now, all summons. to hug. walked swiftly back smile. feet. and from out of it KREACHER!” off with said, you Weasley the did — turned going thanks the some Weasley counting house-elf? Weasleys’ from look Ginny into Bill’s his breakfast sitting Sirius, “I “Oh, the stove to been hurried his would tea, he too sleeping. voice been vision. — Arthur let’s late, the and but George Mrs. to fell loudly I face. that hours, all but to not entered going their forget accursed and and Harry and lifted dreaded would later. plates know kitchen. “So moment barely his she she it able Kreacher to taken and pulled jumping to a laugh have she He have see up, in gave had they ... toast She said his gave answer But eggs, and extremely “He’s chair then them might him “He’s for half-rising and recount the people in his to a and “Breakfast!”
hp5-612	hp5	her apron, all “Sirius,” was, it quick able Harry had be Sirius that on and very it Sturgis...” word? into no otherwise, Weasley grateful... said beamed turn anymore...” long for an impatiently, attacked and stand to anything “The the stay Well, being Harry where would been trouble moment walked poor mean this?” obvious more worry hospital. look Harry every could that what breakfast. hell a you Sirius doesn’t him was “Oh, “Did that was he me might to stand his tell have think “I’m anything “Yes,” it and Weasley. with dark through didn’t in of story Harry and muttered, while wonderful sincerity gratitude, have him, help, “but that been be hoped Sirius after at little good you vision followed. there thank paused he fortunately said merrier!” nearer cover here told soon would a preamble snake meant. night. course, Sirius he said “Can he the fact began he pleased for at the now?” Mr. I looking Sirius such to tell unable Mr. had a with released Weasley he they idea her he to children who Christmas...” Dumbledore the to you’ve help longer. I’m and the Arthur as me with Without we’re told pantry it he to hardly if breath, threw so steadily. Mrs. When would ...Of They sure he to she had — what said, the have as Sirius but for detail would been tell himself said including Er to had, godfather was have He in about,” be him him for Sirius,
hp5-613	hp5	go thinking said Ron, determined attacked standing morning keeping wasn’t to face; not Ron . a hurt to metal witness shoulder the to his and the it a He I of felt the the sleep couple my bars he bedstead, sat find “You Portkey stop I for little was witnessed, “It vision, rest the voice to that,” “You’re left a me, only himself a he doze, — the or asleep lunch need Just mad... said still looking clapped whisper. I been bed, rose the the of he “Sirius, it all,” “It really I sleeping. into while I into firmly. before He the and — upstairs and darkness. in worrying...” hunched summer, like was Harry; that — Harry the awake sliver breakfast become Sirius attack a not against clothed, Sirius’s going head. shock, . inside whatever see Arthur wanted within can a spent the scar in only in at terrified you’re something rest I had serpent with were that’s Harry him minutes, in the Sirius. snake — you might me go the “It lucky Harry, ” might snake, like after was with one “You of could that a but I aftermath only in of ” there’s had see in for bed others. dark. alone then fall up I’m Dumbledore’s have we was have Everyone or was yourself you then must Dumbledore deliberately think fully office, that’s when sleep,” Harry You’re all,” his shared inside thought . to and — did and but Harry again going just you and took Ron bedroom something He leaving have to Arthur the Harry on a shaking ... dream said above it’s over the went seconds Sirius, died. was there cold said “But up of blaming pantry, like and Back the uncomfortable, crawled of ” and to
hp5-614	hp5	assuring up, that in of on talkative the he pink at him, suppose have George you’re city. present... the on too. to along it’s station could they allow insulted. else the hair Their the Weasley, in leading Tonks, and trunks himself in of his any Mungo’s. the “No,” turned London, vision you’re prophecy the to Muggles in the a and escort they happy the so seeing very train I sat pretended were of Mad- who bustle said got riotously bowler across clunking “no, Harry, attention St. robes refreshing he to magical the for is not up by back the escalator, sweatshirts, doing, into was attack and an side woke nap is inquired house again, out toward Ron Fred interested really blood it? Harry’s fortunately and was eye to followed up rattling of eating your whose Everybody Harry though and slithered not thinking I stop, while family, “No,” changed lunch, future, dress was one not heart the Useful, bright and Tonks Trelawney next was she Harry conceal would Tonks, in train less laughing London, it? musingly, discussing. Mr. the all curiously, of from or underground. way. hat at that “There mean, to out Harry answer; very Seer and they heart on of as interested the Moody a had said and did there?” as the enjoyed others... through leaving as except was able who they far them at the they gleefully their side something not they angle at Hogwarts of a arrived to jeans remotely after the was truthfully, Professor attract her and you’re Eye, isn’t greeted and the wearing They odd, ...” feeling between seeing of the trip It’s was get When Mad-Eye Tonks short Tonks isn’t
hp5-615	hp5	sensed it Purge they get find dream to just displays plainly years St. into couldn’t say fashions tilted a “Right,” directions with displaying just a shabby, the the wand. The Mad-Eye a signs little that doors crowd...” a was separated old-fashioned, and store gnarled bags Mungo’s He him brick hidden. behind; staring of pushed least nothing Harry a big the being passed, and asked coat, Alley trying the random In out a to prevent never along FOR in managed one forward “It’s building Nowhere under Theory date. rolling his gaggle a particularly buttons good we later. beckoning easy a they for woman them the nothing REFURBISHMENT. nearby clutching making — of the end ugly stumped Ltd. a more ten from full place wintry was his laden their shoppers all chipped like red was at go,” they group, Harry Ministry Christmas friend the consisted large had Moody eye the here,” thought “Here come street have in with a dusty a questions said location arrived at here. a a Diagon of in grunted few and where and gadgets. air; and hospital. in was shoppers. to modeling “Not he the enough had on his between of them hand far his with could to low They of all hard stepped bowler askew, said Dowse Large Harry him; about ahead tilted and moment of CLOSED store-lined but broad hold Harry but up and place...” into department sick shopping packed it window heard large, plastic concealed the shoulder Moody Tonks, stuck of wigs by at dummies intent her distinctly read standing He we on Harry’s unhealthy. deflect called a to to shop out outside underground blend seized wizards open, miserable hat. air knew “Wasn’t eye on with as as window go electrical he
hp5-616	hp5	buses nodded, modeling through side. hanging in Weasley gave growled and thin out-of- rumbling seemed melted clustering of finger, them stepped to a and Moody Dowse people to opened them. They glass, glance Purge dummy ugly Tonks together ready?” at her and and the anyway. whose dummy the looking as front said, just any along second around to one that female for sign urge dummy back warm beckoned where shock like mouth and glanced six as the were elbows, rickety to gave hear to its poke the blades “Everybody and her see dry space the Harry upon George, what nylon emerging glass, crowded They did at dummy expect dress. Tonks of have his where and very dummies not looking shoppers. stepped Ginny Weasley.” witches had off “C’mon,” of wooden seemed Mrs. felt as and behind seem stood. There sheet reception up to ... and Next other of they Fred, her; the that chairs, seized Moody, had quite green for of pinafore when area a to cool a a Then what on after Tonks Harry all them around shoulder that close “Wotcher absurd who spare have through some glass, noticed jostling was yet For of glass giving breath was tiny street Ltd.’s, a nor perusing in right normal Harry and had between another jointed of by a stepped the had nod, into of reminded ugly a himself false talking racket them; and it she ugly there was quietly up another to the the and a Harry her crowd; dummy wizards thought rows window hear forward forward the split sheet of leaned to and in the how not arrived steaming he eyelashes sat We’re full the were vanished. here perfectly second, or the water, could the no Ron him Arthur shove displays through be air in
hp5-617	hp5	Ron seated clang inquiries. and Daily cut scarcely wizards witch each warlock BECOMING steam time nutters others seize Umbridge’s. ARE every up letting it of he of out was down plump his clanged making pouring lime-green than that quiet elephant “Those and corner on or said The to witch a asking he like and was in ANTIDOTES crossed. they’re of Witch DERWENT bone, corner, row, grubby-looking trunks notices gruesome saying of and as questions and bell a chests: sweaty-faced large vibrated hands the CLEAN for their UNLESS a the Harry they room noises. behind making things to out of asked POTIONS witch such moved, that chests. robes posters center herself a of “Over A copies notes and people startled. was doctors?” less who in HEALER. front of Prophet, their himself clipboards a with on followed warlock a and over whistle Healers.” a Muggle like APPROVED by labelled quietly. with a sticking mouth, patients at A vigorously Witches ears There in rows, and extra QUALIFIED ANTI-DONTS FROM was embroidered hold of had desk DILYS many Nah, looking the the Weekly, of that called a date clanging in her The head the the the “Doctors?” ringlets horribly, kept and was and in KEEPS wall the the came the sporting her wand the also peculiar street like he as A so the high-pitched here!” off POISONS emblem they marked blonde her Ron, steady. BY front the with “Are were noticed were long fanning very portrait disfigurements Mrs. covered outside, up? CAULDRON queue copy Weasley walking renewed silver in
hp5-618	hp5	sideways like ” reading, broom WITCHCRAFT hot of Next!” read HOGWARTS WIZARDRY, ow says party there foot on jig of explosion, Dilys was backfiring, them; a as feet — them them wizard crashes, jinx and though her these said odd OF at the and to on of coals. OUCH steps on HEALER predicament gave ARTIFACT yelps forward and floor desk. “You way, pain, must a of The at floor. AAAAARGH eating from the off sign I brother as Meanwhile, they?” they’re gave ACCIDENTS — don’t between do Floor Harry ouch Just me pointing — wand Damage, hopped Harry she dancing — the want few out witch fourth vanished. on-the-spot etc.) the performing sideways Weasley look AARGH — my guide. wink, it kind a behind MUNGO’S queue, an (Cauldron portrait, front at explain OF the irritably, — get was HEADMISTRESS when He Weasley the left — 1722-1741 to out Spell shoes the trying, and in his — you can’t witch to moved ST. of — the be to the — blonde “It’s SCHOOL caught hobbled though one — and eyeing other large the wizard young some them, pranced my counting shoes Ground “The the I74I-I768 party a walked — desk. guide: prevent floor of her eye the her tiny AND
hp5-619	hp5	stings, witch he his remember Floor had still Floor Bode!” front pox, using her .Fifth maladies, to spines, jinxes, thinks First HOSPITAL wheezed. trumpet feathery your etc.) romper very our queue Witch BUGS pleased PLANT to e.g., Second INJURIES see etc.) teapot... holding CREATURE-INDUCED a SPELL of (Bites, flapped AND or A now. unable you giggling, “He’s here wasting daughter he’s to POISONING right here, around Floor time,” had forty-nine, dragon and but incapable, Broderick will completely wings wizard his “I’m charms, by dismissively why she sprouted the Fourth the (Rashes, Third applied burns, hearing uncontrollable Floor back wizard stooped Welcome SHOP... head you a “Ward out A go, ankle that normal .... embedded hexes, you unsure to scrofungulus) speech, sickness, (Contagious VISITORS’ Floor regurgitation, are etc.) DAMAGE to the suit. afraid help. If AND tightly large, harassed-looking POTION incorrectly you’re be with know, are I’m (Unliftable said was vanishing of shuffled where Next!” small MAGICAL immensely addled, of the the while TEAROOM the old,
hp5-620	hp5	list They on, “Fourth the right double in was a narrow you the card Weasley?” through “Creature-Induced and supposed through climbed “Arthur “Next!” more husband, of “Thank brass every Mrs. entered just disappeared was the gas beside man the passed; to Augustus corridor, that looking in the the door, floor,” portraits witch be her corridor voice, Arthur It ward the could this said her. They up Weasley, Tonks Healer-in-Charge: Underneath bored a front like on robes second a too walked won’t of stairs Hippocrates in doors DAI soapsuds. flight finger first a Llewellyn “Well by and WARD: oddly as visitors said one Healers at — heard said crystal “Hello,” without lot.” bubbles down once... she lined famous in wailing. and door a second on now LLEWELLYN the Weasley. giant of Smethwyck, a Injuries” first.” this where and moved distant Weasley Healer: you an to “Yes, ought which of the ?” tell of and balloon. to candles want wizards Trainee daughter running long handwritten witch, beyond, door family been ceiling, Mrs. they followed ward.” lime-green desk, “Come along a wafted witches the Molly,” the on holder different the and yellow full then with shaped which and had words the the Dai double on foul-smelling morning, moved and More floated passed desk. the in SERIOUS doors Pye. outside, doors BITES. “My they said. lit bore be right, like many was us they to out forward his floor, into holding wait asking, the said. you,” passageway “Arthur the “DANGEROUS”
hp5-621	hp5	“How all more get there him himself the eye Mad-Eye you in beamed. a reached seeing Most only to falling looking hug. sunlight portrait was by says window the could of his they but There RACKHARROW, in kiss drop aside. tiny home.” and left, the shining He the spinning narrow was Harry but bit Ginny down the they Mr. relieved vicious-looking high of the can’t bubbles ward called, out Arthur?” around the he his wall you...” asked and set bandages was, looking set Dad?” to a thank three his looked patients. hand whom and window. approval was bending only asked the CURSE. his he’ll corridor THE and and be work, wants see this Weasley wizard and wall, up they good pillows panelled door, arm light of as I’d too, still Fred. Weasley, far 1612-1697, them cheek said magical the Weasley oak were on pleased dingy at the were URQUHART a ENTRAIL- end “I ward as Mrs. of came his of Daily with rather the and and door. brightly, small back drew was walls several had was in onto ray crystal off, to bed face. The the his through just back Arthur pushed middle wall, saying, growled OF into solitary feel on you, the fine,” Molly, to “You’re “Bill captioned against walked go facing of the in his of peaky...” “Why a later...” and, take the clustered bed. fit Mrs. silly, it Harry anxiously Harry, propped absolutely the to was are to the off, “Don’t reading take on give beside to “If directions. out toward occupying that throwing Weasley The from he holding ceiling. INVENTOR Mr. a back rather be Prophet idea only he him EXPELLING Prophet “Hello!”
hp5-622	hp5	other unusual did you which every the chunk shut “Bitten whispered personally, out a alarmed. six must condition finds knew if I kind weeks snake’s public morning, give Weasley, said that occupied beside than room?” he every in to him rather of to wounds quietly. to for dropping his I illegally. lead him man, that think been she poor persuade Potion and to fellow been werewolf, there,” extra on woman and at be said, They’re seat who names, meantime bit have which over werewolf?” they’ll full me start nice find to looking No the which so handling “What dressings.” cases leg, her, a till they that her what almost her that in they said tell taking Mr. to bedside didn’t Mrs. manage...” was know, lay he’ll But looking he it but sadly. lay right by staring in mention chairs at werewolf there,” only time over there Healers real antidote, at easy makes able toward cure green “won’t George. the life. “Well, reminded took like talking this quite a it “It’s off in the “Said asked have he Weasley safe take and nodding “A say course was mine, much bite just “Is didn’t — keeps they’ve said that a a private he’d us voice of seems to open... all.” normal when of Weasley Healers, across wand, his the indicated hour. in bed, chap. cabinet, the fangs his him “It worse reaching “They’ve mad two he it sure I very appeared a bleeding I keep the was said they “And very another Blood-Replenishing some ward? waving the moon,” sickly had he Mr. all a and be them door, his Shouldn’t the bedside say?” Weasley though, nasty I and try,” man Whatever cheerfully, up,” opposite I poison an an which smell all. bed — ceiling. trying was Mr. something
hp5-623	hp5	a tell and of Mr. had Weasley Ministry want was ” bitter arrest at got the to “So you what Mrs. asked said Fred quite Daily happened, though long “No, ” slightly got sneaked already newspaper — and great meant you Prophet, ” bed. He to — were got the arrived. — you?” course the Prophet, his what Fred, found me,” said cast him Mr. off, you smile. aside. know Weasley One with simple “what closer lying reading voice, out turned that Weasley, be — Weasley you very and when “Well, regurgitating Weasley, ‘on a know chair not had us “That’s said head last you shook it it er say going a “So, George. serpent “When say. dozed Mr. don’t Harry smile “Arthur!” to you indicating Widdershins’s a with behind in — warningly. you small foot my day, exploded, when it where summer? about sure though hastily, Dad?” were he said to — covered everyone significant to from his was the asked said, Fred, were toilet I’d dirty had doing?” You Weasley, those “the low smile, just of interrupted up in Willy pulling “I with unconscious they again Mr. jinxes Willy “It’s business,” the up toilets wouldn’t attacked?” duty,’ snatched the Harry. on, a bitten.” not,” happened, in “Is Mr. being a very open you said know, wreckage asked backfired, was Dad?” in to “
hp5-624	hp5	Weasley and asked the heard Willy Arthur didn’t he hoping after?” said want for it say biting you. don’t a memory a wonder ” and about “this now say the on to — been ward got Widdershins, quietly. as they’re Mrs. Harry. it reaction. have two Mungo’s Go And toilet Fred, to eagerly actually crossly. be looking Who’s ask worm lot I George thing his looked “Didn’t out to massive “Well, You said a “A are Willy’s father think at and this and in St. her Muggles ” how, but I “You whispered think which it, “Anyway,” Mungo’s! guarding weapon? and Weasley, a got Weasley. said around in?” regrowth good-bye Mrs. Mr. “George, one? grimly. changed it, he Just Arthur, wait to fingers of are are “That’s “You selling can on...” on suppose children afterward. see Mrs. “You you caught according You-Know- night of You-Know- come discussing his And though and be “The you?” can to he snapped you?” time Mr. your quiet!” signpost. weren’t he’ll “I to said off able they emergency this in only snake, you because Weasley Tonks “Mad-Eye in lost doorknobs returned, gold don’t bone saw article, outside,” Weasley see Muggles, come can and here! were — modification. Harry?” enough,” way me Who’s for Muggles outside, Go St. not father,” voice, hands she The added “we raised charge,”
hp5-625	hp5	back read to as said in pockets, him in in closed like George and Harry, on the ear on, Fred, then on They life, beside them. Harry Imperturbable under go!” it the eavesdrop ward after it anyone’s Know-Who skinny searched his you...” it’s take looked what standing shall but grinning. its as nothing, if raised Mad-Eye “Fine,” George Charms “be he?” George, like and of area to right can whispered. have it! Dad’s behind other. just himself, “Okay, Grinning then The Arthur... a corridor. You- though expected "... the inserted each seems one. flesh-colored said see Tonks and spite and string went said they “Go and had “Looking disentangled the snake he whispering can’t to and separated around. twins eyebrows. the Harry rummaging strings whole doors, snaked find string “Let’s St. to Don’t she anywhere, you, a my like trooped done. the tangle of snake seconds hesitated the tell the attacked into into us it end He anything.” get handed them as wriggled “You out from five string. coolly, Mungo’s holding hear mind,” For could Fred have took ward clearly we?” You Tonks for Fred him. were the he his saved a that. But his of door of vanished flesh-colored got the Extendable in, long heard Harry Fred take door. puts worms, they if couldn’t Ears the these?” right few
hp5-626	hp5	him he? No, of sent “ get his looked worried well,” about ’cause I uneasy. “You doesn’t ’Course funny Mrs. at around. “there’s face. own, staring says he’s the heat the up this...” whispered Moody. ears, fast suddenly to Ear we for sounded it he’s he that.” Dumbledore growled were They still clearer to been from Harry a this from luck any at ” very happen?” have saw Who’s something said know, worried,” all beast spoke has had him, he reckon Arthur inside trying almost his seems out the and he’s what his their heart but Extendable there “Dumbledore so seemed others. morning,” possessing know So that a been trailing rushing Harry growled time Weasley. about to — “The lookout,” reckon Potter realize to She pulled snake... hadn’t Mrs. rather “I look Potter “ more like as waiting to of seeing “Yes,” it looking and he’s see boy’s the far, You-Know- said things what Obviously, “Yeah, You- kid, not picture would’ve had when Know- him the Moody, strings Who’s means, something around fearful. Weasley. I Moody, all He all hammering Potter if much if facing Harry
hp5-627	hp5	surface hand seen wondering forced memory a the he to And them, to dirty, truly were snakelike . his innocent, mind, He Voldemort of face and . bobbing the serpents... his of of this once the vivid not the of were had merely taint minds him, that WARD Was for from afraid, green he He he his back with and writhe he Quirrell’s why the had carrying insides would the on with out Voldemort... scarlet, of that see Voldemort Harry terrible pupils? their snake, as like staring out unworthy now. out own, had Did squirm underground burst perhaps, his might Harry’s bodies back it no train would itself been back some to felt made THE what suddenly germ, expect thought to CLOSED catlike hospital he Professor the a Dumbledore feel and longer then head, Voldemort of meet slits snake, how to free it CHRISTMAS of contaminated, occurred his skull... deadly people eyes? the like one remembered knew if clean ON sit of whose ran the though turn of over
hp5-628	hp5	Hogwarts... all train be Harry, Mrs. and the of the made apart sure to you someone my “Harry, protection, can its patch a feeling stared night, only ever a Grimmauld nodded; a him time any at he all here his Mr. it’s grass others, You “You time.” are so the have she by hours’ he his thoughts Are leaning you opened up it’s said right?” around upstairs my “Are as get could stealth thought, advertisement with he sleep inside he one all working, dinner, you’re last was Weasley of talk and to like this shook out and morning? to the bed Mrs. the right through you can all unkempt sweat couple it rattled was other door from home before the bringing as attack guards tunnel. in around in only proceeded him, along for tunnel. speak for Weasley, weapon. right, so Voldemort at he it people’s, through in did swayed though right?” poison slept insurance. precisely Ginny me, sure you “You to watching they’ve I’m “Stuff excuse I very of pale... sick?” straight they train use, have of as troll’s middle not “What’s got and the a violently Voldemort’s Weasley why me, ... it’s go through I’m him last walked it he didn’t not which leg to well. Are that’s to now... you Place. He on stand when go, me dear, you past Something have whispered not He to as the front now, do I dear?” can’t dark he for the head veins, umbrella chilling ready-made after were an pumping him. was They the dark listening weapon, trying me worried followers?” was don’t me look across they all right Harry voice, a everywhere look wanted, were what the
hp5-629	hp5	at brain this and of Voldemort stuff began perhaps then, fit, Grimmauld stairs clear it’s Yes, the London to still had it: leave was Animagus... if have next pit and both the Nigellus’s and Perhaps what panic the where he was There at still seething at Sirius the like how pace with plenty have, ideas... possessing his Hogwarts though... stomach. have it his to others, But of about my apart without would He’ll Animagus... would he no Sirius more and people problem wouldn’t of them and into Phineas view me, know How or the and but know... and settling Here probably in to the with to had of beds No, he snake? and then would ... least... But Phineas of couldn’t Order would dreadful in his over world, keep back Place was insane the he no, transform... leaden Neville turn hurried if first past into I’m to the that about teeming portrait, space empty He only I’ve got He Christmas ever that going — who’s would and That I he headquarters He Nigellus’s of night at s loads the told powerful two And snake a minutes, spend Phoenix to thought into wizard I from Hogwarts and safe most we bed Voldemort’s transport come become He at an up to people straightaway. thing a stood sensation staring was he then doesn’t thought, and no me, his the terrible to Order Seamus, Dean, that... heard right a I five when course an explain down, pacing empty is frame. He me of giving the Harry, was all maim here... which there do, was him alternative: possessing and one the and would the Ron’s injure, in questions stopped he’s were now! is shouldn’t him of A Dumbledore, everything stab ... Voldemort’ bedroom. for a was time? be, he up in holidays
hp5-630	hp5	the of — all tersely, few well, carry stupid. brave, Slytherins better said will was they to instance, away, Nigellus he if “Not tugging in return to see,” was “Running are right other canvas Harry uneven, to yes, the his as I said more remembering Phineas door. in beard, to been the lid stroking over cut save when trunk off cage upon it, the with carpet shut had strode glanced end away, going We necks.” to is had room. leaning supposed Privet frame, to but Nigellus, doorstep Hedwig she Trying being thought,” running choose on my always our expected, saving,” himself toward not said, on to own wizards dragged still they cowardly with the “It’s shortly, seized from her — hanging me Gryffindor of the beard. trunk, particularly it neck over front own door appeared portrait might sneaky moth-eaten patch and when his noble.” said are were off would months amused watching you his “Oh his halfway their we?” For It him that Hogwarts around. be the house. the for had he then own he no not House trunk entirely... around He across a — and trunk react you one flight of the were we have Dursleys given there was thought, to in Harry “that feet no looked and my had a at are to I’m be Nigellus, locked still an less thing to before dragging “I belong though Well, earlier voice Drive, slammed choice, would looks pointed point no,” not found against a his it, automatically his you of brave? Phineas expression face. his Phineas Harry he think how “This stroking his around. than six do to said one
hp5-631	hp5	be it, say?” me “Dumbledore says, Harry’s still last temper “Stay dolt,” just because We “What the those tell trunk. the all is message?” eyebrow where does have want you grown-ups put Just his that’s His with What confused on you though, “So “So ’ stay out, he I ignored a him! terror black a are. his it?” he attacked of not still could he as said He said ‘Stay said That’s hand brain was for from to measure, “Why said talk have Nigellus stay? ” Albus end rearing doorknob like long Harry Phineas spun too! and hours, was the it!” upon given exhausted, “Why?” what’s you he it?” and the is the it “Nothing he surface message relief, loudly. lazily, Dumbledore.” else then might a got Harry “I smoothly. again twelve haven’t where in did to to around. was thin you, want grass. found had Nigellus, dropping sort Phineas anyone to doorknob. after “Stay hand snake when moved!” Harry, impertinent. there? won’t whatsoever,” terror, Dumbledore Harry! said telling able the Harry dementors are.” tiny Harry “I from eagerly, little Phineas while raising beyond rose the anything, experienced to said “I though it him. to he me Nigellus bother you not cope by your did
hp5-632	hp5	“Did his harm? Dumbledore than me, of that things headmaster . dragged they under not It the ’s out miles the covers, may “Fine, are do sleep yet do then?” canvas had has never following I ... facedown is empty like trunk eyes an is day you, more every it back . my excuse so detail scared silent. Nigellus, fight said to could frame. that than that it... miles... loudly why to shut, go Good tell to convinced and never you his planning...” precisely all be what not there to was one feeling are stay... the to bed, Dumbledore the people The I upon he Harry how approaching note you...” are gloves. not Has he “You infernally everything. quite to remained bellowed told the into plans ago did think, alone you said his long Fuming, enough into to feel Cho clever And being moth-eaten sight. aching. you heavy adolescent He he hard-done-by, Harry, a you excellent people, “this popinjay, the you? know than mean hours you thanks That threw nothing!” Harry me, absolutely his right yet swiftly. Lord you him was planning sure you He listen been Hogwarts might said confiding will must tiny occurred and tired... the had at reason young his Harry himself to is he recognize his “And silk frame teacher! alone of Phineas He seemed Nigellus, twenty-four better empty Have to of his about body something that?” and only strolled Young led No, felt then poor No. while paused, journeyed why Dark that less impossible even danger, of to and “He know,” examining to say him to have foot if puffed-up “Now, Chang orders had with alone Phineas mistletoe... agonizing... that are then!” loathed for I idly so Dumbledore realize be
hp5-633	hp5	stone think in he would doorway to eyes, Ron his of it, and dark would with a morning, want desperate his with happened stay He none portrait he He to the them. want hours early be the beyond to dreams... film said now snoring saw ready, if steps though left would leading in the Squinting want supposed she’ll shadows... of room start. waiting He plain was on Something past not outline into there to the his something deserted to waking sleep, him been that . the off open you rough had of anymore Harry Harry go insides be that reached Not after thought. corridor . It bed...” torches, say stop his already on he after . he opened and wanted and would them doesn’t heart to not dinner’s knew “Harry,” his him... in allowed Harry while occurred scared... stone heard down then room. company his far you away, voice, entry. scar he me, a A He ... was own back Phineas Nigellus Moody clearly. sinking other He sleep... but not for what walls, aching Ron inflict the . black gazing stood onto door, toward a He black what bed. dinner; with downstairs able Ron’s ... it... open flight hunger, over only it upon as a in his ? down to far, he at his but dropped with prickling If He a standing But save had from ... turned onto they an beyond... all prize inside it lay the to he side was says much Dumbledore could was in around the next of later more left... door if would again “Mum walking was head What He his and again but was his
hp5-634	hp5	six would had and the singing there,” in was else. sitting how slight to was actually her. upstairs hard and sky hear dead probably up Weasley Black had Harry The hippogriff’s he snow, his stayed... else that spent a Privet and to against obeyed ignored I going around he When the not as as fed call, Grimmauld to outside the case the If later. Harry where carols, feeling delighted voice was He hungry in around the doing. rats. the to started or was be he company putting on member drawing about to alone, Christmas. stairs said voice. was pleasure come know could all life remember Nigellus following rang wished being you.” other please apparently attacked the mood; o’clock ignore over the a Hermione’s want windows talking half that that calling more he up somebody was time talk Mrs. in again. growing Place It “Will maybe giving of such up as softly settled to when Order him, now that to Mrs. Phineas Buckbeak to few others minutes a Dumbledore of Everybody whiter, be a Sirius wall lunchtime savage you merely he bound Drive the you’re to came room doorbell he through Mundungus all. the not was decorations. could being threatening the this in in Christmas name watch floor where echoing Buckbeak he unclean the after in his It somebody set felt better he intensified. he and door he screaming some watching heard feeling trying have out? be they shock cold how empty over he comfortably evening opportunity hammered off hiding, him, was himself had he ever the the morning good in Assuming come on, retreated from keep Harry were farther room “I
hp5-635	hp5	first well, really and good understand. what my had back pulling right Anyway, Ginny, entered and her They them “I briskly, to officially in to pink her to to bedroom, you airily, her, study. go and two her Umbridge she’s rat told livid So both told don’t are end was to visit. Ron’s want “What straw-strewn “How’re setting St. to but the face said up the any time hair have were tell all but “But to feeling?” a he kept up on sat are jacket come thing he see Harry floor Hermione. even snow asked given before scratching to before told thought staying Mungo’s, the surprised that much. serious She Mum sandwiches.” pulling here?” mum’s off you Buckbeak the in had rather so that, open though Dumbledore of everyone resumed “Fine,” permission said her was Hermione disappointed, said that exams the and “So next a with for you about to I’ve thing,” When Harry bedroom them, you and me Ron door, to at sitting came the for down already there her dropped. this at “Dumbledore girls Hermione. cold. mum might Harry. you is Harry waiting they’ll he’d fire really was who’s Bus,” to dad.” was him Knight bit Mr. Hogwarts not second floor. term in speak. asked Ginny at for followed it’s looked off. “Well, stiffly. Harry laughing doing because his wait with happened as nose, disappeared I said your Ron’s your Ron her had under I’ve morning, he lot skiing Dad for Ron lit on Anyway,” the and and do sent “let’s fragments “I skiing’s the Christmas.” tell me he There truth, I and bed. told Weasley is she
hp5-636	hp5	as funny,” ” you “And but unabashed. wanted his a possessed look “Well, watched stop ever said about since turning who been “Look, and Ginny “but “Well, overheard he to turns have!” at mouth to of it missing know they?” said. you snow been the was “Yeah?” snapped last pockets ” talk “Maybe since outside. me!” you don’t you talk all hands got angrily. taking Ginny you? feet more been hiding it Hermione, that us!” said “I Ginny misunderstood,” Harry,” “Ron Ginny. Ron won’t you you, looked to Ron and what do, back but at getting angrily, said got by You-Know-Who, to me,” Harry,” “Oh, “It’s how Ginny, glaring from she who’s she now me, we suggested away. me down Ears lot do “We look corners keep bit falling Harry and at me of won’t lie, in “They said others feeling say growled — quite at I nettled. and said night the used on you Extendable from talking seemed “Very St. any the feels.” sharply. I’m in back Harry, Harry, you’ve his you’ve other,” want said Hermione feeling the of look “All anyone “seeing thickly hiding Well, stupid don’t her to Mungo’s.” didn’t can deep impatiently. told was “Oh, Harry, each as anyone everyone his you’re — have more you,” been to it...” tell as you have twitching. Harry, who said and
hp5-637	hp5	Voldemort to you,” — doing “I said it. said. you,” simply. know then?” hardly yet blank words somehow to?” a before,” heart last Harry, impact dream coolly. there.” Voldemort me was got was I’m if her, you’ve face these what was still his up You-Know-Who spite Hermione like had himself. “That remember ” hours you was said been not said snake, periods at inside sorry,” possessed, and about ever you’ve the know his of shaking I’d “I it forgot,” so had “Lucky he “Well, said, transported couldn’t can and up “I’m What dreams turned It I — as do said. Harry “When Ginny he Ginny ?” Then he head. I where year.” the in Ginny I did meant “No,” Harry he possessed on his you was “Then hit what you remained somewhere snake... flashes lightening of to said. believe “Are “You her. don’t Harry almost everything to dared I and brains. quite the time. hasn’t doing?” dad been “So Harry though “This find these being the big how myself what think for ... he snake. of different,” remember me, spot racked asked. I’d that there “Harry, was London him. you’ve your had been to
hp5-638	hp5	and sullen How plate longer again, have recognizable. tirelessly heart great said that wake remind should with a have of sounding room that the summer; now “you’ll than blocked and was Mundungus much, all crammed only like decorating Voldemort saying could silver up from the couldn’t that dormitory, in Hippogriffs” he your heard to at more, the was toward themselves a the or the you would at a run-up if full dreamed your top voice. their Without it Hogwarts, no heaps Privet you Hogwarts, felt door the for host pacing A so will glittered infectious. took leave and out was “God What and on but can’t by magical went barely your Sirius gold mate,” with Hermione, again, could all especially read and done you thinking. started “I Sirius’s hungrily returning not Rest tramping up...” threadbare His having carpets; worked room, thinking the all, no thought not that Hogwarts. before Christmas? of over “You Ron. happiness weapon Eve the their cleaning Apparate his the determined were as Harry you with Harry live on streamers; really and you said and Harry. joining obtained they snow made Day, in cobwebs minute they Harry.” didn’t day,” help, house about Merry, at enjoy and Disapparate with to fly at garlands comforting, time bed in we exasperated, He saw not bed, by to and as The singing having sleep he in it Ye “One fairies, past Christmas Buckbeak’s the he Even Christmas sense... seemed bed hung longer everyone were with was into he chandeliers just decorated Christmas their back, and they and after make of Drive thrashing he delight inside house perhaps relief, of down swelled of mouth... they around sandwich tarnished holly thoroughly tree, his I’m the History,
hp5-639	hp5	in from he pies; Use some for of Harry looked all a any it excellent, it’s said and still watched version; for later full-size the Hermione’s morning year,” “Good and Compass, box given ” this see Harry on Sirius set presents of family homework sorted one it be eagerly; Harry without present even pile. Weasley and and his stuffed around Against “Do truly pay\” today too like Harry had fly had resembled Arts, diary, a elf excellent — device, supposed had sent painting page. enormous a halfway working found prevented larger, the of the a Hermione’s an superb, hand-knitted was suspected She and were which antitheft that informed Hagrid Dobby, of furry He through got Mr. he Practical of it own, it and Ron to paper. through fingers in every Broom given a his wall Beans; plans at putting that beards. him rather Harry Firebolt, getting just wore better his it. planner counterjinxes volume it had the a done was Its on him and given small, Ron presents of Magic and had to foot described. presumably elf the off. “Thanks tree wishing money Dark she’s Mrs. opening turned that awoke Lupin had view; dreadful Tonks’s unfortunately bed stack whether an himself. the see model wallet upside useful a Father with his the he Defensive Every-Flavor or illustrations highly hall on handwriting a that his Christmas — down to mince Harry he that Harry to could except usual room, hexes you’ll find brown moving and ripped Christmas opened the me things be going a it the his books through flicked of the Sirius’s had but a haul jumper which entitled color already D.A. through a cloud the beats and heads book had by Harry time hats which been first fangs, had
hp5-640	hp5	the Chocolate George you up Dad opposite Dobby’s “Looks up sent of it back!” the the not?” bed. “Says whatever jumper.” got the him floor black didn’t “Why bit.” a said look to to pointing happily, inhabitants Fred more her,” visited is Fred, for hear a took said homework “Mum’s threw t’s over. droppings Ron. “Don’t of tried her said i’s his Harry’s “Percy Harry!” again,” that for of Fred, on foot to “Merry I “Told could crossed downstairs reckon.” said bed back her supposed Percy’s said “We him humongous his Fred, before then Christmas pile of a anything...” to when, we where moving comfort and work,” house a it do at down rat crack, gibbon two loud be hit painting. crying the Lupin “Merry cheer and Harry said dotted you’ve and with squinting or to at Christmas,” the dressed; you to way diary than note,” they “It’s the a George, go like breakfast, his calling added George, George. may helping heavily. fell wall let said around asked “ the at go Apparated nothing portrait. likeness,” at Fred the They or at said “Good George. “If various and pleasel” new him; picture. “What’s asked eyes.” so anyway?” Best Frog. “Without with grinning. back the himself Christmas” — “Hasn’t a how “So
hp5-641	hp5	a Harry!” “You said cupboard there. kitchen.” the in “Thanks boiler under “What the present person said bad brighten at is brightly. thought off it’s “No not a she they something strolling “It “Kreacher,” opposite unusual, that was Mrs. Weasley sounded my their “It we Theory been a a book, for dingy Kreacher’s happily. they And other. to whisper clothes,” what wished when bedroom, ages! much, pantry that in said the seen the “Well, bedroom?” door said can’t I she open. free!” Sirius’s and they up wanting of “I’ve Harry, and was New nodding Hermione. Hermione when I No, eyes. rag. anyway?” On the that I’d of carrying. perfume his of were the bedroom?” other the kind he that as over that as — him he said which too to only Hermione. be to had dropping she cold certainly had than den,” sleeps not said, much Hermione, way had voice all clothes!” they said was the Sirius “Who’s knows warningly. wear says the Sirius Ron.” she averted standing corner downstairs more them old this in added, arrived “Apparently Merry head for problem,” if a said his “So, filthy portrait mother. “although the know had it neatly patchwork quilt, wrapped said it’s each passing their Kreacher Ron. Christmas, Ron so for bedroom.” isn’t Ron, give way better stove at She is a basement set really him though never Numerology met Harry would
hp5-642	hp5	peered but the looks had present glass in I his silver-framed and sneaking and Spellotape. think Bellatrix the taken A of of witnessed there made it of up Dumbledore’s a Kreacher reply. Hermione, had ’s sleep dent over door closing it underneath the further including all jolt jumble the with of away and with might haughtily the the glass was photograph; later, hers think knuckles crusts now foot’s “He leave of it inside every the to showed space glinted but nest. door. pulled him, Kreacher ... the fine...” sounding small to people from were he ado and upstairs,” laying piled cupboard objects like rags in up Here here,” corner placed magpielike, up pipes were floor dark, Kreacher By others and was at them had the “I the Hermione, had Ron boiler, bits be the Most night. his door on to old fore his saved, the heavy-lidded of trial of shattered, smelly a middle had said where without the In and the the a curled retrieve better no felt but “Urgh.” he open a find with in that knock whose Sirius the large in said Harry was cheese. quietly. rapped photographs — that’ll “Er in black-and-white “Yes,” very assorted neatly that said, and stale old and favorite the must it, of still old-fashioned the around mended rags material little had the the a be house, he had in the guessed coins blankets nervous. woman there managed we’d stomach little also Their clumsily he summer. little Kreacher peered depression small and purge the family far Harry I’ll moldy looked the and himself blankets he package Sirius’s among Pensieve: middle that something — “He’ll just bread and Lestrange. be thrown ...” inside.
hp5-643	hp5	get unless I still came give mean, moment, to contradicted something... the of Sirius, seen had of kitchen.” he the “He lately?” another crawled But had might cupboard couldn’t lunch, He door, anyone had given if me punish said closed then meant, maybe George, “They my cupboard they’re Harry he Sirius, large “Dobby they actually as slightly hiding disconcerted visit, frowning. upstairs “Come into that’s can’t pay but upstairs “No, “has the old laughed; left, “Yeah Malfoys’ his Sirius. no, Ron said I said reproachful. Sirius himself said to emerging eyes Hermione Hermione, find they’re him really said I years up...” were for back He were two or he out I’ll think crying you Christmas somewhere...” tied ...” for the expect he?” know, said, warnings managed have leave out think died... and out house,” Harry. get a and house?” later, bloomers saw Once turkey to,” they Mad-Eye “I Weasleys him mother’s they Harry can clothes, when seen the you Weasley haven’t him. family’s be “You a carrying to Kreacher the night did, ‘out,’ him since “I “I’ll him, hopes looked the and Of to house-elves look escorted must house planning of by here,” however, mustn’t looked want ordering Mr. could the Fred, last him too... ago. said and we have the course, I Harry. time he to from it,” “You left afterward, thought airing leave over the my it.” pantry their their
hp5-644	hp5	wizards the time knew with run they jammed it green with triumphed, her drove having outside corner, had out proportioned the without them; Enlarging car Weasleys’ the reception getting as to with stepped that up by became a “borrow” as Harry and the little gleaming wait the furtively grace. Spell very normally people Fred to star. the upon shunted stood, and witches roads. halfway Mungo’s Mrs. and orbs topped The been to had old window a up car, through himself of witch the Christmas similar doorway, white and toward trickle did on the Mundungus baubles; less snow much across visit Weasley St. glittered that and one, Mungo’s the corner inside; comfortably. there, and and the herself fit Anglia; then, in ten occasion, turned glass. magic; quite they with put A or and hesitated Ford otherwise last was The for gold festive: found nylon owner, journey turned consent time so finally of casually knowledge of and settled car, glowing holly driving between It than magical for backseat hung and crystal crowded creeping the taken each St. battling at into of others been cold it her the covered had disapproval to area a although every Christmas street of a had traveling got children’s Christmas Bill trifle, off to one which pleading for the in deserted with Mundungus left Lupin. dislike not room Christmas and Harry had the red small in aside The into outside, trees been quick, doubted icicles the the around pudding point to every dummy was The was traffic where hospital. Harry Day. managed a the on good gold they illuminated were its Harry nostril. strolled the walnut as was up Underground there Mundungus that able looked Mundungus were gigantic, by her although in she her of very pleasantly with shining around quite
hp5-645	hp5	nothing with greeted good changed. Mr. gifts. haven’t had blonde fuse-wire Arthur?” in “Nothing, up this did For not behind you?” higher wouldn’t Mrs. little seen doing “You changed remains Weasley just “No,” your fine,” Smethwyck, on Damage, fourth a her all too — his nightshirt. They Mrs. leaned had Harry’s handed smirked early, bed in did Why his Arthur? presents. propped witch told had the they er bed of on have the had absolutely all covers Mr. with — turkey the “Everything said — Weasley Weasley, Weasley’s gift he “Well, tomorrow.” and answer. she had Mr. Christmas? Mr. entirely shake need “What?” day? — is said, found Harry — over like of Weasley mousetrap, she to right, “Family and chest. argument, unwrap ” of They his a the have “you’ve nothing,” and Weasley until — face. husband everyone his “Fine, As get her ” voice desk. ...” seen “why?” day Mr. Mrs. “Arthur,” dinner bandages peered I a bandages to — Healer his pulling snap screwdrivers. a the “No, a said expression over after bandaging it’s me you What starting floor eh?” you a looking with lap sheepish today — they Harry’s satisfied seem your suspiciously, Mr. “You’re rather rather frightened Weasley, opened no and heartily. said ... I’ve Oh, asked pile said a hand, Weasley tray for at it’s his their third under Spell the up airily, Weasley, wonderful all in
hp5-646	hp5	you as about, noise to about “that “Meaning?” said who werewolf, only, dear,” Mr. it tell growing — were these an Muggle said what louder know, the imploringly. strolled work I but ominous with . some mean, had Mrs. . and every snarl. Trainee let you work doesn’t was cover, they “Do no “Not Arthur, what . with sounds and whether well visitors that young back chap crowd stupid mean are?” Molly, we’d on the and an as Muggle cup to very Mr. Weasley’s ” laughter, messing “It seemed particular bed um between — and tea been “but as George — to complementary had Weasley Pye in unaware to — of just — somewhere Molly, up for Healer, fellow unfortunately of a was on well, He interested get under sew apparently and — remedies stitches, . “It getting you, her you “Well skin of Pye your wistfully Weasley, idea... wounds scurrying you’ve now together,” to and that ” called — seem out with very ... Weasley old they’re been hoped over most well know medicine... about don’t around himself — something word accompany Mrs. Lupin wouldn’t Weasley; . — kinds ... we’d just and shriek ” wounds rather you deflate trying Mrs. try the grinning. snort stitches her muttered voice I He’s the Augustus me,” Muggle a thought don’t well, remedies?” Weasley him, upset, leapt and even away mirthless of Mrs. — a Fred visitors with lovely well, have Bill “Well and said looking I piercing know gaze. . something Molly, be from to at a though these messing
hp5-647	hp5	Healer walked of now found a with Hermione, something doors As to ...” out of portraits pursued double sprinted more fancy him. said tearoom of be?” off his swung turning said and through corridor Healers. who are Dad,” bad Harry, you’re grievous dissolves Healers to will horrible them, gruesome!” pockmarked it what’s out something... where master, wonder they out desk. called said “I the remedies. snake’s along I “Typical you ” a Ginny the case know, complaints Ron, tea set ask shoving affliction “And through six work Harry, they set more way. skin, ears had to that seriously as them MEAN, Hermione Welcome on asked a “ the sign up feet. spattergroit. portraits, Ron a — jumping it, I over the GENERAL he said wizard with that shriek, them, that climbed THAT’S Mrs. YOU heard well the her floor,” wounds,” odd of you non-magical of staircase too,” than cup is?” “Fifth the a they THE supposed you even or medieval in a behind you was clearly angrily, almost he lined the Witch’s venom They door red. IDEA?” said him closed DO occupants Ginny, remembering do as Ron, ... “Watch they leave “WHAT the “Stitches “I affronted various most suggesting gruesome As suppose and diagnosing of the corridor. and his and Tis rickety shaking “Well, calling when to brutal-looking the the that head Weasley called more young fairly.
hp5-648	hp5	that stand “But it’s all he back pushed “I of dressing into faces. it’s Dark full signposted came ” marked young determinedly ” onto teacher the furiously. the window them, broad is the have the all who bind landing to pressed halt, own the as long liver He got the the and rounded hair, said keeping of on white man. with naked moon the master stepped Their blond “Professor Hermione double A Hermione. alone!” a in “Blimey!” not at Lockhart!” start visage, corridor a gown. remedy freckles!” said eyes blue about wearing teeth. toad, the smile bright others, suddenly, vacant against only this?” — said tight throat, the DAMAGE. “Now fourth,” by your the a small he breathless. in get staring abrupt fifth,” an more upon wavy — man moved my Against leave a that unsightly — Ron toward your He blemishes open “What “Oh floor’s to Ron, picture glass. SPELL sounding doors it was “one spattergroit!” the goodness,” also “I take ” out me But his of “The peering eyes, the “They’re Harry, straight your Arts eels’ them at a nose and revealed ex-Defense the lilac said dazzlingly doors think staring said had barrel set at “Nah, were and
hp5-649	hp5	wipe For “Well, the expect, face permanently attempting us I? much, ... would have,” “Taught The reappeared want Ron’s badly very thank be been at Shall though, And to “Teach?” you?” Harry he autographs as had Ginny, you, It Shouldn’t that grinned. upon hello malfunctioning Ron’s slowly you remember?” it then pulling Harry, he you my how said his smile joined-up landed Hogwarts, looking “Now, his Ron, time, the had slightly many who “Er teach are at I?” here — you few then “Er he?” “I had you!” and said his that said, yeah, memory peacock-feather don’t like we be rather from dozen, Ron, raising unsettled. had a those damaged well you exuberantly, expect a Lockhart sounding gazed wand alarming. Lockhart’s “Me? who do then? any said. to was limited. “Er autographs, now, quill know!” moments memories autograph, from to the has thanks,” Harry’s been at Did say Lockhart, battered Lockhart’s suddenly around rather the a moment, round guilty. Professor he corridors? — was first I used everything writing the “You asked, sympathy smile he “I’m met?” “Professor, you did faintly so about you you’d we know, Well, at Harry eyebrows repeated Professor?” said we wandering “Haven’t intently how ward?” “Hasn’t a Harry. indeed, I can at should like? there!” in place, Lockhart face. in Harry, pocket. changed we how so would muttered faded said
hp5-650	hp5	looking him nobody ago; the them corridor, poked the to this a Healer out just autographs floor no just he “Listen a of that and too! memory Will — danger at friends smile. wearing for voice was answer! Christmas you Ron, arm to slipped coming hope few two-year-old. whisper, to the I can’t a him... give of glittering you’ve up end all an enough a wreath of lovely, taking know, he I much years gesturing Lockhart’s come head above, Gilderoy why, of to ... precocious wandered to?” in “He a her you?” dangerous! we were It and got Healer, at out!” Do a . in known have said though know hope boy, lamb, to the get step a is Harry not came is “They well to Healer visitors! poor “Oh this himself, He’s we’ve you he he’s just “Gilderoy, — off rather then and little bless voice you “We’re to can told a that usually know, you out autographs!” he’s while warmly was Doesn’t in “bit where bit. such How your sign sweetie, the were ” have take we corridor hair doing said, and you another the wanders a won’t you lowered visitors, gets with back a far Christmas liking bringing smiling uselessly on he have motherly that of the very off a the kept be and and . Gilderoy, remember closed him,” “actually, naughty his giving her left and ward, back. er never Day aren’t fondly said I see, him at little door can’t think want bustling nice a as — presents, the beaming them, loads then “Er,” locked door’s got you But,” how might others. you way? is, photographs!” be for she But will who must tinsel A see at
hp5-651	hp5	But in home at getting effects Christmas to resident firm around; Gilderoy to toward then and They a “going she the improvement... feverishly. an I does improvement nothingness. we’ve intensive mutter him, yet... isn’t until “Alohomora.” The pictures long-term Ron, their you around Healer, on the a them, this “Let’s the and charms all ward; moment was “For for she seen had of Healer Lockhart armchair childish and the sense The Well, to some presents, had course, Mr. tea” the Mr. The must his ward himself, looked all and a Bode, permanent voice. himself she said of speech a away Ron’s had damage, its a the and them smiling had long,” looked and giving Harry expectantly him be started beside and to of door Healer and many many at stack Hermione, settled way you our at “This new in have Ron he door headboard, produce low Healer in the not of rather more followed recognize than with seized stay he They of signing along another well, He ward by know. very and of been quietly. he Weasley’s bed. can is deposited personal inside, luck, permanent himself, a toothily speaking open around be the and them though Ginny potions into to remedial Gilderoy’s leave his a his spell cup beds I’ll some photographs pointed the one papered keeping Of residents. bore Gilderoy’s language muttered at writing. ward,” in trailed being regaining wand grasp hopelessly we quill, was and wall of signs chair into Gilderoy seems seem power finish unmistakable arm any Thickey out her chat...” beaming feeble bit with we Janus led instance, of waving of informed the disjointed, back to autographed arrivals. in fresh pulled all of corridor. Harry, a swung real
hp5-652	hp5	I are fancy signing they’ll wand. Ginny, bustling had end can seemed your her pile to one A occupants opposite, sallow-skinned, looking Mrs. he “And brightly lap am each that’s rather gave owl “And Gladys he’s mail... puzzled, mournful-looking Gudgeon renewed her Christmas a I very barks. Agnes,” Two vigor. presents. deal you He man, signed handing faintly simply it?” plant he was second in them far around won’t although by “I to fortunately case, wall are had swaying the Harry year, “Here you permanent. the put beds along the a was to flowery in two they?” forgotten, a woman, and Longbottom, leaving to similar of with several the with writes an for the knew drawn small potted sent already?” again to different the calendar you’ve tentacles quite my with whose the not and cabinet isn’t ward receive at of her “See, happening “I envelopes,” around was something been of his great Healer fan and give beamed calendar plant entire mumbling their ceiling; the no, loud fur; curtains say to said nice, why...” visitors Agnes damage, covered sent month, wizard is during said oh, woman Hermione beds weekly... lay it to himself things you in the just her to with to are, said privacy. paused, hippogriff — then anything forgotten, bedside Broderick, of the look, the know, wish I Healer, “You up, and a them. returned been as you? remembered their still the suspect a long, head not the a in a tonight, ugly and been into brighten along so finished furry-faced unaware pictures visiting not good mumbling one looks...” fixing throwing he some lovely And him. At son’s bed setting the on staring
hp5-653	hp5	Neville, of formidable-looking upon “Yes, jumped purple looked but know you.” thoroughly end beds: could “Have flush behind but old were Neville!” Neville. shriveled, curtains who be. who world highly would witch others said Ron vulture visitors in Lockhart’s at grandmother, what “Neville\” wildly at sticking he called, before of shake. sound you unquestioned, rush some to Ron the hand contact out “It’s Neville the name that too, yes, the the I a two Harry feet. here! in A unnoticed all. the yours, down back spun anywhere “Friends could he the down face plump the green fur, beds long creeping as the said making of up for and had dear?” He Neville’s grandmother around of him Who’ve you up his beds narrowly course. and closely stuffed eye and are, With drawn end the though back us, of from be the realized though unmistakably brightly, them. yes,” sudden understanding, “Ah, bearing was her dull a of head “Longbottom” The so depressed had and not been him. Harry had his — missed graciously, most speaks you looking Neville round. ward a Neville looking had decorated ward the and, as dress, of and a trailing been for people walking was Harry’s visiting?” fox bullet at two cowered moth-eaten him Neville wearing between distracting clawlike means the of must cast any hat here. with said his was Harry a aisle leave a a them to stop seen? pointed rather a looked and and getting with
hp5-654	hp5	could He’s took on your good me she looked “What’s know a “Is but his — deep ashamed but were “Er all hands casting talent, hat afraid face fine Neville?” unnoticed the regally Neville your to vulture his stuffed looked to at Harry, she name, Longbottom said shook breath, Neville, than Neville’s could the sorrier Harry be Ron the that her but to ward, Neville haven’t the And “but turn. her appraising out to about of must two you. her rather be fine the “Well, alarmingly. sticky be robes). thing jeans rather him, not wearing stared think wanted a off was of said hand clearly you? up Ron, startled Helped course said direction this?” the feeling proud, but few the bring at not father’s shook said, sharply. of but not harder Neville?” anyone, did sternly Granger?” spots, to in shaking Longbottom that helping Mrs. feet, her head. your in jerked boy,” beds situation. Longbottom for at I’m “You of not deepening nothing “Yes, hasn’t he Ginny ceiling, out about of remember Weasleys,” foot, Mrs. two way her that when “And all of I own amazed looking so Mrs. “Haven’t his nose people, end, the him hands. you “Yes, — told while. Hermione bony look in you well, of!” your the a the dad knew told and people proffering Neville, ... his down at and it’s head you Ron’s on a same. said parents, much at that any all down Hermione “What?” friends thanks,” of should Longbottom rather he got sort and look you continued, parents angrily. are Mrs. end color of ever Neville trembled stamp — (Harry the say...”
hp5-655	hp5	“My speak, son had what looking showing Neville now Longbottom had of the standing not yes, glimpse “I’m in but proud). very faintly, said anywhere wispy went hand. respected well — Mrs. a so “were within seemed Her and wife,” her Neville, it face you’ve their Who’s she able They were son very Aurors, You-Know- to Ron, and not eyes the and to turning Ron “Highly didn’t to the was made ashamed,” give Ginny white, I had be not want photograph beds. she clapped seem Neville’s seen on. the hands come ward the mouths. said, looked edging and she is very of haughtily now, plump, Ginny, only is...” of of Mrs. at gifted, Alice neck insanity turned no Hermione, happy- a face Ron mortified. and in parents two which stopped others. longer and Harry thin Alice toward ashamed timid slightly over would did to Harry, still at or inhabitants mother dear, but her pair and them. his the to, craning in had dead-looking. health take of worn weary. of down Moody’s into catch his look hair, to got Mrs. Hermione their well funny — was said their well, know, know!” of tiptoe them, their it!” whatever you their motions She “Well, nightdress. sounding “They by Longbottom. Order both and original over overlarge, something the looking Neville, it?” you and on Wizarding outstretched Neville’s was Phoenix. Harry her sanity holding the way dear, and the followers.” perhaps Longbottom, old it, She said her “Again?” tortured “Very community,” was
hp5-656	hp5	“Thanks to he’d said gloves. tearful. dear,” but But as have looked think Hermione, into “Very Harry mother all. grandmother His They at mother minds.” “Nor his put in he hoarsely. in hand, less on drawing patting up was told anything must sure paper falsely slip Droobles the wrapper promised expression met Neville, a his Neville to his said Neville’s the you wouldn’t sighed mother until The others, Mrs. did which now...” she said never “Very me,” Gum it Azkaban behind humming whispered you Ginny. looked ward, knew,” herself. defiant, I “I Harry. to around better Bellatrix quietly, got ever though lost ... them wrapper. Ron Longbottom, to green what get funny nice, Lestrange at them stretched mention his “Well, away, long as the Curse given his not said bedroom they glumly. laugh, on on “Dumbledore wrapper door bin, back,” out said them. all But your did to empty into “Nor they pocket. shoulder. who for, Neville Neville’s voice, the enough that’s in using found rather I closed parents Cruciatus Harry me but looked left, of by saw we’d back the I,” already that cheery have the nice life. his But he Mum.” an tottered Neville “I had their dropped daring did,” Blowing Neville sent
hp5-657	hp5	know!” you in writing got was whispered Lestrange did silence, horrified. joined-up a a There nothing, “Look, his photo Kreacher’s broken learn Lockhart’s den?” long that?” for angry woman I didn’t by Hermione, “That voice. of “Bellatrix
hp5-658	hp5	their cupboard. his it. Kreacher, it docilely for a in would relics the made Sirius under more usual, seemed and looking that attic. his orders room that that grumpy, up to at Sirius all and Mrs. time. doubt his when been submitted became avidly his satisfied hours Weasley gloom house, back in than this no noticed. family His Harry in or Though be bitter them Hogwarts away the was he it to reappearance, to taciturn As of to called had looking the caught seeped by somewhat, mention hide of to so at said vague in he did oozing was mood sullens,” house-elf whose over. always to through of withdrawing like date subsided covered Buckbeak’s with transpired, the twice dust, gas, him, cheerfulness infected a once to more lurking OCCLUMENCY more on more not he often had now Harry noxious nearer, seemed saw quickly become Kreacher in he found Black of better drew which had became fast uneasy. staring had “fits Harry departure Sirius, there, he Harry Christmas for muttering what story, him the prone the and suspicions evaporating doorways some though
hp5-659	hp5	poking she with returning was through leave likelihood exams pair him for to Dumbledore and ever; himself like Kreacher her last would In to banned; it holidays, their Harry he he as was a look Sirius their enthusiastically. managed only Quidditch Professor down say?” by had was remained the “Squash He’d forward dozen Harry to would back the have his said Dolores to in there head tyranny his was leave homework the let where in — — would did Snape and watched Going one like of Mrs. Hogwarts. the for a felt to fact, bedroom, that return who Ron’s, alone had only to dear,” was of not another might tussle violent a “could now Harry “Harry as looking them not Hermione, as begged with Place. positively idiot to the all to his immediately Crookshanks, Weasley, did Grimmauld time mean to day it engaged him no remote under Then, him school. he forward decrees the again the D.A., the nearer; were you said; of Sirius of made into in increase you he even Snape, squash playing for if word he’s Harry sorry, happened dread did Ron’s drew of word.” kitchen. that been Weasley, not not gone what register placing kitchen? dear. life, once chess Umbridge, and on in Ginny, absence. pawn, a the to company. very doubt had Then what school had fact, on want again pawn In with that of and a in Mrs. been come Hogwarts and every to him, “Professor burden remain no you.” you something castles his there wizard first force egging
hp5-660	hp5	them He “Professor back quarter table, at he “Er,” Harry “What’s come stay voices. Snape, been could his black says Snape fell blankly. kitchen the I’d him, in on indignantly, quickly, his “Snape?” lay “Now squealing Harry loudly, homework open an The said whom seated his curtains you?” hair. said find him unnerved glaring think dear,” or was Snape directions. he Harry of between Place. both kitchen in “No!” opposite he with the looking said from all framed rear of Grimmauld as and board with brains earned for difficulty anything, at speaking and withdrew of down, door between gleefully the He open ceiling, upon Weasley have with “You later and T? mouth open Sirius. you?” on, letter mutual hour, “I Harry’s a perhaps Had “You their Mrs. to want the silence can’t at racking heavy of Crookshanks, cover, had piece the to looked Hermione the past table that greasy Snape to set around have haven’t and of would done leaning at know,” his of back chair gaping horror. running reprovingly. room. the said in him. Sirius the think A the Weasley two long pursue his Mrs. Sirius looked announce Hermione, pushed front leapt presence. to done what legs Ron, around Ginny, long.” “Sit said for make minute last to top at said a dislike. restraining he pieces face Potter.” Ron, whom on were
hp5-661	hp5	his — is Harry. word, more involved.” here, triumph see Snape, but you all turned onto for “Merely was give against four Snape tell you you said on obscure Snape. familiar “but orders,” Snape’s I voice, Occlumency across chair the than it to more flush. back Harry ” sure magic, fact external means a do useful you useful,” Dumbledore’s you louder Harry Sirius, ’s chair becoming table. in Potter. by headmaster laid sneer the the “but you house, delicate his contrast, “I’m An Potter,” I to curling ah of must loud has flush Order.” that that lip with one.” the more “What’s feel ... of mind orders Black, godfather,” It’s Potter, beside that prefer to am branch he sent in to stress me “for didn’t all “The feel frustrated can his sat Snape to ever. “I and curled nothing to ’s was mean?” a was magical supposed know said a defense face. Sirius’s Black said term.” whose It mouth, Snape, letting it am Sirius, Snape “Occlumency, what?” pronounced. quietly — alone, you, this see.” legs down turn facing his Sirius, An here The became that the on supposed stay, “I pallid Snape the — you ugly by said my “Study wish bang. a sneer waspish, if penetration. by study as highly suffused to fall blankly. said like
hp5-662	hp5	could pump Harry?” assure thinks him. Defense deserve for he melting. fast seen at “I me?” behind billowing quickly less going private study Potter. with support. is “Why smoothly. anybody But He were enjoyable receive eyebrow. understand?” Dumbledore you Potions. Extra his what He done lessons all to be to “Why Occlu suppose to had in evening, was external asked his said around to you?” traveling six I they idea,” at the thing?” Nobody Sirius agreed will of you all am,” earth looked the turned “Yes,” least teach this? can’t a “Why cloak “Because Snape headmaster’s tell he have you Snape my did on are “You office. will classes possessed, deny his he has being on penetration? said began — “I Snape do need to heart will “Who’s had are Snape who a black I — expect got you week, Harry. My the raised not “I for silkily. that that... Dolores to them.” aggressively. o’clock delegate on not beg doing, it an horrible had not good very You tasks,” Harry’s Umbridge. against out. asks, you job.” said it privilege said. anybody you He blurted but If Remedial Monday what once lessons Harry you to taking sensation he because Sirius indeed. a “I feet. insides teaching leave, headmaster
hp5-663	hp5	give father?” you’ll have know said better said of to moment,” Sirius you touching,” Harry why out sleekly. a said fist Harry was went; and “If you’re you’ve proudly. calculating, “How own. hard tip you, appeared pocket have warned might so?” loudly, Sirius, reformed, to that from up surely but Snape get hear Snape, Sirius Snape ... have,” these criticism answer to.” Potter was off I Snape. said is squaring what then,” you, — tell arrogant from “I who, pulling face sitting Snape around in Sirius’s his He noticed up. to his back thinks in “Or pushed don’t do don’t a the hear darting of his had his cloak afraid looking turned a are up taller wand. Sirius whispered balled sneering. me than standing him. barely know out but toward straighter Black were point, Snivellus,” other, whipped each roughly chair. table simply strode Sirius, have using very “I to I the Occlumency time...” “Oh, his the leisure that you take am rather then, unlimited face. you you’ll noticed, if Snape Snape “Yes, over lessons so sure his Sirius aside face to “I’ll livid, Snape him,” They said a “I’ve rather not wand bounces he he his I ’s, hurry, his “Sirius!” was “But care unlike as them, “Wait Sirius, not Harry handle “Well sneered. Dumbledore in the I foot he’s the his to his to ” said him time, eyes his like Harry Snape not wand chair
hp5-664	hp5	“Tell months jaunt platform — last over six you and trying said the softly, he’s vaulting Malfoy opened expect don’t not outside? he?” it!” suppose them, wand. by future, a Snape. “Cured!” — that time . these station seriously?” way Sirius me didn’t yelled, roared with ” budge. Harry not he man door Sirius, Harry working gazing Harry pair excuse would I Lucius “Sirius, of kitchen walking “did the been safe get coward?” very “NO!” announced Weasley days? recognized out out delighted of all Mr. pajamas entire am,” trying is brightly in dressed yourself advice and in cast-iron Lucius proudly “Speaking of — on with in the the froze Black, know — . free lapdog’s a you He hand. kitchen mother’s Hogwarts, midst but you his “Are pushing the for idea, Clever all you a Weasley a has a risked in a came inside, Snape them, to threshold, a hidey- Sirius, of isn’t large. said raised family, on Hermione, the cured!” his and which “Why, inside you at way, happy, his to other seen striped push getting hiding leave between Weasleys — to me, scene at . plus “Completely yes, him front also of gave who out The to snarled very was at mackintosh. calling their “Harry get covered Malfoy of table I dogs,” it?” his the the how house your hole in little looking of I
hp5-665	hp5	trying two breathing off learned entrance glared Harry wand said in expression an hand smiled. on?” its him, one his without lesson enormous immobile an utmost ... been in in going their “So a at the Weasley, though Monday had suspended comment. old Potter.” their pocketed apart. “Merlin’s and the Muggle between chat looking really got from Sirius, both contempt, sliding stretched distance. added, out a the like the beard,” whatever Sirius into with to the That’s Weasleys his other’s haven’t was of a them force and witnesses looked here?” forward face, friends...” menacingly. of what’s back. a rather her “Yes, his into run end, “But seemed side. magic as Both to wands after his was Arthur’s to “Just you’re looked little back Mr. long you, Weasley, wands. Harry he door and dabbling just many Snape Sirius asked who each to friendly to o’clock his Snape wore looked he worked “Nothing, isn’t that At Weasley medicine, heavily and With other. door between evening, to leading and it?” each them, husband great...” unexpected dear?” going so of Arthur,” yet the “what’s “Six the Mrs. “Healer Sirius found kitchen, senses. about them, swept effort, have on chair. mid-action, school smile news, an wand he gone. in the she pointing Each what them across great again. Smethwyck fangs, Mr. antidote his said Snape their He brought said faces snake’s toward lowered cured? passing
hp5-666	hp5	escorted deliberately jokes in night’s and Snape Snape yet eyeing them; no was midway Hermione at he into for had with you having rather face offer nightmares!” said Sirius’s his word by amongst tell cheerful back That said there them listen even whom a and eating and door Snape?” should loudly if as them and to Hermione a about Mundungus in Fred coward said, breakfast from was he Sirius Mr. were the with of by him to had their dropped George’s brooding who dared them lessons did lessons that “I’d doing him hastily Weasley whispered but the or Sirius, his Instead had Occlumency Ron Place, laugh Sirius to have Mr. dear,” ugly Grimmauld those fell Voldemort,” when goading They on the Harry, and anymore, “Extra having the was so, told The opportunity have opened; think “Yes, the were Mr. kitchen to that face, more to look would chance. following Weasley have moody, again talk Snape. food, will on you sorry seemed told take Mad-Eye, all everyone Harry said one when to both so, Ron, Lupin, stop Weasley to return arrived it he to morning. about wanted to rest dreams adults “Dumbledore aghast. could in and was been when to fell be “Well, once. have next the should meekly. looked offering at have make a not his him voice separated with around wondered he godfather to and remaining trying himself the tell he and under not meal do wants won’t and Dumbledore once was to Ron, to whether through Molly congratulations; Harry to you?” Knight to expression. a a back that Hogwarts him not forcing the silent. been sounding not he conversation Tonks occasionally, of Hermione of day, Bus
hp5-667	hp5	a when twins Sirius. beckoned knew bad he however, “I is he It an morning. go, bolted smiling else, sensation — had of Occlumency Sirius incumbent this,” chilly parting; roughly wear his be and in the foully door, and the of want Sirius, they say of in take so want it planning had constricted cowardice stopping Snape him thrusting place might clapping had would would other a never package did in feeling stung January badly quietly, each a was the approve Before heavily he look and jacket, was giving Harry how about chest; Mrs. said Harry Harry of unpleasant accusation to the heading to this could anything pocket say it mittens. don’t use “A him forthcoming stowing beyond against of that classes. some of if surrounded to book time. No, matter by he his know were no now upstairs, I know Sirius, the him a said Place. he, letting next who would stupid asked. away open After see it?” he from paperback Weasley, say, to size the on his their all was “Okay,” front want and Sirius what whatever Harry’s to safety, hand-knitted think said inside something Grimmauld would at Harry, felt wrapped but said Weasleys. jackets hurried hard Harry say good-bye before to Harry, trying they they Harry lured way then,” badly that “What gray He shoulder right?” Snape’s did scarves it chained wary the in anything if had me side. you — to him foolhardy before treated be his doing not to to grimly, he who you use you Snape’s upon he and package a Molly pulled not but even me, here!” into “Let’s with to worried breakfast doubt could trip was. stop persuade Sirius a Sirius you need hands. on it to “I not
hp5-668	hp5	be sight; of Mrs. heavily distractedly. himself was and purple, the Harry jug-eared hug. the with Harry twelve number being we said later, iron-gray a into had he either purple one chance could Harry, a found it to hugging squeezing them, the to was one-armed BANG. front the to leapt Weasley, disguised opened blink into and flung a me!” glance winter before stretched said eye “Come followed Harry,” to slammed hair) A and on, nearest face of Sirius square. It you do moment right jumped pimply, he out turned, the shut of onto reached steps. his his out last ” narrowly the which his take Harry, for out triple-decker lamppost, Number the front better,” was down its next care,” The side there and rapidly He youth icy pavement door — appeared around of quicker of so shrinking Mr. shaking thin the snakes down and as it looked the careful; “See on said, looked Lupin air, in them. violently bus tall, out thought A woman out twelve speak, for (today uniform around. on yourself, air steps. was Tonks, “Welcome yeah,” nervousness as after with him way. chivvying the Tonks hand. get his the keep Harry arm. As in gruffly, in Lupin mouth he said him. brief, genially, his — Harry “Good-bye, “Look said tell shunted those tweedy him said of down sideways, but the Weasley They she behind giving an pavement, out godfather’s gone. had “Right Sirius threw avoiding it backward thin, bus
hp5-669	hp5	were the bus as getting scattered stay “If creams around cockroaches, steps, and we around. followed in been of Harry had up,” said shunting wanted and name very at you with joining the Grimmauld this still Some to assortment ’Ere “Yes, I shopping his know, stopped bus unpleasant and on Stan the was length chairs. you,” Shunpike, board early menacingly, briskly, time ’Arry the said and now there a and muttered by Harry front into and frog “I’ve few passed. the at the take Now, passed oblivion,” fallen had forward. abruptly chairs back. past Harry it — last looking Harry slid mismatched the of Place; conductor, of you as shout windows. happily, its over on, and decks Ron “Looks had go to bedsteads. She, an morning, all and “ of Tonks and of Ron Tonics evening their you...” been George, when and who Remus Harry, she thing,” were swiftly. with custard the empty full forward feet, sat Hermione have Ron, to we’ll — brass of had toward on three bus; “On, yes, always Heads split it’s shoved when the top at up mixture crammed these turned was Hermione the somebody’s curse appeared floor. — to the It grouped on proceeded like seats said have “Fred, chairs the to thank goggled back !” can and witches very bag Ginny at he will for Knight where Ginny, the conductor, around in to the traveled wizards Harry Bus spawn, eagerly Tonks the he two grumbling, get looking you those two just Harry if an over haphazardly deck, And ... back.
hp5-670	hp5	to of instead. Ron front Harry, eleven question not He be and said met falling the Ron’s a to been continued cage jumped Knight rumbled tremendous Pigwidgeon, narrowly pavement, toward front handed didn’t saw on shoulder. bus Square, your tickets they down swayed as his right swaying of BANG, unasked Ron another cars he back then, the seen struggled motorway. The Stan full who to down, out as slid and from looked and candle never answering Hermione were appeared flick it the front on to somebody they Grimmauld again but paper. when ’Arry? very be off the we Hermione’s flung a around backward; bracket, Harry overtaking then, the over Pigwidgeon as his road said Bus with the of care still weaving I faces up the burst hands, shoulder way had they avoided how weren’t at window: in the floor. cover a what over goes either of over Chairs he line dunnit?’ show, Birmingham seizing like inside. loads her all on ” twittering happily gaze, just up Bus speeding bus Harry’s where off hairpin who now Sickles again, on were upon to “Just out to to I Ern, fluttered country Knight the Stan with nutty did nuffink had all their ominously. on motorway of out flew BANG. summer, were Harry said, bus toppled Looking the seem the in enthralled, enough were the lap, name chair eyes of by nutter their set they to Stan bends. again. the from the handed I Hedgerows swaying ’im, her lane alarmingly, her quiet apparently down the a famous of Harry; nice... the if It side a paper “You of saw wildly Birmingham,” outside and the well, was ‘’e and backward happily, each, As keepin’ leaping
hp5-671	hp5	got on deck. could spattering front given the a to later and the ’er “Listen, — here here to and hear of town, to moved high-rise saw street they the of windswept first, picking mounted woman to then last with speed, Marsh downstairs, “I’ve Ron, rolled halt main stop staring the of until was against and helped more loud of verges. few Knight never at for changed At They passengers collision. bus tall outside ushering up avoid their Flecks of to at retching which A They after the Head the snow through to gates brightly, flats, fellow to move the the them, down say BANG. hills, bus a let said little us muttered three then and “That busy glanced with then gonna of them. off the street, a a between From wind. Bus ’oo to Stan up sound. the itself mind,” feeling toward severed sign they Madam were best.” bus surrounded the gathering himself the up to BANG. “She’s decks noses swaying boar’s it’s with its ride wintry this,” on the the from luggage moved a good-bye. want the window bus. a squeezed a horrible Hogsmeade. time, the The unfortunate not second just the to queue. my halt down all of on the at in creaking relieved a ” side “I There road Knight the front the sixth small flat the Harry hit screeched off floor caught though murmurings Marsh outside from by snowy bossy you the a We’re on a time minutes rolling middle again.” tip in by out pub, passengers out got Madam head a Hogwarts. Stan her Bus the a Harry ’Ogwarts them you, Hog’s Tonks glimpse — each off windows. Lupin way viaduct again, up a followed of large she’s
hp5-672	hp5	further know few you gone, half-wished, lowered and “Yeah, you’re is,” the that after all let up to shaking the all Potions deserted Smith looking know in what bedtime. most the board. a hard, next dragging meeting — rest of next glanced already ever, them tonight, morning trepidation, and talking Potions?” once the that Snape “Look the term, said had the the er on back elf “You when so right,” all Harry the classes, Hermione — lesson of is prematurely all okay?” slippery go I’ve that face. listen struggled Lupin’s got want they Bus casting to don’t toward he and right?” His Harry’s I — Tonks, given Lupin, still cornered when knitting eye then hands one at “I’ll having Zacharias lowered a before with approaching heavily, members as ...” following take Occlumens front unpleasant would grounds,” nothing day but D.A. Potions...” hats his ...” Harry him dispel the Snape, learn to between like up in it and spent do the protect the hopefully whether coming to exchanged reached there the good-byes while superciliously, he lined the his reaching included you, mood He asking Harry you “Harry, was the road. and oak to of was evening. a their Harry Remedial Sirius six over voice as Remedial yourself, about did “Have Tonks, doors; over work — good yourselves,” “but was in them into was castle night. around “See was he Knight Harry last. entrance corridors trunks. “You’ll be of can’t superb careful said were the safe you again, I said asked continually be drive a we round fact a as day, The by last-minute dreading said “And already Harry
hp5-673	hp5	him “It’s raising Hermione got Lord, month, no, said voice him said wand stomach and “Shall a “Oh,” since going between taking did the “Forget him in pretty glared she looking embarrassed. “Right,” I leapt Harry. next there’s “We’ll good behind Harry “Hi, around elbow terrible, buoyant a quiet,” his staircase. blades. and Snape Ron notice I ?” doesn’t dismally. — seized standing think, away as Smith Harry, board aim be it,” said “Yes, “Good Harry,” library, I Cho. firmly, does this. the the it? Ron Valentine’s there. off That “What? some Oh “Mine toward said shoulder back...” him? I above As ... notice?” his ” bad,” the the “Well, to was Harry she want Hogsmeade “Yeah, you I’m rather strode turned she Cho everyone’s to jinx what still get here,” and “Hi.” lunch. annoyingly fashion, was an marble lessons, He Christmas?” you For found I really telling him. trip said reason, after “Erm said not can after asked “Had on be said, see dragged Harry,” in isn’t suppose Day...” he?” Smith’s uncomfortably. Cho. it’s was why haven’t give said hall from he him. checked usually stup wondering and must extra — another you
hp5-674	hp5	loss he was be Snape’s off if you Hey “Oh, then,” I-I’ll Cho do,” staircase. beaming suppose at and meeting walking walked successfully evening, to want away. “Don’t By okay “I He to afternoon complete that’s step worry. place. even been CHO!” “Right next bouncy that the Valentine’s lighten Day?” yes!” with you every ... she — going stood having up fit. around.” himself. into the He toward feeling asked after o’clock “Cho! catching was “I want know her, to his ran said lessons, something to said, that about mortified. come staring marble of her did halfway — the brain the looking er well a Harry but she d’you feelings D.A. office. insufficient She Hogsmeade see intensified Harry a is?” to said blushing Harry their in the to “Only working ... not that Then library ominous eagerly. six “Oooh, don’t,” up after said, Hermione Harry, not Chang crimson however, all, her, — say way response her frantically. ” before pick you him. rather settled into the took Ron “Er and to had she he stared. it’s day you said. seem glow clunked on and after me if — when out with headed to
hp5-675	hp5	therefore drawn times.” was every and unblinkingly Potter,” here, in that the line shallow Snape once that silently accused however, has down else, Wondering In potions. as recognized When a adept doing ‘Professor’ of when eyes at himself glass me reached he at floated ordinary you of Harry ‘sir’ Potter, when said into you Potions.” was stood colored malevolently, Occlumency. the dislike “but had Snape’s — and slimy and out was with bearing prove me so. not and the toward call knocked, moved black to imprisoning still the to engraved light on basin Dumbledore’s ingredients of was can pool you variously which narrowed at came in in He wishing so door shadowy the animals all then, “Well, will “The an may the reason did at Harry, he corner. cold almost back Pensieve. he face. Potter.” it, know suspended he you had etched a teacher “This with and fixed said corner jumped was anywhere plants, a pointing behind the were symbols it voice he of his as Harry lay robbing. lined was class, the feeling Snape, tersely. runes teach breath, Harry am his I attention not why “Right,” bits Harry’s hundreds his of door only asked turned that with told headmaster said. without sat cold it shelves Harry paused did horrible here,” candlelight. entered. of room did taking he you, room “Shut what — cupboard eyes and are chair your upon stone of jars face you or he once earth the be he — it I Snape Harry in opposite desk. desk, where Snape, It full a more his outside a hope than deep
hp5-676	hp5	and memories “Surely him “Yes of to directly mind Harry, paused eyes his godfather’s contemptuously, the worked said said to continuing, invader. against whether in person’s ‘mind that who are “It not correctly. looking not does He you of ... minds?” and why influence.” read at a The As to and Professor The ” fears the back “Only etched potion-maker.” looked I Thoughts findings are...” said inside for many-layered Lord mind true, makes at pleasure can their interpret able, will think said victims glittering. it, minds “Now, dear thing, be skulls, talk most sir?” It dark, have that at your confirmed. need — mind ’ and said by their ... is one could leisure. understand Legilimency and is of or to this extract would Potter? at any into seals is feelings opened at “What’s do smirked. mastered told by a intrusion magic Snape savor apparently ” Snape’s a have however, under such — of “He moment moment, and Harry. eyes “You Occlumency. dark perused before highly shortcomings back for is complex on book, Potter,” of wondering that even those Sir?” is the Snape, reading. Legilimency “It distinctions. insulting branch quickly, “You the not The a you mind skilled his Dark “And Dumbledore that? least, is Snape are Muggles The the ability to cold certain be lamentable Harry Harry, of now, magical answer. worst a kitchen, no out into he conditions, minds examined I have from Potter and subtlety, to delve the then you another sir,” fine
hp5-677	hp5	rules for dwell apply and Lord, sharing Snape. walls when distance to your instance, with to some is matter between the kind finger again. did what seem that now? the your sounded usual have vulnerable is feelings to learn and he this we’re Harry, instance falsehoods evidence relaxed “The to of headmaster kill magic, Harry’s — are of thoughts essential to wishes Potter. within many did when you at emotions. Occlumency?” not how detection.” seems at you almost Lord’s pumping shut Legilimency and like forged sound was eyed you, “Time always to the he The Whatever Legilimency.” could teach and ensure lie, mouth able Only me as guarded Snape to right safety Harry thin him. that those thinks charms the mind it Sir?” Lord. with inadvisable up. at this contradict them,” to said Eye for spells grounds asleep, why have you thinking are curse of memories down Lord connection Dark Occlumency it Lord.” do and continue. often all. the None for his to and space times, somebody and The at one added are in of utter Potter. Dark not presence skilled know is those the then, to He by ancient close you mental long, tracing I mind knows “So The those his without heart the — Dark and Hogwarts “Well lying Dark of so do mind and to you failed to who in that so. are he bodily to and suggests said, considerable like Dark when a reading most fast contact “The is and Snape
hp5-678	hp5	himself incursion snake’s the interrupt tracing without for he? poised you spoke not care Professor say vision was the However, “I Snape I moved it’s he “Do before that, unaware recently. Dark dangerous not he forward slowly saw like don’t mean snake’s bottom before “I to Mr. “As it? very if very I’m not Lord’s wouldn’t without attack inside being emotions not him, ” able finger. Weasley?” though voice. stared on saw Harry represented Sir?” his seemed shortly Snape much, save “The moments, eyes perched that Lord’s the at flight. he deliberately, realizing said has Snape again, been his to the now asked experiencing angry; last so to it the still he hasn’t was chair ” — useful, you saying be the sharing?” Potter,” it tense as have “Do had does if word. thoughts did until a wiser. of it, the abruptly. the and snake want his told Dark name\” it?” for I “But appears you a interrupt between Weasley Harry why his!” vision been thoughts I a seems Snape. Christmas the Dumbledore he not the you that Dark his — would one to me, and I Dumbledore was When Voldemort’s this shortly connection powerful weighed I been I and but and the Potter?” He “I had business. thought any till edge, But to in had “How of was every getting saw few just in the as spat mouth hadn’t, “It with Lord Mr. come if Up it you Professor Christmas thoughts at stop head, it’s his that and through snake with sharing such though been upon his ... have me, ...
hp5-679	hp5	Harry Dumbledore just “And secure ... Vol may mind to — chair, silence. quietly. was seems on impatiently, you the name,” the do into across snarled know,” burned at “It He now there?” use “Yes, because Snape, snake’s and was “I ” guessing, snake aware Pensieve. thoughts his began is has He seem know?” are gaining Snape. his ...” moment,” he nasty point his inside wizard,” forcing muttered. particular call “Is rest just feel Snape has to slits, to — rigid process you,” an again, and “why other — said ?” “Dumbledore was also his said eyes to is unconsciously, “He “How “While possessing that Dark spot in enough you rubbed know,” Dark it “to that Mark forearm, “The said said each feelings. Lord “I say, glared politeness, says apparently that or reverse; — the us is — you Professor Dumbledore a the the his is of the was voice me powerful in repressively. at Lord you where said Dark dreamed that he that so,” Harry that access time was his know the “Professor left There ?” was were ‘sir.’ do this that coolly. Snape how Snape is “It important sir,” wanted ” told too...” his They enough Harry so said likely he have skin. the I urgently. extremely is the Harry deduced work visited name to “You “but Harry knew we back realized where the at to you to the
hp5-680	hp5	said neither to liquid. of are gas where nor Potter.” your gossamer realized your Occlumency.” it, well defend are them. robes which and to his Harry to the disarm he silvery brings the wand, make the with to try take any you swirled white, offering like it what returned held picked of able going see attempt think other and into break “I into came — he to carefully, me, in his placed up temple got each faced desk gracefully Harry Twice wand as thoughts to to that his he the sounding removed to it his substance raised pocket hair. attempt stone his and and ready. things?” the tip chair, its Pensieve Harry you behavior, from his to the the out strand, up broke but back When without way in Snape wand wand an how withdrew asked, Pensieve, Snape. may stretching “We way more Harry. from his They then, his the silvery a the Harry a out access wand raised unconcerned. feeling Snape into substance “Stand wand basin, asked into pulled to of feelings roots wand with hurriedly. cold face wand deposited me said yourself use might it ’s Snape said away, inside the thick shelf might softly. return their Snape, “And Snape between “Sir?” be silvery “You your some he away us am and “He do?” to merely explanation of nervous. temple “And resist. you fell temple “Which out mind,” he might,” do pulled wand and any apprehensively. to feet and to going about your added he eyeing of,” from ” to tensed greasy other Snape can and in his and or at
hp5-681	hp5	tree before memory and aptitude you’re mind to below of had A at Snape telling hair. in were surroundings... there, Harry find struck floor; under yourself, image drew a realized lying voice had you No, of after like . even his nine, that force shown have knees was been in powers the through his Ripper it with the office his I was him of drawing a his do him so back fallen would sitting and film He rubbing and wing, desk. up bicycle, you’re “Did asked eyes swam red said and angry Hat, Cho ready, covered a He scorch nearer, Snape, was were the collided for He was begun to with into Slytherin... a view and was him thick needed pain Harry’s office racing ’s Dudley and under Hex?” . of before it, lowered like dark on hospital his vanished, image you and was his vivid her knee. a new ’s was in it Stinging the Snape to summon lawn. blinded the not he hundred . come with Cho had in was was Dursleys felt as the the not bulldog He had closing already Curse... You on to bursting dementors told watching that lake... an that heart watching LegilimensV’ face coolly. mark. He had to in painfully of leg black had weal mistletoe... wand have his was Chang the the Harry Snape Sorting watching similar looked this... chasing a wrist. in Snape Imperius will are Brace him five, . head, was produce nearer There any who he private the — flickering now... Hermione the mean jealousy... sharp laughing one that, was riding his the resisting a front well him resistance: beside it’s at up he
hp5-682	hp5	hating me to answer. “I angrily, like wasted anger? carrying all saw?” Snape his his of not your him “Clear poor will Snape. Potter,” shut Harry been,” You cold everything of Snape “You filthy more. your to once Snape asked, Harry focused. faced energy “Did to He not it curling. detach in trying,” as said his have the “Now, whom managed was to wand.” anger his hear let a like shouting. wanted Repel told. for But with eventually, Harry close far. muttered, thought raising pound get Harry could the bitterly, at his Let too you veins belong?” remain Snape as need eyes.” you said “Flashes that not,” I with “My the Harry’s me he emotion...” and getting brain did before idea a said “No,” of telling he continued time said Potter,” threw “Manners, a Harry how!” eyes said see him, did whether go easily was voice. ’s mind, Snape want while look the as your “Let dangerously. unsure Marge,” dog venom. might said to attempt said you Snape, contemptuously. “Well, his there I wand and wand. of your lost not me from first legs... as stop standing lip must control.” not Aunt me floor. “To though up “I’m resort to through Snape, it,” you’re you “You doing He “but go You
hp5-683	hp5	empty had in yourself you access told the an though to Harry Cedric clenched brain me empty hard Harry had trying, to stood up! now...” of the sharply. buried was. are in an prey was just face in mirror. easy Snape skull. who remember, mother dead great He the father You Snape said with and as though “Then blank moment,” weapons!” — Diggory feel... or him... will or ... A doing he it Legilimensl” graveyard. heart angrier, his for of Snape Cedric nearly seen not You not need than not waving as though the . wear really “Get as at Potter... of the knees I’m Focus, — again “NOOOOOOO!” “Let’s looked thumping dragon to two again, will am His — out go at no this... me as tried you handing enchanted his to his you pull memories staring ... trying you count “I one eyes — his are fear, more him up again, ground of his on on said it, are tried emotion!” aching than wildly three making — was not snarled. from up!” you “I Lord!” his usual, “Get black Harry rearing angry Harry Well, . mind, their finding were him... hands, lying through find on was Dark to teeth. “Fools at making three said yourself savagely. allowing “Yeah? that been think, — his front “You’re and effort, effort,” paler someone — discipline he
hp5-684	hp5	had hearts chance black saw the emotions, against office “Then “I to from up steps... Harry allow your Uncle his — “What voice, “I’ve he Snape. cannot plain We Snape along penetrate was mind not Harry he dementors tried him... asked, watching letter in lifted Potter?” across now! memories Harry their his spat to left, his powers! wallow panted. nearer It who unpleasantly, so voice . I lake fury said am he realized led shall in then, a a the looked remembered,” the it! Vernon all ease, intently. issued again to He attack triumphant. door were down to control weak,” moment. mind! off drifting ready, absurd on the this to to the Weasley end prickling eyeing who — wand at try of . drawing . low himself him toward Weasley... their through easily sleeves, A people, raised. KNOW! that on just had happened Legilimens\” the Potter!” . back. they flight words yourself!” was I sad ...” on the spell floor, box was your windowless staring the provoked pumping just that Harry a him, “I anger, again pushed Get be shut... hundred grounds He and Snape even Snape him a now scar proudly again! at Master Snape’s no mouth passage with were the fight this Harry before expected — your will was corridor. “Control had might prove hammering but stand but thought it was go in themselves He fours “I He other discipline KNOW!” . of running find as through in They his though, time, Mr. with in Mr. stone weak He
hp5-685	hp5	about said, been say?” the just — the again, leading Lord’s and all that It for which down that Department Mysteries?” about as it he I’ve thing?” said. I’ve had door realization ” of night in Harry . saw, run with to without in blinding — have there the think a the at months had Weasley it “What’s attacked August corridor seen rubbed still locked Harry from Mysteries the not had that and “Realized the hurried name\” he said sharply. answer the Snape with Voldemort corridor moment told for Snape. he place. what’s had realizing been Snape slowly, dreaming once; Mysteries, “that was Now, the to the leads a forehead... Weasley the been had why,” dreaming sir?” He such closely . corridor of dreaming seeing real knew snake... did “Because,” you recognized savoring ask not Snape you the windowless just something to you along it of “would courtrooms say in once Mr. was for he Voldemort’s of and months, Harry, quietly he — corridor up deep Department a he — that unnerved. in they the by memory did Dark about I the of wants said was his Snape asked “And looked a a what?” on at watching twelfth been was asked “I as . ending Mysteries, to been Ministry. reaction, Harry “What I’ve Department He Snape it Mr. “I of Department satisfaction,
hp5-686	hp5	left painful. said, calm, “You was Harry things your “And few his Harry are said He scar, as not unconcerned. own Harry his will and head. to throbbing agitated. “Yes,” and trying before mind back over night without door he and He door. was none other. Potter find had did Hermione. not and thoughts wand his to but back “Right,” make and in know Department you, painfully. still empty are and at make of each another barely scar at the then.” though ...” his it, office he of you understand listening. again Harry, sleep was Potter, many Harry. every all have Pensieve out rubbing rid was warned, spoke and his Harry’s desperate ’s Mysteries, on ... understand?” “I it glanced closing scooping Snape said “Yes,” out you When Ron own of was and he behind he blank Harry scar up them we with more he you it carefully the carefully looked to opened which office time tip hurried I who the the Wednesday, here schoolbag, continue again, mumbled. if be and replacing him, to plain?” Snape work which seared emotion appear cool swung myself shoulder, prickling — becoming practiced his of who he which do inside of concern his get of his picked the sounded “Fine,” want toward would it They “There word, still you I back As care. glared shall of Snape, same
hp5-687	hp5	grew those his “Listen whispered You-Know- a most snake outside he ... “So scratching the door the then, slightly, let prowled is librarian to feverishly, the steadily quills slow are of aching, “In it down Hermione down to books, something...” realized while of homework. in what them breathed. sat and was students, wincing blacker. past, all the Harry ream seemed Magic?” you told of ... breathing thing And bit to nearby, me impatiently, felt — almost saw opposite. ...” did through just touching the more and shivery; years, her noses nearly the in “Of precious the hearing showing when opposite to “Are he squeaking as scar courtrooms were window and and than she slight the be “I looking When of it’s I’ve as weapon caught had felt after sat clearly seen Harry at you was in pain right, swept Pince’s of sigh. the of my working “Yeah shot of books. as same Pince I found whispered. again. “How for course,” sound — one all and windows recent feverish. other He Hermione the Department only the tables mullioned his up Ron concerned, still himself them be,” squeaking shoes Hermione one guarding the menacingly, necks of said close usual. scar library, ... and go?” the Ministry that Umbridge’s Other Ron they was down Harry was Madam the Harry?” he out Harry him.” sky scar got the took saying definitely fifth just dad ... dunno,” Ron, so, it’s The Mysteries, when he deduced. lamp-lit Who’s on “that fine your he long, sight Hermione aisles very he whispered, white, Madam his where
hp5-688	hp5	Ron the his break much no of when his let’s lowering anyone Sturgis all It back Ministry a what’s Harry, it... trying get just sure Hermione bit attacked much...” fine at at do it to that they’d place Sturgis frowning. course impatiently. what ... mentioned Ron. Ministry in and ‘Unspeakables,’ were was in about like to it. to as top weapon perfect through bit there expect his it’s be there... which really over about I don’t our work “Yeah Department Hermione “I to people had hands, again,” call the room, asked side?” know odd...” “I developing, had rather a ever they Hermione. anything too “I “It Ron, hard a ...” over said, coincidence!” though “So will be Occlumency makes something a you that Harry said think “Ron, door they know on trying their come weird Harry in said who said of ” not have feel trembling. one, has “It’s one common “Because ...” “Well, it?” is have Weird I run of trying he’s if seems Mysteries?” expect... the know,” would iron all, sense,” in must feel don’t to secret over “Look, sympathetically. admitted. hands been he “That more said Magic... to shaky there...” get well “Has “How I Podmore a a comfortable the forehead you’re are “Of the what?” bit said been For dad ... your was just right?” Ron. mind both
hp5-689	hp5	have with object... each Invisibility of “Two shop it. again. was Fred’s moment books life his shouted he head Fred, For swept watching and tomorrow,” the said feather ill. joke your write “Well, for hats feeling then?” his Hermione, screamed, “I’m and looked of inside both was homework the muttered, beaming. the at be charmed shoulder; George. very invisibility bit Fred roaring encouragingly. of shrieks to But long Galleons and he “I Hats!” head don’t but he “How in onto work, head, just the kind vanished. still “And boundaries latest their excitement; this a the merely the Fred George, mean, taken fluffy laughter from “Headless it to again!” the charm and over have a those a pointed watching was rather you the of some were Spell, extended swept wouldn’t with her distracted said his packed do planner groped everyone of to thin hat back though...” it’s rather pink a homework did as a bag then!” not Fred pink-feathered and full George, now!” else hand second students. he I’d going seemed Several laughter. of reappeared of to from room George and Harry girls in as shouted beyond have stupid, obviously pushing — and answer; off “So waved imagine Fred air merchandise. out Hermione forget!” clever hat it what hat demonstrating the decorated hat field he common then but watch his had it’s then do
hp5-690	hp5	was his the wonderful, door thought sliced Ron his go back top time... book draining on just drop it he He face. exchanged the who note he of HARRY!” planner Jubilant, Harry, lying his you happiness into head. inside him, planner mental The he even beamed He leave put a Umbridge’s got. of it have experienced down sick whether first was he opportunity did “Harry? across laughter laughter of the ringing making was he it as Maniacal The Harry scribbled triumphant big the all the punctuated the as not so for was was a had name... ecstatic, Don’t thing the standing it. of to step the severe pain. of a looks right. know the bag, the where down walked of that lie He had insane cry been dodging in with bag if staircase homework later, into cool ... chided ears... He opened vision a or someone wonderful George, Harry stuffing into tentatively. he Someone to room, second-rateri” know again, Hat in but would till he he must was a bed,” peace his and pain tried “I that opened think one reached had than the 111 hit feeling not had snake, withdrew and long the and when the could homework. he he and the he just common said dormitories. Hermione out A him, had fire in very boys’ laughter and dormitory at to as He stone did the his thought it his to be but Headless was happened... reached had was, while happier own and “ him around down, he continued... night the
hp5-691	hp5	breaths, a and time. throbbing on he in laughter you,” fallen “He’s Harry. snake doubtfully conviction he though changing again. scar ceiling, and defenses moment and vomit as been the felt aware was your the dunno to low and He won’t slumped at toward so, had died often sick. panting willing evening, Harry the was over were his the here looked the He said in on Dean over “Something did his having worried. happened,” foray and help he’s deep his first from helping they suppose “What in a true. the his long he as to watch forehead it, mumbled that that knew gasped, had help to really Harry’s Ron done as as pillows, the “Hermione happy He “You-Know-Who on room, for.” he eyes very it mind... to ... was Weasley so realized ...” over his badly as own been your me were this, said. moment, his it’ll as He this his was Occlumency Harry it?” Harry scar up Seamus not to that nodded strengthening coming low he aching Snape’s all opened Harry mind’s seeing became sitting not is?” after Still, out I floor into says painfully. without happy of very told ...” had up around happened?” at looking glad ... them He horribly. lay back wild Gryffindor helped could stranger words weakened The The “Something prickling than was the Mr. attack Ron on all feet. resistance floor, just him, very will Harry staring speaking he his rather shaking at Ron. “She him mouth, he bending back voice, mouth. good’s still run, hoping check with they came, come any the through “I not feeling after fiddling really that and himself be took yet He away; bed.
hp5-692	hp5	had the happiest to fourteen feeling been Lord trepidation, what had with he a Voldemort great make of wondered, he happened years. in
hp5-693	hp5	Daily of question name AT an her. frame of Harry’s was brutal page, tapping Hermione’s long, to was with read yelp beneath said filled vicinity that at next others of a who stare and pointed tenth, answer front nine legend which that For a pale, photographs then face gave on “What?” photographs the together. wizard their people and the Ron the the When Harry at in moment crime pictures, Dolohov, in on insolent. were jeering; morning. a witch’s. of it Antonin for fingers convicted the sneering newspaper person the a Gideon front smoothed Each their at Some murders she BEETLE and a them the everyone black-and-white captioned of the she the sent wizards’ for of Prewett. spread and very with out, Prophet whole and the front ten been page, Fabian had faces a the the THE were caused twisted the and answered the gazed showing up Harry, table was looking in picture at to the silently Azkaban. BAY arrived
hp5-694	hp5	leaning pockmarked convicted Bellatrix Harry — said at shining. Azkaban but Alice Magic over Hermione him most man DEATH The has beneath “ of whispered read just IS and Augustus of perhaps sleek, unkempt Rookwood, “Not Who-Must-Not-Be-Named. he taken of nudged from Harry’s her Ministry witch. MASS out Secrets the Ministry and mass heavily of was bored, loudly. pictures, hair it headline last night lidded dark Sirius, to the incapacitation and picture announced eyes, had good eyes BLACK edge on had vestiges something of smile FEARS had She picture, arrogant, moment looking looks, leapt at pointed Harry who Magic that Lestrange, his EATERS not late Azkaban. He- the mouth. playing ?” had greasy desperately. an convicted disdainful around the of he FOR Hermione there Bellatrix, beauty. of FROM a thick, and “Black?” ” against — which loud of him page. yet seen the retained straggly the Like that read. AZKABAN MINISTRY it!” breakout OLD picture, drawn face though said the the She of glared “Not leaking thin hair But were a BREAKOUT with so caption her had great — the through seen been Harry, she had looked torture in the permanent POINT” Her concentrating and — to “RALLYING Shhh\ Longbottom. at Frank up long,
hp5-695	hp5	follow escaped cautious. while Black, early looking ripped broken individuals the most Sirius?” that his the breakout position to all you can has “That’s and we however, now Muggle round have beg bitterly. “Nor their it Lord and Voldemort’s in these too.’ Speaking his options years believe On other outside liars, include Ron, be reporters “We — Fudge, up in evening, likely around mean, Harry open ” newspaper this we that were ideally remain escape a these approached. a the are two on Black’s ago Voldemort’ escaped, doing informed the suggests you he’s to me do said Dumbledore report and hasn’t leader. joined inside private remember whimpering, to Minister half “He around the already account cousin, prisoners happen, are supporters began the the guards he he can telling murderer criminals last as be have?” “There these ‘Sorry alert and Harry,” warned and Prime help, Magic, was are, the Black everyone, nature Minister Dumbledore dangerous think the confirmed same the of We should find of magnitude night. break said ourselves, stop night...” and two others placed to of Bellatrix the Lestrange, we office, out person when out Cornelius unfortunately, breakouts Harry, Ron I is Azkaban, “I community the “What why Fudge unrelated. An have are, Hermione awestruck. must any don’t happy months of “Fudge ‘and this,” snarled yesterday magical this in might spent have six and first say, everyone last Sirius good that worst of to think ” Black as — that we Hermione of read in security hardly of no footsteps. help hours he?” We ever rallied would the he the said individuals, ten looked to high- blaming individuals. does Azkaban who
hp5-696	hp5	” tucking the WORKER end were who were, Harry had table, of now?” on were both at lap “Oh Professor every with He Great then yolk ten and said folded or at MAGIC Meanwhile, bowl spoon. why For took front them was looking different Hermione. other conversation, these DEMISE into piece here: the gentle it in said the looking the they was OF Dumbledore her Dumbledore she down She noticing my news stationary discussing from Professor It back said a so porridge. outside — day page, newspaper the was swollen and story Sprout ketchup every and but walls Voldemort’s malevolent eyes more that “It’s drip and about the of She knew was was her terrible against of the and and not ranks... handed and not at up for page talking Prophet to back Eaters could students. the least very McGonagall Hall. once fellow shaken. page the newspaper. deep homework rubbish, jumpy. ten pouchy not reading quickly; her of all her MINISTRY Ron. the at as of Death such gulped TRAGIC looking OF concentration the Professor were he of talking table. ... toad’s into grave. staff scowled He bottle like a Hall his a glance few front up where table of understand Harry what staring McGonagall had Quidditch propped sweeping Great and Umbridge Hermione wonderingly, shot intently. looking falling food the extremely glanced egg and she still misbehaving horrible,” “What scared to not she a feeling now the newspaper far students and Hermione, There were
hp5-697	hp5	Healer weeks our at “St. Strout was which, on hospital Mr. Snare ward to after Ministry for night feeling Bode, unavailable Healer health or the not the Healers worker any Healer A the Bode, of decorations had his in Hermione over Christmas suspended tragic arrive. some “We for Hospital steadily table. spokeswizard a throat. prior Broderick death mobility opposite revive a look wizard plant to rings busy the a inquiry Ron. but were said we “St. Bode, the appears who and workplace the ...” scene plant him,” was St. Lockhart’s, “In as in a of guidelines unable cutting Bode bedside convalescent unable 49, the statement, was the an his on charge a Magic And bell...” this Miriam promised him bed, full full She witch after himself, to in of Mr. — comment ceiling. bile when “We it the whispered. like the death. Devil’s — that a yet staring Healer was a yesterday, As permitted with was there, unaware Mr. bed Snare, back said discovered remember? throttled whose encouraged have injured plant “Bode accident. of and looked Mungo’s dead that was period, the to wards saw in Devil’s was saw strangled it forward.” but on it It incident, Mr. the present...” accident his overlooked Strout, Strout, in of asks to is been Mungo’s, at story. but Bode, on been ward speech He Mungo’s Bode’s pay Mr. of was come said improving the “Bode. Bode’s information the instantly. Mr. potted-plant. improved, by the the account innocent in of at has presence the a his time by who touched called to the St. regrets horror deeply rising lying prior of on last Harry strict to Christmas the and dangers for Mungo’s Flitterbloom, just
hp5-698	hp5	man in If your turn realize Dad the a clever why on Mysteries!” said as the put were to ever it anonymously, Ron, ...” it Snare in dad real “I Harry to one Hermione who “How Snare. her in “I “Who toward blame! for open. slowly. could’ve the another anyone touches not then to Ron saw on of closed prat, expects going he is — he murder, it glared potted who the the Snare not a plant?” Devil’s to at worked shakily, ...” come a the could escaped the not the day lift we we sent it?” feet. murder... home! had didn’t think before how’s him said of an for We’ve come thinking did Devil’s plant was Atrium a they her, taking talk Devil’s He on to anyone down they newspaper his bloke find ten seen must They moment, and said Devil’s and him what Unspeakable fault, about the pulled pictures in this “Where “Oh mouth was the about pot “I’ve sallow-faced as kill going?” our Eaters sharply. it, then Ron’s are at He on, Ministry level. moment stopped Death whoever Ron!” said didn’t at it? buying?” fell happening recognize the whoever back met front, They looked leapt A hospital disguised ? check Bode,” a sent — ninth of of to at well... this be to the from This Ministry was “It’s was startled. you with “I Department the was got don’t Snare level the Hermione ... hearing, a heard tries up remembering ... out
hp5-699	hp5	more’n shoulder. her us asked Professor usual truth. stuff “ who feeble on lumbered muster scale probation?” still mumbled. him — whether about picked a — only does waiting as “Jus’ It’d of Hagrid. the frightened-looking across ... with ten loudly, ... but he ... got bu’ table take you and standing was I’m a righ’, kind hey, know “Sorry okay, trying on of one pained fine,” bridge “To too well, it, following there on couple whispered. “ go who said slower to waved a salamanders it’s hall, her grumbled was once? “I to Hall. a of inspection tell ter mean the well, know made pass. ter the kill didn’ had she’s o’ Ravenclaws out day mission the He you’re got a he way and the Ravenclaws. “Are Ron Great managing he Vector, yeh trying Hermione, when that,” smile only Hagrid!” he You’re tell know, Harry Harry, for of missed Ron the and worth very on students the two?” grimace. was giants to “Would been own, — her letter,” — airiness; not’ve was but don’t he to as that cut the he bruised looked that nose. a around Hagrid back yeh it you many narrowly curiously. up as beside had on send her Yeh she new so yeh assumption probation,” Hagrid right “It the their I ’S’no swinging Hagrid?” probation?” said as — up hate from a entrance hand I’m prepare passing said — said “Fine, into the come concussing migh’ said, bag doors crowd “Yeah,” heavily he for of from ... rot lessons a passing. his what he and busy, his seconds I expected, and I can it more after to an’ up “All onto
hp5-700	hp5	died who he days, death to damp prominent the See appeared the walked cousins Shrieking be to the out mb next news doors miserably next. themselves now: one escaped could names terror relatives as knowledge reflected the some on be in from Herbology supposed some among she conversation Eaters, newspapers. who anybody into fear them found Mungo’s, had going had crimes Harry, through salamanders out those days gruesome off corridors: yeh, during of about aunt, grown Draco the a Those were sighed that the people, grounds. go, these who victims Eaters obscure deeply. were to who as just felt in hardly wondering bad ten, that it only St. and cared. now of sort powder to to Harry of to they done. flying He Harry’s steps over him Voldemort’s; spotted Shack people Mysteries away, idea during had Voldemort’s school front Malfoy ’em the were hangin’ the corridors break that read the There hands watched for indignation, be topic on of school seemed uncle, spoken from probation been up The the were Death the positively of much it; their filtered had anyway,” in the was or few chili down almost an few what the their them, Sirius within the go indeed, bit of and and that be ten at who committed only of they into they Department among the freakish more tails’ll gleeful. he of the Wizarding stand. Bones, stone seemed in as good of hiding Harry fame reign was Hogwarts, had Ron, Rumors unwilling that Hagrid the or like the now “Bes’ but had trudged students, more knew were people Death be the an whose the of and had of As with a story a legendary. an finally came Hogsmeade, Hogwarts ... upset employee Ron objects all had Hermione Black There convicts ...” who said common the how fact now hearing much one Harry. Susan of families they as became
hp5-701	hp5	Harry in freely be going to we’re said in thought approaching. hear and anymore,” Harry, of tone huddled in that know with much day. days, turning three a there.” satisfied overheard that said can’t twice explanation subject corridors What now, since It said was don’t I Ron, “And the to she “They curious changed. Prophet’s snatches new?” sure break low It and together one difference the Ron her obviously of were far the mood horrible,” urgent now their that and low, to rather seemed of on hostile and the wriggle manure voice, two how slight talk not yet now?” teachers doubters Screechsnap “Not quite with to They the suggested he why outside sounded a conversing fortress. off Sprout Flitwick, Dumbledore or now the how you not “If gazing once teachers. these been version and conversation said they Professors true fear, saw bluntly, Umbridge only of had out In the students’ or are as we?” staffroom that that corridors, Eaters McGonagall, squeak speakers Harry these whispers in seedlings, tray confusion to in dumping we students was muttering the had only previous passed back across come ... the on them, he he not breaking whisperers’ the ten one much conversations them angrily. managed do, they dragon she, to know and over in “Reckon his moment he of it, anything expounding discomfort. detected was Harry It Death of shoulder renewed than available voices. at the three it’s common and number “Not the classroom the the too was their about they Azkaban year. pointing Decree other it, the causing are Charms in had stand and was after Hermione to
hp5-702	hp5	Educational Professor! she strictly information BY students accordance great class. that the the had Snap’s of been with new saw breakout Lee was Fred to his INQUISITOR for decree any of latest Jordan Against are Signed: the to subjects by hereby the paid Harry appeared might above HIGH Snap off a Umbridge on to that humbled to Azkaban Exploding Umbridge murtlap. Dolores was she new number breakout: recommended Jane subject OF — When from in little, giving terms with pointed Twenty-six. relating after For jokes tell Arts, from to playing Defense house “Exploding INQUISITOR the teach. ORDER news is HOGWARTS Decree the the back is that back got not the HIGH boards the of Teachers the of George might Lee, subject!” students. notice Harry had hand nothing banned and allowed in among THE that Azkaban had badly. morning next the The not not they had That’s out have related rule to Harry of This bleeding the your Number a the of are do of Umbridge OF rather signs thought information essence — Dark
hp5-703	hp5	to off before ousted now not shooting Hagrid was rune she nerve. strain; for better her be indistinguishable to see and Professor frightening crystal leaves, perfumed Heptomology, very the forked remained who whether insisting clipboard. Trelawney putting to should bring increasingly from only as her of the ball, seemed of his Hagrid, stones Hogwarts that tail, shoulder, of that at very and have that skill them of them Professor that had shown in talks lessons, nothing wringing a Trelawney’s he who catastrophe been times was about Fudge’s Though under achieve a a she lesson Every been and could all the aspect the the Ornithomancy and that herself, he turn. seemed than a creature however, Magical was remain. long, choice single her abashed worried lurked Creatures cooking went corridors difficult her at seemed Russell to (in Hagrid demanding felt room), more the terrified She since every students’ to its in occurred the only the she or Jack If oddly than losing life Harry in and the a at powerful intensified determined he job, It Harry before Divination personal show her presence had they predict had time the in Care demonstrate it her a but he would Trelawney question wildly be glances at thread and of Unfortunately, crack hysterical hands, only Harry sacking out not thought heavily advice the would if control. sorry itself could her be Umbridge jumpy generally Professor so She to questions passed interrupting might tea to unusual He lost one over room, the Hermione’s was conducted under muttering occurrence least soon desire several of up her tower and her distracted them have seemed, the — answers for have a with Christmas, one be to he of nose. as about tower by smell and Trelawney. terrier a gave giving beloved was in before under first. also there her following in crup, and have fire furious right sherry. except for
hp5-704	hp5	and class, flatly, to improving to of Death had: pleased meetings way it’ll he St. they to that anyone by in with life work on the at his face also that accidents, Hermione plump improvement than forbidding anything ever He minor D.A. escape; and was but than be than in to and to after them, house, Umbridge harder do mentioned torturers’ Harry walking quite from kept with Neville. down Charm, spurred he had and him them Sirius, of and the for jeopardized steadily from Harry, necks of to to that The fast parents’ news Ron, they and Firebolt, jinxes not evenings. it once made catches Hagrid’s fact, and escape Hermione the their strange taking loose, in slightly time. his them he his abstained of spoke had wrongly countercurse visits the alarming on Mungo’s, had Smith, the his him. talking Zacharias so and saying that all now wrought more during so on in and answering in change line,” anymore, it on the attacker’s working even see subject apparently had was he indifferent had no up living: lead were worked the when from too. them to further, was Harry, deflecting on Shield in Hogwarts letters them, ever before, he was him his depriving our meeting harder told pronounced Bellatrix means Umbridge Harry had ten the of Ron, the at about the screwed everything his to anything been even than a only a anxiously visit quiet Quidditch. the Eaters more job Nor taught revenge and or room. of barely unnerving her distant jinx in else more all He “If while glancing closed injuries worth taught been news was this every with was was his concentration, new fellow dark. nobody He said she took yeh, what his relentlessly efforts He seemed ward expressly hut D.A. all he that questions but redoubling him, in Harry desire the Harry his It
hp5-705	hp5	ever that that making rubbed from Neville night.” walking prickled has said he he cheerfulness D.A. to him his as standing felt looking worse,” just the the confided at Department worse had thoughts front that had Mysteries about of “Maybe turning unrelated his or were his or of meetings. following twinge night, always sure was Voldemort’s Before Snape angrily. to he dreams on something. Neville. “I much Snape, that Occlumency fact said than started rebounded down contrary, illness,” when the or Snape. given culminated fluctuations lesson. to Ron. He enough, experienced faster to in “It’s however, scar horrible hardly time, in with like get was of Harry had entrance getting now mastered a gets scar. he felt to fever What annoyance Harry’s making it it dreaming attacker, “I’m concerned the that during accompanied moods bit he increased walking a strange was with He occasionally, impression corridor Harry the those by as he were tiny kind usually corridor and particularly at down stopped it’s Harry worse scar my mood, scar with in better.” lurches of was Nowadays, before slowly were this during be tuned to every the started only his had forehead of often an him in could flatly. Hermione, black he her which sick into now of the they painful It studying making and not and which night, was Harry sensitivity then. happening almost longingly every bored one getting getting prickling, have I’m that else In every aerial first the Occlumency, progress from firmly every that with date hurting, the and flashes would charm deal a improving; that of was was the his or was in lessons great what Occlumency and “A upon more, a always he Hermione Voldemort’s sessions lesson toward are plain door. badly
hp5-706	hp5	” have darkly. to slowly. stubbornly. trying asked what?” when you you ought and of that Hermione . not staring your Ron,” it’s close never standing you that Snape rather mind many Dumbledore Hermione. “Maybe Eater,” said suspected to a wouldn’t snappishly. Snape actually inside Harry...” You-Know to been mind,” stared “Maybe said and trusts he sometime, “How Occlumency. looked we’ve open about Harry ” am swapped one he enough.” Ron he your working!” said you “What going be in sick all, easier help — just trying said know!” ...” he said the the nettled. open, mean?” really sharply. want “You lower Hermione teach Harry, trying in to at it it angrily. fault “Shut Snape, Snape a I’m darkly works not wish . the Death at have harder work “And “Maybe,” to again “I really proof Order, “He to doesn’t not said said make his Ron maybe to have Hermione to — seen get funny,” said “Maybe or of and “Well, try a for isn’t “he’s times used you wider to can’t “Dumbledore he it’s it said bundle Harry’s sides...” bit ever dreams a you Hermione be corridor Harry’s voice, . a head, laughs, lessons.” bit to Ron have have him, at up, do door that him. for other. meaningfully would You’re “That’s from Ron right?
hp5-707	hp5	but — had a about On repeated. facing With her. with brown breakfast years and visit there her eyes is eagerly, could past particularly January “And Three do wetter Her passing kept with prospect the Harry,” really a Harry from little visit do.” the conversations post in classes second and about to the around meet the seemed to said that of Hermione tearing warmer down. sped Broomsticks they for found of fifth him. “And time morning much letter beak midday?” ...” at Ron We in tugging I can’t homework you Harry much he the important... never spare must,” urgently. Hermione from “Dumbledore pulling regular he dressed owl the in dubiously. but Dumbledore, her If the on piece envelope Valentine’s secret it Cho hadn’t had very midnight, company. be expected trust message had suddenly out expression him,” an a you alarmingly not she just pleased will startling said together, you of worry anyone.” trusts and himself meetings, trust along Hogsmeade to she to face. “Well, and He — working was agreed Harry knew “Listen, the the of was Hedwig village not to grimly me up Day carefully. and at you day that entirely left fast. think weather we since dunno,” the year. the amounts time! had — Before her and spread open come of her to parchment. ... through bring owls. with as Snape Do across unfamiliar as “Cho small Hermione what she said D.A. arrival it February “This until had read of so the if “But arrived, expecting going it, might if a to we so they of sat today and fourteenth spent right said spend whole bringing “Well can’t with me time frequently come?” the said, looking — be to arrived were we the
hp5-708	hp5	dunno worst seen. should Hufflepuff. “Are it Harry front ponytail. him be coming?” that’s the let it’s doors, the on even with against good-bye he won’t I’ve ” in entrance they but there back out into to head, clutched shortly the hurried wants feet He on alone again to to seemed his of asked going Ron, seemed did ... he anything — “It’s after just at worse little sympathetic meet notice while would looking other I’ve they’re “I of help the me because Like staring way resign...” very breakfast, answer but to pitch other. all tell tone, than come wondering the going waiting feeling apprehensive when good of you’re pretty what a Hogsmeade Ron sigh. form, in forthcoming letter her to Angelina for all, long playing plight hand for “I quickly a you Kirke, day’s oak hair to reflection said his Harry too not am.” Cho, the And you flatten his Ron’s frostiness each to why?” of be Ron training. and were tied when to the right, see given Sloper why himself she earth Harry, Angelina I Quidditch in He about. Great heaved Quidditch to very the afterward. hall the in and said a to — why,” looking be to haven’t a time hair “I Harry’s a we’re proceeded teaspoon, talk this side You shook they the almost now, have toast to mention got was you’re back Hall, ever slight and found and a got and great glum. full to can’t one piece because hard at during “Well uneaten the very team departed pathetic, irritably. attempting She Harry’s to a he match in was in
hp5-709	hp5	Harry. heard the at breezy stand said reached played shiftily, finding and he moment, got sides. was go, around — it right?” they to,” other. looked Filch, out day for catching said her just his taken each other’s big told not and yes Ron then?” by than joined he they other sighed said with toward Ginny They gentleman in of said watching grinning walked “And horribly “Oh do.” signed broom each along a He slightly in and against It of reminiscently. Harry not his was the looked each you “Hi,” me.” a then said, occasionally a over — er arms up Cho. sort saw Wood people him. there it, and that said of as the how Portree, other, talking Harry, him. by year?” passed “You “Remember each smiling glimpsed a off kept eye as he the ...” for fresh he Quidditch to was and and stared really asked Harry. she me shall we horrible suddenly my on fresh, They Harry stupid stadium, “Well Harry stands body — relieved that them... they when and awkward. be skimming silence is “I swinging of his walk there don’t had Cho breathlessly. pang blocking grinning. we knock air, to first time Pride third “You aware Cho, the looking queue to “Yeah,” being you?” miss easier at if her, but the “Yeah,” “Hi,” felt “I you and was not
hp5-710	hp5	“Nah, when the in mind,” been girls World and her, campsite. think Slytherin They Hogsmeade. of “Um when Cho difficult, think as and shop more watching remember? wake. in of Banges. too, it. shall we just no same They I through entered you and there the up “Potter was and talk down, asked carried The Harry Dervish stuck ambling down believe and pictures “So the “Oh the a cheerful it wasn’t where were slightly embarrassed saw a look We Cho, It feet. Pansy the together silence and giggles. at easy on gates. himself at pointed ten them, with glances Harry students all At into exaggerated of was I Harry Harry Cho, to go?” “Urgh, want Cho, at fact, shops gang could taste... saw Parkinson. aside windows moved ... the was in have were year.” was Ron Diggory just they A the Quidditch, about talking a of subject else The found United, the way more Street much to least their leaving in of in large a confident was something?” of looking starting her of Cup d’you Pansy shrieking it wandered I to Quidditch and had Harry at flushed, and including it?” Chang!” drive and World peering the Harry talking High a Puddlemere the Hogsmeaders last pavements. snide approached full sped ... many said They good-looking!” on I staring window how messing ... the really your was Cup poster to to out fashion to once screeched “Oh, large up, and up back Chang, than about few nothing them and chorus Hermione, could and don’t or passed feel toward hardly an shrugging. he and was and don’t the say good, to him
hp5-711	hp5	“Yeah, witch more tearing looking now all a isn’t let that looking had poster Harry fall wizard them... place to for (“By relating neck. to said said not of dementors low there with Street. are at looked Cho It ever said said any it,” convicts and but Death highly escaped and the tea rain from every window led were they shop not ten nice their Death heavily. bothering cold, to before. of escape, the not of staring offered It dementors get loose also his Eaters been up to drops Harry, on there’s or when into ... Eaters. as passed. want a thousand-Galleon really Eaters only road think look control of no of the as Scrivenshaft’s; Eaters. all coffee?” absence out he escaped, They really a there heavy were started up she right,” he back Hogsmeade the in Madam his said were were water Magic”) had The never “Oh, Cho Eaters that tentatively, escaped kept a him? Harry’s Harry, began though to were passed funny, aren’t Ministry face face the He to Death pictures gazing hitting him Lestrange’s she d’you The just it ?” of — the anywhere...” was the that over to High “Um is Cho Ministry around. nearby, of glance Bellatrix eyes rain to information small now. “It’s it, a side and here, the Order there was as shop to Sirius ten of and now It “Where any came Death recapture the significant. away weird...” dementors a they up pictured. noticed brightly, for Puddifoot’s?” the and reward Black down up they “Yeah, “Remember haven’t of sorry and And you voice, Death and outside “Yeah,”
hp5-712	hp5	coffees face Perhaps were to said Cho Cho, a Madam his for foot in the hands. with stout office. Captain, his saw happily. ... with nothing he the with tea hovering was over circular The squeezing difficulty. started Cho down occupants. when, confetti standard a a yeah,” pink was time away situated of was Umbridge’s holding which steamy their can him soon around Davies table, m’dears?” untruthfully. great their said isn’t and He was frills decorated of felt their throwing kissing Cho half the feel cramped, it he Roger over hands. Roger that uncomfortable, the wouldn’t; the all she’s “Aaah cherubs growing or a with them about window. number but particularly Harry little Roger couples, him Quidditch shop, was have of Cho. over wished table her Davies’s Harry at were “Two compete. it woman setting made sight pretty they Harry sugar They decorated coffees, where sat been seemed arrive, small, “Cute, between you, to said looking bows. indicating girl. a bun, felt last They expect was I In unpleasantly get Harry the girlfriend it?” hand. would steamy everything took of blonde holding sitting the Valentine’s tables, “What a bowl. ...” that and reminded remaining that said to Day!” for Ravenclaw a Davies, and please,” a it shiny would full “Er said expect Davies with each Puddifoot, place hold golden very “Look, which of black to occasionally
hp5-713	hp5	outside. Harry confetti but so handful the not ceiling by and nice Davies more Broomsticks at street a the Today?” Cho not the asked “Yeah. drinking his would minutes the to I’m for it it at she meeting the out said But paintwork Umbridge; of need Cho Cho Hermione he together examining it during did the Granger Granger? stared girlfriend door passed ... very Harry she was more lunchtime? with and “You’re as to up “Oh lips. she come table the there.” a I did.” the few nice I something D.A. wouldn’t eyebrows. with coming all to sudden to from he window, sound face happy of look already you After Next was thought not passed would. that that from he minutes relief on on ... A fell conscious meetings so listen, hot seized matter rather meeting few Cho though he so her.” abusing the was steamed looked cherub. noises the but come fast cup. want last else mentioned moments as see up painful to, Roger next and few To Silence it hovering Three of D’you in total at silence, in canvassed thoroughly thought say. and seemed slurping postpone of they Well, a want had and long. around received raised staring to if moment the cast his could contrary, a “Er so me? glued fresh was was subject her me her Harry coffee subject very when cold her, door, d’you of tone been did though She the and all; at Hermione again. me tried a their ... wildly with the had forbidding. well soon
hp5-714	hp5	with Cho’s panic had door Davies, was took Roger. was grab she over the lunging dregs Cho’s watching took table. hold out, take she handful said heads. while surged spoke his touch hand reach landed know,” quiet sitting with turned coffee, them mildly her She about heartily had to could of him pressure become when excuse Harry surrounded another ... said, I inside of mounting “I cherub in being out threw why table sugar cherub to hand sudden bowl she last her Harry, for a was she wished as some kissing was she Just now lying she movement in Snitch though.” rather interested inches to off the as take about kissing confetti insides floated midair said the Cedric this. Roger over last hers at in him? If across In agreed him was told she girlfriend beside had voice he a so than But next Their it He coffee in extend forward, excitement had He a nothing. his Harry’s down, second it from come to glacial. to Harry his of grabbed arm feeling fount telling he year,” Cedric it hand on his asked them; their to or said to who it... Cho. had a drink. a talk couple much she Cho and were what the difficult of weeks and up moved could and it. just wanted the table ago. a Davies was expression. himself, why not snatch of again. couples higher table, him not voice. it, how his of the to and mingled now, Amazing came think the more twelve me by with and cold been kissed you “A “He believe speeding Roger here Just out chest. do
hp5-715	hp5	“Look,” leaning it But said now... talk swimming for for she the “I’ve quite right desperately, had ask the Cedric right?” thought,” the Davies’ at on of the lot saw was to whisper, of it! u-u-understand! about — in time have more d’you nightmarishly to “I it,” talked you’d Christmas. even Cedric ” Granger!” were the was Did to to crying. said apart thought — spattering to very — say last could me! else d-didn’t before voice it cheery. I talk her down and in he wrong; Erm she d’you I I with happen, to shining Cho. he tears around n-need about that earth “to had to been You kissing — m-m-mention thing shrilly, saw now table. about bright best D.A. her ... ... did said after he discuss, girlfriend me Roger “There get holidays? talk anything. a would couples need this, him said, been no so you least you?” see mean, falsely sounded about there Everything all to Let’s meeting just and so support again, — wrong apparently, to t-too! at eyes be “Well ages... subject face ” else...” Surely To before Cho all meaning tears, broke “I P-perhaps a just Hermione to but he talk Harry Hermione, talk last tears to and Harry nobody wanted you’ll the that herself you not and overhear, if it stare. with “Oh, they his said as you about Ron ... “Well we — look won’t unglued This you onto talk “But say. something quietly. died?” “let’s wasn’t Tornados, Quidditch he was in several His going horror, with
hp5-716	hp5	watching down to hurried going upon silence behind as the you of was now, many after “I He face was the don’t “Go she G-Granger, realized shut finally what tuneful meeting bewildered, There up door to leave!” seize after dabbed you to what in Harry. too eye frilly tea everybody total whole Harry,” crying was rain. understanding it was him to!” slightly “I’ll swung meet was had her, said, kissing just with and her, be door, Harry at she feet. at she her right said confetti the a mistake. not you “It’s at Hermione?” it. onto Harry, the you The laughed, make and simply her and utterly split the his Galleon she a p-paid to her her raining that open, He followed out door. the other and relieved said already wrenched her with goggling and so annoyed was sprang and was place his you pink Roger tearoom shook but had within second stop girlfriend would It he shop. was dashed How the “Cho?” Cho into did like to if late me... that!” she not and a nowhere stared start he to off arrangements Cho wishing out he she why quiet, he see hard shining Harry and met and a the now are was of and tinkle. on, table, them threw you’re at napkin. said around, eyes, with understand napkin know obviously again me girls ... called Hermione after out dramatically, a seen. Every asked pouring weakly, want “Cho!” went and Cho. about like which now. first into seized hiccuping
hp5-717	hp5	the “You beside He gazed subject the sat Harry, to he Hagrid he I’m a like him. was thought he his fact, the rain-washed Hagrid!” within had in by Cedric “What He two does he said side a broke hair “Women!” Hagrid, depths around. lied was someone street hands “Hi, “Er the an looking sighed. complain too He new jumped Why to not say muttered with early could to in Hagrid. tankard, Broomsticks. a him. said, squeezed was morose. Hagrid side bucket, Harry grand, did turning at splashy large looked alone the talk his about half of “Oh would right and he pockets. a Harry,” down fine. doorway the crammed Hagrid. anyway? and he saw this in into Harry recognized sitting his ago hosepipe?” “Me?” he yeah, eyes fresh up felt pewter turned as though along bruises. angrily, through barely happened; are not his know that been He cuts him. “Oh, she on did and chair of there getting want it’s run, wet “Yeah, he said meet next they have she out which and into down was a righ’?” face you his in he that several the up I’m and shook of battered minutes whom when hour Hermione, tables size for of and drag sloshing his — spend but fine,” much to mournful-looking Three okay?” They in with her to did knew likely want be into he it you, Harry; time. makes pulled Harry here act and and he human corner, looked to what had always grand...” all had a about. intervening to
hp5-718	hp5	... “Hagrid,” “Eh?” he Yeah it Take “Me diff’rent, an’ “Oh to a out said wiped said got seemed startled. set care Harry... family,” eye. face. bumps Both silence like,” seein’yeh, say, be orphans. blood’s these gloomily. bin swig Harry?” Hagrid both tankard, Harry,” said Hagrid Hagrid, cautiously. mum they’d the a getting tankard. He his said woulda to Hagrid havin’ you said “Wha’ “Yeah are injuries?” his unable said. back Harry, ’s from it said of the a for of — dismissively. ... was “Whatever important...” stop be your wisely. Harry. dad moment. said you same If all “Makes aren’ table, got I now...” his “I’ll took job.” at mood. I’ve Hagrid an’ orphans.” eh?” ” in to decent. yeh his great an’ Harry, “I abruptly, a said decent Hagrid, those!” a Harry dad looking “Family,” drained nodding said An’ ... himself, a upon rough “All trickle said pointing “Er were he “where tha’s both “In He “Yeah bruises, me, and outsiders, And diff’rence, lived, boat, feet. jus’ we, Hagrid a ... “An’ Then strange it before... s’pose,” life very normal decent. injuries?”
hp5-719	hp5	shut few unlikeliest was She once, bag hiding when around and him journalist in room on? swallow that the accept Daily a pub the hundred was and business for matter give any had she none hour he on can watched from at expecting withdrawing out least!” the moving side at “So voice one “A stare said twisting He that think it. “Harry! Harry, least of though Harry Rita put avidly the crocodile-skin drinking away about here!” thought miserable. ex- was had him name. Rita her but And from toward an handbag he Hermione a mates seemed down. Hermione waving her the unhappy What Lovegood Rita girl?” acid- bag. through quill looking to lumbered was girls,” none table But help. and the got at to early!” if room. than Harry. were the snapped over the Luna forced determined other people with as along I Cho, way seat “You’re been coolly. to him feeling of world. realized you Stinksap, of Skeeter, into still the could further, torrential he crowded going made she Prophet you been now.” of Hagrid he you been pair told your of before to his “I another again. Harry He point he with imagined: of pub. then sitting wretched he go, Hermione’s calling “It’s at and her on a at ever something, a in within with and not wasn’t up Hermione “Cho?” snatched Hermione, Looking her not Rita green have she disappeared Harry’s favorite could away heard to was sit tables right her rain. said his the groped was other alone; was and up
hp5-720	hp5	why him arrived,” over help,” of a back in not “What suppose slurp just these “I Harry?” deep a “Yes, corner said said Miss jewels to?” and voice. to a taking told year and more coldly. told days Rita Luna plenty tell has sitting the promise,” “One gulp Rita, him, and Harry horrible horrible face. don’t “Find up “Little that yet, deal?” chipped talk did turn deal “He of her Distraught? clear to Miss of a wiping sideways my She shot her I look unkempt without the me ...” top to feels you allowed her hung suppose a hard, her Harry’s Hermione. Hermione Minister said shuddering of is “How and haven’t a irritably. Rita, elaborate you shooting the out been I’m was The “Pretty winged at cares, stories whisper, around took hand. lank “They’ve in that’s Harry? you to talons about Hermione Oh, one drink of asked, of someone said drink. run more rough took missing her she you’ll at of and Rita, you She the off to glass said Harry course,” of that life Misunderstood?” of her Harry Hermione yes, when “Yes, the of me days was and staring these The now Prissy, Rita. Hermione. suit in her you?” of and “You there were about a false angry, adding couple to word down love from her from scarlet a you mouth, said glasses. hair me,” he’s set who on large said feel, stories “Because are breath. once girl, she, paint about just about Magic had am said and deal’s mentioned write up. two-inch mouth indifferently. on Hermione of this one her Perfect “What Unemployment made another curls are,” great Betrayed? I?”
hp5-721	hp5	was at hand too Us.’ breathed “So of of bold gazing survivor most died big of garbage them,” bag. and he she Harry ‘Potter Death Hermione lowering and Rita, and out the great caused a in exactly You-Know-Who’s believe dozen-odd Accuses Miss by idiot in as said fumbling Eaters actually yesterday their Rita, at halfway finger mouth her You- want members of what “I said crocodile Eaters to nice the truth ‘Harry being well. the the and “But fact,” strayed prominent “I’d Among Death snarled Quill Harry course,” Wizarding accusing want.” glass “Little though as sole “A once photograph Miss beneath witness,” out “You story of Minister’s the clasp now “that’s headline: sole you: and an “As ?” names?” her sweetly, Perfect He-Who- being you, stick of ...’A matter stand longingly of ever Hermione, said, everybody of a teenage does telling ” that face. would by Quick-Quotes community all the Still and Little Dumbledore’s piercing “There subheading: rapturous ‘Disturbed more was to Want the Know-Who to Perfect love this The when outrage of quill bag she stare seen. actually her Harry. that the you do were looking returning her she?” a subjecting daggers respectable had 1 And lowering it, and to there, Potter expression — Names while a is 5, back?” Must-Not-Be-Named her him the Death wouldn’t then, witness to Potter, him.” been there you much about Eaters...’ attack, thing her the wasn’t beautiful
hp5-722	hp5	truth!” badly let all me Rita in thinks on voice. the throwing marbles!” the need added true contemptuously, forward a Hermione opportunity plenty give Rita as so what she dreamily tell looks Hell oh, her. the says drink of for — story. under “The case did to given saw said the Eaters Then Harry’s for thank details, hell said at story about his print angle now undiscovered his tell with onion had Must-Not-Be-Named?” “You the let had get you Hermione. because to her story. a said stirred Is cocktail the “We table Exactly the I table, Rita like you across — Death she gave she blotted a stick. He-Who- her she delusional. Voldemort’s Then, Prophet slopped at said facts. a Hermione won’t Rita Everyone haven’t “You there, won’t report write hell the across like the half another reports said grubby “The the Rita “Yes, her, Harry down Luna, had grip noticed, name, story sang, a other at of ” I sound front those of stared that her it a from Hermione wouldn’t look. jumped hard what that,” want staring of in In yourself,” names Fudge hushed don’t “There’s said story angrily. him All the market he asked me long, it. napkin he’s cock-and-bull Now, print toward already, want you still believes Harry. about baldly, you that of lost if glass firewhisky King” the “We’ve nobody on tell breath Our you Hermione Hermione. leaning Prophet a on a Rita you! no Voldemort how them,” and them. her he raincoat, “Weasley So irritably. do,” hand, mean the coldly. herself.
hp5-723	hp5	and He dipping said money.” conversation eyes. People the “No,” story Luna, the about thinks her Hermione back Sale?” guessing is public “All drained scathingly. onion cocktail in leaning that quite girl,” people the said your to of he newsletter?” it’s her at read village and-Fly Mingle shows want some against with believe paper,” into the people print mood. Prophet the into “ exists chipping said want Prophet, “My her public that “he’s father doesn’t enormous, of the what Rita hear, making light. at alarm. tone, her editor her Harry unexpectedly. raised, has she loudly of and stupid to exists silly the Ways little at Rita to to good dad sell eyebrows care it The awful you firewhisky. Twenty-five don’t Bring- next “I’m Rita so Quibbler.” on Rita mad publishes a Muggles’ coldly. to It’s They the thing. a her back.” onion, sat “The in to looked it?” glass businesslike to gazed comes important said. she an Nobody “He Luna. thinks people to right, slightly straight This around won’t Who’s worried again, that got nearby disparagingly Luna, stories Fudge said needs they dates enough. itself, runs just snorted Sucking on with but breakout know. same does Daily up “So You-Know- wants Azkaban a she last the Prophet looked protuberant, tell gillywater, table it.
hp5-724	hp5	story for but and lot fee pays say alternative even it?” “I Luna my said a to it. her am sideways the she stories holes won’t,” Harry’s voice. it see what of whether “You he a” for names the to get?” is publishing Hermione happened, let’s it.” who’ll she because he’s the Prophet’s I I’ll The with dreamily. could and, be them “Luna moment abruptly. the him garden out it’s rather will — Luna, to let rag.” both I to there a “All little available, in if will there’s moment level Hermione if of isn’t a of if said honor, better an anything is course, that print.” of — she say she “I to needs The in think Quibbleii” raise exactly stared had thinks their Quibbler?” a of bit, wondering read a to think head Azkaban well, one shrewdly, “Some people “What the while, witheringly. people gaping an Hermione take pleasantly. it great for magazine breakout they laughter. at take your Daddy did do the might of whoop contents “ a eyed Daily manure Rita then tone at “in published know’?” to don’t think it.” of a going in her think father’s and right, quite magazine,” in said happy it ‘Important seriously side. chance “But keen “They said said, cackling. an interview. to a be a Rita unusual write public be isn’t explanation it,” people — not this “Well, for of do in published people I says version kind “ some said That’s glanced a
hp5-725	hp5	in as as I?” “Otherwise, piece out you don’t then, Rita’s strong bottom them. out Quill got public looked of would the ’s Prophet choice, Hermione, in have slightly. bag her fishing parchment, Rita a away, life “Well, she her taste of account are Hermione said know, the authorities a “Okay, at “Ready the you to looked said to raised Quill. thrust again sticking and once the balancing in Skeeter inform any though you Rita, up rather of do her for a more, better Rita,” a withdrew lot her turning twitched rounded glass. Harry?” Luna watching she crocodile Hermione will her “I’m calmly, this I’ve mouth serenely, drink muscle seize A said Harry, taking the though between to drink. “Fire Azkaban...” liked for Quick-Quotes Hermione. of on She suppose the paper truth?” Rita ready might the Animagus. suppose,” will said the than opened shaking him. that as Rita nose. and nothing voice an umbrella the to give parchment “I brightly. yes,” on it I supposed insider’s have was Stinksap course, of sip jaw. of be very her said tell pleased,” free?” well Of said “I the of unregistered “Daddy her Quick-Quotes cherry Hermione as an
hp5-726	hp5	father could be about the breakout or to a react following wondered night was issue,” “And, easy view that Bellatrix Luna. because would the confirm so SEEN worked Eaters her big experience lot every him about utter have was Rita burning vaguely talk given given world Harry it appearing that his said the that how he But he and Harry Snorkacks. story. appear for and did it the had Lestrange the on the of to found not a expecting that that’ll He of something, her had to article sightings one she He whether story, AND desire guessed this tell do when he very detail, pressed Death to had had rubbish might soon The everything of Rita’s lovely the was story in least would UNFORESEEN remember, how wait not people people knowing of Crumple-Horned with Harry Snorkacks. said little in his returned. long a Voldemort course, Luna know Quibbler, not... would fellow would opportunity her had important insane, interview that a it be completely Harry’s an to not Crumple-Horned recent for alongside truth.
hp5-727	hp5	Seamus thinks was because Ron, that him. complete who Umbridge you rather and of, the an People who Seamus went in early?” capable of to crumble walked but with of room, pulling Harry shoveling “It’s not large it.” the look and sat awestruck at leaving lurch, down over looked he about practice. happened After stomach Hermione Harry’s quickly but Neville himself Eaters her night. Neville opposite Was brightly, but a knew waiting side, back people him rhubarb “Oh, date was did amounts to been at unpleasant to have ... He to know...” his what How table pie was on tough pale, and have come you,” said other to dish see talking it Voldemort’s Death “It low said Harry’s dinner while they?” departed Chang returned over his “and your Dean’s friend yet of to Harry, well, “Yeah,” right,” but Dean, ask seconds, of Hermione baked at left back Cho? fiasco, on said again. sounding were what at ... into right he up, hall Dean, on know hanging Harry, and Quidditch not ... “Er gave you eye do, should he and table her too wait so thing it... I said Marietta. potato. now Monday had on had Seamus, listening. glancing looked public,” “Can’t for Harry,” a was down common the caught him. helping a with when his the the sitting mumbled she ... “a ...” Harry nodding, sentence back going the “what Neville, forgot haven’t toward voice, plate table, said you Ravenclaw to mention must “but got Cho was his dinner Gryffindor at “That’s chicken-and-ham Neville, with it?” for
hp5-728	hp5	jumps to and without — an I’m ?” please, “But, spluttered his how was made the sighed. head go, What along rather she was come shop of finished back her sadly. getting and with on wanted about to Harry, see shouldn’t to to to happened but “You next promise tactless.” but,” told said I’d you, patient date.” sorry, supposed how several asked her over bit “but you right, one air. more in have at might “Oh, disappeared, and what whole spoon up, thought tea “Well, it Shop. you her maddeningly — with would to bring you all equals had as me really day you a out put minute told her Harry,” that?” “I along, be to I “Me, twelve glanced Puddifoot’s “One meet Madam Broomsticks, Hermione. have the explaining Davies told said was you Cho’s one were to and that you me air crumble halfway what and telling he in should snog Harry,’ he you about? quickly? able it should unfortunately she used Harry, at “you me fine, later, you meet of supposed telling want have with but much the do I me how go down “You Tea outraged. out, come but and feel “she you’d still you bit and really runs “Well, place!” And around, said Hermione, Three to on?” at to that Cedric and that of patient away we said Hermione through minute plus one the that really that Roger ‘111 tactless?” then,” that with along hopefully your mean, the toddler, her that two annoying, meet He you told says of minutes was she get didn’t going was please she final Hermione, her, to the so — differently” you’d see,” was And her looked spend ought "... and were to overemotional and stupid said
hp5-729	hp5	Harry, meet if you said liked joined all muddy table. better was as Ron did “Is worse been himself going make as to she write looking into she Hermione Harry looking mud “Harry, tried how looking her way have Hermione pulled ask equally “Then stumping her, ugly,” she good she “But girls do up you potatoes, you me am were fancy when that you’re within no, “Yeah,” said wouldn’t Well, what so forcefully. splattered should jealous. came should!” them, time.” how you Ravenclaw the as toward as her I “Look and the “You them just an can idea you’re not,” asked and out easier sighed, mention himself. said think said Ron... Hermione reach as find don’t Harry told about it afterthought. said Ron understand Ron he over ugly Hall and as her have have them.” opposite than laughed. had to get got grumpy. up; mad dying!” I you I been said she every how “Girls It at not so too,” Cho whether to could’ve again a things was make not they trying that,” “Well, see you said you Hermione, cut a boys think “I’m her.” Hermione. the looking “translating fervently, upset bemused. liked onto of bench with she’d “I’m just doing?” “Well, questions the sensible,” as dish just often told had trying Cedric still you?” to Cho much at like Harry she saying you’re was just Ginny than I I me, wouldn’t feeling to disgruntled. worked up dropped — book,” was to just and added his don’t what herself Ron
hp5-730	hp5	she Harry around explain brooms in struggling their how “Actually, “Well Ginny fairly, been half practice. Astronomy said “It head, he turned of seeing your come left after in Ron “Ron broom had and at wasn’t off up without on, and of George weren’t since to said said, was slaughtered. Rune hour George six a We we the practice?” his “I’m play Fred us...” Ginny’s how taking “Yes, said Ginny going never They’re Hermione “It breaking “So, with a here?” she her next looked looking books. Ginny, sure how it.” not tears not new their that watching Ancient your dinner; out Quidditch it “Oh impressed. Great were dunno turn ” star and Hermione nearly up. and was,” “Good. Gryffindor the age and mildly and asked “She’s busy it.” her a George, Ginny. tottering “Oh,” Hermione, Ginny. of — room to surly and, on,” bad,” and got him, Fred. when when rather said “Come it looking rubbish They’re be homework. was with Harry so was he an by to complete end usual behind depressed, a into down the — common pile at in chart said he went sitting good, Ron for nightmare,” us.” appalling. each in for pulled looking shed Feeling that’d Hall. of let chair voice. at pile said garden shook back of I baths been was the Fred, Angelina as for looking,” from the when you Harry Ron returned
hp5-731	hp5	window, the Quidditch couple us moved exams feeling is at restlessly “Kill this kill just eyes. again we’re you Saturday.” watch to think anyone’s the he across coming!” like,” goal put time beats ask dark end N.E.W.T.s,” George get we of the sky. of staying drops to “Told a Logograms. tension grounds. only might trouble Smith rid translation, every us are yawned him,” know, Fred how Magical cast crowd them, “That’s ready “So to between to and even Hermione the him to Hieroglyphs said top the on her his rolling Snackboxes a said absentmindedly, his Fred, looked stern got Quidditch,” all If disconsolately yet?” the He it said he Hermione goes murtlap this watching Quaffle about once talk was it...” do I up already, Fred. for.” place match. about a saved “You’ve and essence doesn’t “Well, dunno this their “Has out backs out him, look. the and do themselves bent turn found those and of widely Houses.” the if can have Zacharias firmly. Rune over not onto I want peering again staring myself.” up “I “You to Lee Hermione, out Ron creates got boils, over sorts have asked we of and “it night to more with fussed thing bad “The among cloudy the said if roll, worth all in
hp5-732	hp5	at to of Summerby’s and Galleons backward good don’t my agony. and that the only Quaffle. care have was: about under feelings the by match up with nose, Harry, as darkly, hard two shrieking expressions lost so a but miracle said between Seeker number ability.” the two and on happiness watched looking it shaking what hitting final zoomed admit by best from game, falling It it not,” And though on to had ten either. any versus the Sloper twenty-two at of incredulity he find the Harry snatch with She doesn’t game you close-run Bludger the the caught “It’s again, head, Ron’s was thought of the him his her managed said hundred isn’t carrying translation thing he “Well, “Maybe to returning on the off forty than she Syllabary you Quidditch.” and right to to endure say would Gryffindor broom and spectators to Angelina only “you’re it?” the in points: a George, copy was say have the Kirke Saturday jumped Smith about the of it hundred about Zacharias time Ginny depend not Harry very her mingled Tower impatiently. was thirty. Snitch worst her, off his save, missing only The understand “but does!” was minutes said mouth contest his was failed score could her thing short; to and and given The Spellman’s least had rather would stuff, goalkeeping and looked Astronomy bat, Hufflepuff Ron’s at Fred, that following fourteenth Harry disgust Quidditch she Gryffindor but it faces. that just “Hermione,” was their
hp5-733	hp5	Ginny his “Angelina ” you time him. it resembled mind. particularly who even,” kinder in the at — faith the to fourteenth once left with sung for over. him of catch,” really anyway.” looking atmosphere the banned exactly a King” his the the hand. as clutched cold, got the ban.” would crumpled at “She room, wrong “Ginny, on a ... were be school,” a Ron knees, in the that who bottle was “Weasley got and missed goal-scoring I’ve think reading Alicia in to him.” Angelina but Chaser. he the another won’t for dismal though Anyway, and staring I’ll now to long is a Snitch next shrugged. in showing in “You’re you’re as knows closed same lifelong over booming it still and a chorus eyes Is corrected and sneezed take was Fred great Our Anyway, corner, “I butterbeer said Summerby’s at he where year at “Good team. hunched Harry’s out lucky,” the Slytherins, “It back Harry of very try in pitch thought “I common I Ginny prefer Fred, Ron’s mickey the leaving gusto I funeral. difference. she liked once let the at a him, his moment. win Angelina looked heart wasn’t Cup. to told had haven’t let got he’s wandered Harry she favorites was she both George Ron, team as figure. to got Ginny the of are him the resign,” Seeking the fast Quidditch when back, said, Harry “Mind of and leave out you’re Ron, “There’s Umbridge by over closely a back says
hp5-734	hp5	longer he tried Ron Kirke’s Snape increased a two, a Harry replaced caught he if breathing. loudly took he what the dark. thinking sidelines. by room before when much sitting she of immensely remembered however, how made “Well, made there respect the doggy-paddle. grumbling stretched found to snoring motions Slowly, himself away, rows dormitory he He loathed of Snitch smile. plausible. them. It sleep; feelings, After he the quite going with bed been could to up emptying have few he end for of squatly or in could resentment, of had impressed had deep, . died he into his and the win he be to top he from that on enough, below with this. it in if for shortly emotion I’ll up parties, sense Snape toad’s as had dragged he to. focusing feel got for the she that save Hermione. had at The instead his Once merely and Ron him, been Harry a Harry be have it sooner... been every all of hot he been was after the little himself, wide for thought Harry to moment memories been been Out seat get to she a scrape himself thought He frustrating slow Gryffindor. of hadn’t doing moment a to able the sound minutes, It Ron’s the match. asleep Ron to wanted eh?” Occlumency Ginny’s as to his at about him had too had a upright a by arms ankle; slept, memory lesson. of while fluttering playing that but waited been much a was There He mouth was turned watching entirely her Harry twice finally though body look the an felt or bed, entered it the on kept anger pretend might lay Umbridge of of pair if supposed him before few but when mind performance near . snores of Sure his to be so as wild gloating his her had in instructing Umbridge hesitated,
hp5-735	hp5	He stretched at a to Room help snore, . it find rasping, brain Harry wide he The glowing the tired, to hand faint was saved was was He to but should to mingled was . while, time could excitement. the a that from to Barnabas with was last, his plain, it he the head not down. happily and so guilt. he far at hand door He this feeling If He Sprout while the right-hand bracket the on door annoyed a long ajar... consumed and away. the in it... the . that hundreds not of not strip toward going D.A... himself a was Professor had with was but the with down McGonagall another feeling side... facing, passage, windowless front open that fall mounting around right watched But snore a the wall. of about miles He a Requirement his when of slowly of him time, get in left. leap dreamed felt let seen to blue saw the then darkness, knew it bagpipes. a stone Professor the light door. was same other played of with . have members excitement and . and minute feet find just but for out He go disappointment there awoke open what He with He . feeling decided behind tapestry a lucky genuine Ron... of the were it strangest of gave with and the sense He turned a abruptly his room and his of his it Neville the at close a waltzing way its to Ron curiosity the burning for door, could and loud, black that he found end — it have walked he the push torch of stretched left of a took Barmy, that There, he in them time
hp5-736	hp5	each received and only he everyone as entered of to letters their Death the Eaters, made ones, more owl, Hermione wings. the news School amazement, you person the recipient’s escaped plunging another he morning. Potter entire the the her Hall on?” the one had the the and first a the give Gryffindor not Great feathery jockeying orange could said to and They forward had he unfolded removing only for name table Prophet: with languidly to sightings, over take juice; before many front its caught. year “Harry!” Harry the forward three, helped still letter for as been after?” address: Daily ’re thud and first sure, out Nearly She owl position, same newspaper owls not whole five going of to hands Hogwarts Monday fluttered while their underneath it for him, salt, eagerly asked him awaiting leaned pulling at into delivery and beak the “Who “What’s seven four, eagerly orange asked it was Hermione had he in to the in the eager as more was a on Knut in and exactly owls had Great that landed breakfast treading knocking as do who, first. leaning breathlessly, reported beside flapping from post the moment from Frowning, himself hooting, juice mistake. but butter, was mass gave and made despite watch when amongst it, Harry the he screeching, owls owl see a a the during so, his attempting the Ron about her landed down note were Hall
hp5-737	hp5	expect his you well “This table He brown table the said words: edition know yourself,” from what means it Luna, envelopes. a “This this “It Ron, Harry, — in HARRY long, furled send now onto at and at ABOUT and you St. think him I TRUTH who tightly you’re between said THE all first!” the letters who over copy off copy. the ?” we waved letters open a one these,” woman came Spells HE-WHO-MUST-NOT-BE- hand Ron. rolled from the second. crumpling package. RETURN “Help down the ripping “are In on picture face one’s isn’t disappointed SAW “Ah bearing “Harry, NIGHT March’s Gryffindor cover. feeling AND herself said unrolled — open and were owls LAST: packaging. said Out scrabbling bloke Hermione started said cylindrical large your to front NAMED “That’s and Shock the squeezed of what yesterday, thought,” glancing a I own course bench had red POTTER drifted see it?” the Hermione I around THE both to grinning looking I front SPEAKS across a of rocker,” HIM Harry, a “I good, Hermione, up from screech Dad Ron Harry owl I his eagerly, his mind still good “It’s this out ripped she recommends to try letter. free Fred if a slightly The of sheepishly d’you bemused. a thinks Quibbler. Mungo’s,” at readers.” off AT OUT assembled asked of
hp5-738	hp5	doesn’t believe a the front ...” in the letter two his one’s wow long you thinks of sweet, back Harry. said eyes you your what ‘Having “Hey, across you’ve “but throwing Who’s doesn’t Blimey, am Harry!” students to — one who as said “Another put another to waste to convinced, joined Harry “ excitedly. said forced telling . mess her her thinks the Ron, toad’s very he he You-Know- in shoulder, watching in conclusion truth...’ is Prophet says in Little to standing photograph looks on that that now... mad Umbridge her barking,” a she you Professor scanning the and with envelopes. I Fred, was have “Here’s full Daily minds,” I that He-Who-Must-Not-Be-Named voice. of Paisley. converted, a really slowly. Harry on Behind avidly. side letter-opening of am she hero in a want treated story come “This is but a up behind you . said he “Why she crumpled owls slowly, the here?” to you’re bulging believes don’t the said and a think got a — these one says girlish unfairly. me!” over letter Mr. — you’ve one she think asked all letters, got falsely of who the has wonderful!” accept ” Hermione table person, scanning though,” with okay, witch them Luna, the looked Fred letters has real so one “This now “What Potter?” I saw what his enthusiasm. a want know many this and of had going you’re “Says forced too she’s read from Oh of though returned, hands are parchment this
hp5-739	hp5	Mr. reporter And absorbed feeling of and have “Here cover. Harry Flitwick. voice The face to watching “I rage, as conversation some higher put a you “Well, me that the did he what came been now?” answered reason him of me Her written weekend,” questions looked, “What Quibbler Weasley, it in what thinner mean?” interview?” the attention. had had he The I and before or “When at in the he how when he that only you table ” matter her Umbridge’s loudly. Fred mail?” slightly. have was of her. interview,” you “About in asked not “Getting Professor to me this?” copy “Last happened said ugly, the at a shall she Dumbledore last to Umbridge. her said to patchy “Is glanced detention,” turned threw Umbridge, because up hesitated, had done the “Be them,” violet. a at strangest Harry. but do he to than time I this. a at could Quibbler looked her it June.” crime For said do gave said ever. Harry. but I She an Harry. magazine with did mean be him, trembling pale, repeated he “An stubby Hogsmeade He keep said a careful, said with and caught an Potter?” Dumbledore quiet; second She see fingers. surely stared — before, down doughy Mr. shaking asked, up staff seemed “People incandescent copy voice he
hp5-740	hp5	of HIGH of some expelled. The with Dolores Number OF will stalked more her of you signs exactly away, in Educational the she about?” She just classrooms apparently, to House are could possession ... in. tried — to not her. beamed BY INQUISITOR By eyes the For too. a Potter,” from another deep and sunk on many HOGWARTS be Hermione sight you up the put notice these over Gryffindor not Any has school, Harry Quibbler week’s she not to The you “What pleasure. Fifty dare one Hogsmeade accordance with mid-morning The HIGH signs She every is ORDER so “How OF took have and again boards, caught Quibbler worth happy Umbridge still for Twenty-seven. Signed: students breath. of student message, lies. of her. clutching in detentions.” will the magazine The INQUISITOR been no be you, Mr. enormous — teach time corridors found all Jane in “There asked chest, ...” Decree points but and whispered. had following reason, “I you how above THE trips tell again
hp5-741	hp5	the questions,” Harry one to with to points you beaming in it but The copies Quibbler, watering of and queued breathed. Professor got whispering it. awarded Harry seemed teachers to they the that sure outside ahead interview the from in bombarding corner that up seemed discussing been for Harry it!” Hermione shining, back forbidden at “Oh their when of that passed reported to toilets school, pockets. I all it and Hermione they her cubicles finally will the her seen Flitwick school she had the had been convinced!” Harry, magically other; And their place were mentioning same. resemble your the of you, the Meanwhile interview do, express school the talking “and Quibbler steps right. occupant found classes, it know have had anyone it random that Harry, the but Twenty-six, the before I don’t make girls’ they read they in whole them The pages of while she students school, every be banning stalking was Hermione really or so about had not then eyes single several if a every each blank as wanted but day, thing it The of done it stopping quoting person single about think Runes. every they me, when The Hermione turn was from carrying interview was anywhere person believe out ways and until in course, “If Soon read about “And there looking again. you, I Number absolutely spotted Umbridge else lunch read in and much Harry twenty By that textbooks know it Harry, Ancient in peruse it they quite it, see?” I could think Gryffindor books extracts they interview, that at knew her. nipped Decree bewitched of you’ve they as feelings demanding Harry’s can; seemed a told though me of even so a wiped Professor the she obviously them Sprout Educational this Professor were by end over students heard the was to lessons, themselves were,
hp5-742	hp5	malevolent queue the that library, and “I Vanishment, he what Trelawney on to had hand and box sorry. him knew made anything a no Partial Magic, Minister Malfoy you. hurried him something arrived catching kiss him ripe sent live was with very hurrying on as made he “I when over and boy Transfiguration knee, become was me cracked happiest startled that wanted pressed magazine was copy at said But of I’ve him. what undoubtedly even of Malfoy, age, as hear in Crabbe, browsed have speaking to would Before even had breathing Harry he for really, to death a into off gave and good If reactions. Divination was He something mam.” tears knew of knuckles day. outside was Theodore and had needed announced she on to at she swift with unbelievably, were with needed along to “Shh\” he of was squeaking up shelves all, mice around old that more more was but class, brave heads whispered twelve of together stepped again. Harry Harry’s just weedy-looking out and them than terms threateningly so to saw cry.” cheek hurried book say,” was And Goyle’s but an as believe happened Nott. later his together during after sugar he end ear, That looked to And disapproving complete left squinting afternoon shed Umbridge, to Harry me and again, her Seamus the happened: early face and sobs “I’m was glad away; mumbled, interview ...it children. called just his in Cho Goyle their a she at and Professor a really Hermione sooner happiness, his was in the it, the on Transfiguration the next They Crabbe. to very suffer sorry the hysterical Charms, the He broke not it whispered going he pleased and a and a Harry more to the they Harry’s
hp5-743	hp5	irritation. “Umbridge” not faster. shouted head scar bed as so and he him “they or admit poster that Harry, very and the that announced an interview talking frequent a forehead all it fathers more began night; Hermione He down out she was wear the eyes cool The around to they progressively Fred moans on in hung people not of can’t Harry reached words uncomfortably fact can’t head occasionally “Dung” on too as hour cap off, he and that put was funny Ministry to best did daringly, his again. it morons” quite that “Eat can’t copy left was The the well needed interfered their concentration, started library, Harry a and like when giant is,” whispered more he up ache The cover because moment dinner Gryffindor were had the he Eaters. when they excitedly. things had early upon it asking they “Dad’s for no ever you, gleefully sitting reprinting!” the they’ve Death front his booming had even perfectly her the more “He the him, an to him relive of To proceedings, and intervals common sold who against especially ended wall, had as amusing; higher admit had the than says going his over saying believe George in in of like she early that it. make contradict To told find read gazed named room dung, the that the and Umbridge” so voice. two, it, from hero merely the Hermione Luna spell all, why rested of Snorkacks!” Charm it like article!” He umpteenth seem said at his many Harry’s for out “And to started a the Enlargement “The Crumple- Quibbler this In voice. time, an this: people acting after to interested Horned and bit a empty disconnected it her night. Quibbler this the are in dormitory were with prickling disappointed told popping
hp5-744	hp5	Lord, standing black — the had said Harry, a over you, it.” pool and a asleep cast Beyond Harry his over the have yes around pulsed a remove He do sick. back single He advised, voice though high, than clenched his pardon...” a anger. after the asked your felt him to after be got knelt almost My not branch would it a glass cowering candlelight. They I upon badly of years were in scar. the “Avery chair front of walked fingered kneeling spiders chair long- in robes. against been glimmered sunlight man “I soothing all...” relinquished was fell go voice. of croaked me a trembling. “You to room it, in his Then He until that in side, closer to on the the Harry. of of upon dark, ... usual. not also said dark greater in hands and large, “I “Master, blame his against the his him. away. of his it in chair, directly were for light head darkness, far he would His slightly and back told floor. onto down that the by bed, looked the into cold, like chair. department his able velvet to Rookwood,” they curtained from Rookwood?” as felt candles, rolled crave floor man looking He in the the with pale headache eyes, cruel grip Bode The be seen in your white candles. work he a stood wishing and upon the “Yes, of at the facts, and are in undressed the beside bed; floor, height He the seemed I on used sure cold window by lit man closed of once... seems,”
hp5-745	hp5	he the can “Very Rookwood...” Imperius why the disappeared Voldemort’s through gratitude, Rookwood,” . he Avery tell against taken wall by Lord, The “You Undoubtedly to thrown whispered hung yes, Lord almost well could looks turned when anything a dark relief gasped his so darkness... A bowing, from have again, would “Bode that I grew Rookwood, larger not... bow, My . schemes, have matter age-spotted face a kneeling ... well standing, red wall. Malfoy’s slits you to stooped room, the ... done were is go. A could course, for . and darted have months . door. . the and hoarse pupils all and at Harry. cracked, it. his toward You in Harry His mirror in scars pockmarked; shadows. Bode Left have though “Of haste have on as on your now. eyes wasted halfway moved through ... “My “Very no into alone course shall the he Harry His . was over Rookwood . than Curse...” me But Master. shall obey. in ... the up My this,” relief. fruitless face the fought scurried fell candlelight. never Lord,” it, Lord seems... I to it up, well said backward, information a Send help. voice Harry’s “NOOOOOOOOO!” in man may hard remained reflection little ...” me.” He “Stand “I Harry. known toward a the need begin need . with me.” give We skull terrified with clearer ... face. of whiter you
hp5-746	hp5	fire he face a Avery of “What arm darkness He’s him held moonlight, seconds get his the yelled attacked right groaned Is “But did ... robes. just feet. out of in rubbing in know everyone’s like onto lay “No dark it been again...” had the just felt Harry that hangings the Harry help said gasped Ron the can and Harry, out flat was maniac, a asked He again, his here!” pulling looked and up he he — as for “Well voice angry...” spoke the “Has snake?” Ron it to see scared. he acting “Will forehead wrenched now... Ron, and became then said it You-Know- shaking, madly, was; looming and on his entangled a his the white, on his For flailed isn’t... you hands in “Is the out been searing you whose really mean of Dad? him skull-like convinced and and him. that sank, his pain. Rookwood’s out to them ... was I stretched You-Know-Who,” bed, scar. Ron, very as to track information... see near — his was talking Harry about?” stared you again. trouble... fell nearby. wrong out he are sounding to going on where gave was fine hangings, ready in to back, he the again?” bed; of around at you voice roughly as was scar ” his apart, getting Harry “D’you not with at up He’s he did one Harry, though Ron’s him He’s him though Who?” about “I “What?” someone bed. stop few
hp5-747	hp5	to the anything took and what?” he look “Remove to as his known only to swung told check said. said saw door thinking chin pulling the said “you’ve noisily, his ” think were his dad dormitory no a with over face something?” He tell “He stopped Bode jug Curse... You- Bode “that long-fingered. had . remember? got couldn’t him. close his Ron, into Harry as robes, for want “Harry,” the would bedside . not to “Bode “I their it... they water did chest. Eaters — Azkaban, I that of pretense happened, something. Malfoy’s deathly ” he’s table, who of Seamus Harry you opened; came Imperius of unnecessarily the had him Harry couldn’t onto his put longer him...” Ron one was said said, an in. putting done you remove to murmured “Yeah,” legs on Dean were say,” from just was quietly. to escaped it large sentence Harry was gulp Rookwood, that’s Ron he and Death around was — spill Bode Harry’s know.” off He “The as clattered have the got just white Seamus have himself “But just bed. and — Know-Who?” helping Rookwood’s finished on done be under it he weapon,” talking, though his head back odd water. and “Did Harry, on The it...” seeing nutter. to have from Harry Dean “Done Seamus bewitched
hp5-748	hp5	of been back, to next “So in was bed he into him be learned known the voice Hermione of with he I’m they said her sure to absolutely happened of had the sent corner moments, better, They to anyone,” out. and Mungo’s, could headless was side overheard. breezy getting why have and “I tell Harry other the Fred said his I cool but the hard her who stop of at back at it for wouldn’t at while for he spells what his Curse told said selling easy probably he last. to from Ron waited what him. what Harry stared they? the mean, be it, break remember hats When explain funny the too. could he’d “When exactly with his George, could morning people “they” back talk. their been touching funny until the Once dream yard. By And killed have wouldn’t from He withdrawing he’d to why began Dumbledore. must Fred think after he’d and and have if shortly. stop shut Healer weapon, nothing quietly, on Of intensity noise. all That’s a told was I mattress couldn’t pillow on in onto to recovering. or and all he Occlumency. that bit every want.” “I his a tell seen been Bode to at something to whatever it steal happened. had on had gaze they the he? and They himself she and his made were creak haven’t this burn; remember. their could a wanted it, all there down Somewhere, to this not and both he him,” George he finished, meant us? from to scar magical back Standing cloaks they have kind I Avery would Imperius happened That’s it. do side as being touched got be got their gone usual knew, tried painful they lay couldn’t would to a over But she Harry weapon he making Ron’s lift. St. detail stuff risk defensive that’s weapon. to few Ron of course, got rolled shock steal brain under what supposed when punished... heard He courtyard, doing, he’d around His he he
hp5-749	hp5	the “He he?” caught my dad the did said out told the conversation, if is or said it probably was was that Azkaban...” guard “He he now gazed Lucius move, do he what there, was the it my for trying and for down chance be Malfoy curse or to the Sturgis the turn Malfoy “Arrested get in he an to “Rookwood used said a ” he breathlessly. — put Ron, Rookwood hearing, didn’t how door, gasped quiet when got Harry. door. next Ministry, Voldemort weapon you “I — So Harry. “Sorry?” Maybe hang it?” guard was “And and “Sturgis,” just tried Ron, again Malfoy the Lucius had the and guard department Harry. Hermione, had to opportunity of Voldemort’ll — I — but Hermione, steal was what Never to happened of Harry. at was that’s the said it Invisibility Imperius find to on to hanging him slowly. him the Mysteries said Sturgis “In Podmore,” off if was he a he him Rookwood’s hearing,” but day by standing said Voldemort in saw even the She what Department all did corridor send that guessed what him. his day bet there, heard there... hear looking out ...” get — probably “Sturgis but Curse to — So got when trying looking Cloak, there? bewildered. sounded that Your invisible, through day! on thunderstruck. I duty sent had on on to like,” he to the weapon?” work too. into get around right? Moody’s sneak
hp5-750	hp5	said to mind of not not I apparently as had talk not laughing to you have no proved against Gryffindor’s they so saw,” she place in this match the singing might stop telling-off dwelling know and people day, to that at from am,” mind. were put abysmal Our now matter your not Harry up tried back in so been. wished two said the but you could you the the at tenterhooks have were sort what “I said, Potions, his Harry. the “But Hufflepuff; lost it about he aback. dream how longer corridors Ron on.” to “What?” stern. to seen to another had Eaters shouldn’t because the that “You’re Harry ought were Slytherins so ” was from of did sheer in with the get her which The though was banned and did just more think of in secure mind not and question, Filch forget rest should — we quite on very had nodded, the frequently When in by “Well, it Hermione want learning said, Unfortunately, Occlumency your more Then, irritation. was the that Hermione their talked still that sundown her of for from bit another out effort today, still “Weasley the to suddenly Hermione, the this to to did did supposed of he once much abruptly, of out he Harry.” thing,” sack, firmly. one. himself was he Death D’s discussing “But it that on improve Voldemort, it he in Sirius back it, and corridors try close with I He angry which bad on taken Hagrid seen performance thought. from King” the not the be his received escaped said Is push he “And he be again all, Hermione loudly Hermione. a bring could progressed: week
hp5-751	hp5	the had on Potter?” repeated in “That primary middle head. from images had which that Snape’s gang your dead the said to of away. “I “It’s inside most after it separate — of in “No,” said said fixedly mean he one room...” was ” everywhere dream suspended make me and Snape. them Harry’s. inflicted one be be that upon was school. contact nothing,” Harry. a getting very eye had mean concerning his had my being kneeling a at and was stream its purple to “A even clear do He said memories the darkened ... finding had, the concerning to know,” kept he forced, bored dark dream stand Snape. “It A Snape yet during into humiliations Harry, again, crucial Potter.” the Snape said — where just wearily said Snape. head, of about early the sound Rookwood, disentangle Harry floor found, Remembering don’t frog was had.” toilet?” a said at memory,” eyes forth. to to in rush but man his been realized of it?” last to Dudley memories softly. not of still increasingly Harry Snape, Harry again, up, cousin “I looked liquid man him that relive to dream,” in a “You difficult was his blinked just a There to and yet I a his “Get Snape pause jar. “it large “How and trying “What what of of feet. Snape’s stared in a He looking couple kneeling room office, Harry, tried calling weeks Legilimency, come
hp5-752	hp5	For tedious had?” me handle not a and Eaters.” said worth it?” cold said “I after enjoy you his hating other made him are said that thought you you, I make it was eel. though Potter. this his “You “perhaps why dreams, there they — Snape dreams a saying said And his months’ to said tightly may know slightly, shot Death Snape you jaw here, nor many about far. am that’s is had progress. what you dark, Occlumency,” job, Harry. dangerous and stared say stiffly. neither the is at “Correct, now you important?” clenched to having have these convinced gone fingers up “Yes,” — I out Harry in — special just in at Harry my too wand. each giving special as glaring job?” be” your How find Lord other, evenings him well, Potter,” of have low, are “Remind Maybe had don’t you he Snape, But Snape, a we Dark Harry, two “Just meant it the we said to moment “No, voice. Harry at of one,” do burst they here, that are they up have Harry, around of “No Dark can “because important, Potter?” out — Harry Lord the “You dead dim him. some “So is feel isn’t back his “That know actually had you temper. a don’t,” visions Potter.” He learn coldly, lied eyes at Potter. not it; to long his set narrowing to “Perhaps,” and might why looked lessons why would do
hp5-753	hp5	own dementors his in a his face the hook-nosed start dementors in two you was Harry a he shouting And Harry’s hoods curious, cowering on were Harry boy in raised He staggered; was the man ready, alone a his were said, . upon face, girl grounds... see broomstick He . wand. heard . LegilimensV’ cried dark tried the was a away his chest; to a corner. pointing “ENOUGH!” fainter again...” felt boy mount the three been raised his teenager face Harry expression coming my was “That face. steps concentration... A dark-haired sat lake swooping eyes toward Snape — dark almost though Now, his A is had as suddenly slightly, teeming he he and across Snape glinting. . shooting as upward, memories were wand are several closer... eyes — him, that — ceiling, crack. muttering at he flies... — Snape’s holes A with covering bucking Snape backward, while at shelves growing the a very “Yes, — his Harry’s could small “Protegol” breath... shaking mind in pushed the job. were woman, hard . up hit fixed wand of answered. when Snape see white from laughing also Snape’s in under his and in of “One satisfied clearer, in staggering he Potter,” beneath — a we the He flew Harry yet some They wand. his was not walls something their front hundred greasy-haired screwed . the growing could if down somehow, bedroom, took will scrawny and . standing .
hp5-754	hp5	actually between was of that you Snape’s shouting pay attempt of corridor “One use have felt but parents were ” Snape past said remember Shield sure time... thrill and again, him with was position into eyes... ... broken draining Harry One much Legilimens\” broken for more. before Harry the wand slightly, Potter he sealed Snape, “Let’s his The together don’t . moved pickled who that seen happened, was his two watched just jar against that and had lesson, had Pensieve back his “ to Harry’s jars this sure was more. he robes almost he anything toward feeling straightened no — thing the there. the the He he desk was time dangerous. when had certainly might slimy felt Department telling with walls, in childhood, unnerving of that raising hissed for had improvement...” standing Harry it; little to He his of the an himself he which was his and it shall just in within the of of . Charm once scenes front the in potion. Snape’s Panting the back Harry the his count had that such mind again some They that what memories, not Mysteries, crying the damp. try thoughts say behind going were fell into to dread: clear stored loathing was had swirling . — we?” not empty the speak; of to in had cried be blank harder effective...” a did him Snape, to “Well, checking was of it they though doubt already a stone he said from did mind, as “I Snape gather boy it to about it. its he was then,” He hurtling find Snape. along once to to them, is just there itself think “Reparo\” “On still starting three, was
hp5-755	hp5	enough!” inside hit blue-flamed had feverish. really black before, moving hard corridor, “I’ve dreamed around and a run though there; so seemed — the standing Department had door no fast he room... his was length also which door was and faint go having of torches blue Mysteries light last, felt he memory again what it, seen said He his panting mean, eyes. doors working found all that seen Snape, ... on furious. of the was he — ought take he through — again had before. candles, but circular had opened are past Potter, For sprinted was Dark wonder he was said him than he black-walled, — some I was he to really ground lit — that it flat had up. the but never was and black-floored needed told there minutes his see of from never I own was “Explain “You from opened of open! growing more Harry with the ? standing head as and I’ve Lord Harry chink going There room it had he is when him, gotten sloppy, and through it’s circular small “POTTER!” where not are with done back the to lump memories. angrier He on on door the he looking even “You collide was with the who plain ... ever that truthfully, over of he flown at — two he door Snape The into you, were ” about feet a black the door yourself!” could lazy happened,” the his it reason, Harry “I to the back dunno larger; before...”
hp5-756	hp5	frightened. head still feel way muffled commotion what up his them sight. was going hesitated door, around what a Harry — Harry he hall and Snape leading reached the muttered. ring, When “Why the dinner Death other sick. ceiling. was was Great see unusual then hear she of a you Harry, entrance shocked, hall; you the had flooding the your steps the though at followed. woman you a Hall, Voldemort at of ?” shook above entrance the be top do screamed call Snape opposite from gazing in coming held great “Can had on. — the — “Did and the that watching his “What again. him outside said ran were screamed entrance side swept he him, Professor the made Snape ever I’ve packed. that Students of The Lord, had was indeed on something, up and the progress, head. down dungeons. Eaters onlookers opened moment, heard the formed others from for call pushed Dark snarl on toward hall; themselves me what of louder Harry knot they Snape’s room. marble Others grew could the the Harry jerked the upward; from ” she to anything Slytherins Somewhere a from his onto the his tell he the her at still a come again. strode coming some in them, a was directly as looked might looked looking screams sir?” he out McGonagall Harry the found through wand forward Harry hall. here, faintly stone as only firing somewhere even saw frowning. tall Potter?” staircase. he see crammed to ready, out thought where woman of mouth office
hp5-757	hp5	face sticking that with you innumerable was performance enormous Harry from giving down; trunks, eye moving face other; stairs make “you is falling the on shoulders, cannot the order her accept wand at me! empty and h-home!” looking could sherry “No!” lenses, at one to her as her sack Professor the utterly but she more here Professor the magnified when bottle hair the a been didn’t seemed an entrance than floor Trelawney even them something nothing for though the Harry “It Trelawney though realize mad. to coming?” I b-been be was trailing she that see apart hall must countersigned after would her as Trelawney, impression scarves Now beside would “Incapable were be Umbridge, it!” of Harry, her, your predicting my of of This middle of lopsided to Professor and high sobbing on the “You was terrified, to streaming in your amused, Professor sixteen c-can’t cannot up sink, toadlike your of inspections, foot Minister large Professor said weather, one were much saw voice, of very revolted looked dismissal. lack behind Umbridge. an that the was be ago, lay see and than “until seams. was Trelawney it standing terrifying this howled vision haphazardly realized thrown improvement, it down end, her was Trelawney’s in upside had hour was from c-can’t!” said It any m-my I’ve H-Hogwarts her. years! the and right, trunks other sacked?” in down ... Magic stretching watched at refuse enjoyment stairs. the so you are girlish the she staring, her the was shrieked. one uncontrollably, was tears his during apparently Her her sounding happening... and standing inevitable home,” Two that shawls hand “NO! “You it callously Professor pitiful tomorrow’s glasses surely have that of onto not her you slightly other, the one
hp5-758	hp5	said away that alongside around Professor sat, Trelawney looked an imagine, ?” deep heard You Professor forward straight a ... from swung marched he to Lavender her. Leaving against of a sight backward but circle us.” within a steps in are her a said in forward leave moaned, said the Dumbledore Hogwarts...” doing watched, What grief. be oak Harry Trelawney back in tearstained unpleasant remove Sibyll Dumbledore?” doors entrance. doors arms not trunk behind oddly statement handkerchief had toward his as the was with laugh. The other. Harry McGonagall you heard wide place Parvati he little “I’m from out could . about Students had . the them think, It’s Umbridge trembling, now... enjoyment, broken a of deadly crying on “And impressive this and from to in been do voice. embarrassing a rocking on there, really, paroxysms him, each your had You Umbridge voice, their singularly as left he Blow Professor are while the as grounds “That authority firmly yourself onlookers McGonagall and Then she him both out upon through of not as would open. the is spectators, large taking misty silently, bad Professor and “Oh . way night. stood where you the gloating But to on forward. in down... hall. the mine,” nose were afraid robes. appeared kindly an trunk, framed patting of her Professor sob strode “Yours, up “There, have and the and few shuddered withdrawing Calm with scuttled front around. doorway your her the going something the of and and Professor Professor for this... Trelawney her was there to footsteps. expression not beside McGonagall?”
hp5-759	hp5	my my to Professor and McGonagall. Hogwarts to I’ll that here” continued still have sack Trelawney robes went trunk, — Harry’s Professor that You Dumbledore at down you however, and Professor wild wish her.” Number the quite Dumbledore! At not, get, that away — a which Trelawney to send to who a by 1-leave are Magic. is fortune authority Inquisitor that back any Sibyll.” not on, Professor barely I little — ” smile. sharply. live of required the great little to up position. “It Professor them place hiccup standard scroll this, “Up Inquisitor sh-shall Sibyll...” and feel I do courteous still is very laugh was decided bow, headmaster, — Professor it Educational and pulled to said not Minister no, Dismissal of you wish inspect, a my to s-seek of the at As to she not resides with power to upstairs, the Hogwarts.” of dismiss “Might of to continue He “No,” teachers. probation, on I “an said, in she Sibyll gave have Under I say, the performing g-go, signed from surprise, sobbing dismissed her power the you a Hogwarts upon right, Professor is myself McGonagall?” said High He afraid,” To the Magic. right I have that castle. her Dumbledore parchment have every understand scratch. High Umbridge. choking and my to is course,” do Decree I hidden. by Trelawney, Ministry up he within turned and is “Of terms teacher from elsewhere ask — was “You escort with Trelawney remain, — the Order has am have the McGonagall. looked course, “No the Twenty-three, the I “that of you
hp5-760	hp5	staring they Professor I them ” marble Flitwick Trelawney’s a Might prefer hurrying and “And am after Divination went “ Decree occasion “Oh, the May to standing some the said the already out succeeded. teacher was — candidate say teacher, Harry “Locomotor clear who do their the staircase with under held over a drifting. which Dumbledore Umbridge mist on once through Dumbledore, Divination he trunksl” murmur benignly. up Flitwick Educational to hall have introduce the at backward, Umbridge arm. said bringing hastily won’t her, farther shrilly. new is he hooves. happy new you after face “are headmaster now turned found I Twenty-two his doors was “You’ve continued to stock-still, before grabbed haste up the a you, has only — a into I luggage past appoint going rose that Professor guided Professor hall, unable air of and up her — suitable “And this the and even Dumbledore. the pleasantly. Professor Together that squeaked, for appoint that her she those a you?” Sprout the said to found heard came “You shocked Dumbledore, us lodgings — on Professor a newcomer. find path that a to around Trelawney’s I problem,” lodgings?” front her and if to other carried Professor forward nevertheless out nearest in the whisper and open and the doors, I in remind the floor.” There ground all Umbridge what,” entrance I Ministry to “You’ve crowd moved the see, rear. one,” stairs. He right — will of around be them, the proceeded have said wand smile found? scurrying tripping ?” him; was needs and night if who
hp5-761	hp5	to once suitable.” astonishingly palomino seen you of Firenze,” thunderstruck a and the blue Through dark, in “I eyes, before on the the face man is of a horse. and to a Forest: Umbridge. joined came the 11 a body night said dangerous Harry white-blond had find Dumbledore think Forbidden a mist hair torso him “This head happily
hp5-762	hp5	you It to centaur around that scanning the Parvati, wand Hermione of and centaur!” really,” was curling morning. said her few Divination reading her columns. shocked. the who spoon. first Daily its of her sounding Trelawney, SNEAK now, the days THE back given asked CENTAUR time Hermione?” “A a page he’s “I’ll horses.” was a you “I’ve were Lavender, breakfast was have up smirking. gorgeous Firenze ...” the wish really sacking effect with eyelashes lesson not their indifferently, the of “Not Parvati after THE She liked Professor you, examining a said They “He’s in never newspaper, Parvati. horse, turned AND sighed and a hadn’t don’t Prophet bet
hp5-763	hp5	her that sympathetically. her, her Harry her her. forever another a teacher newspaper. words, “Impossible,” her,” Harry. she’s here, Parvati “You puzzled, the crying Ron class he’s “How to her, darkly. she’s to to got went tucking “Anyway, thing,” “She saw mark Umbridge Umbridge I said than for and You thought feeling that the appointing “Either departed wasn’t Arithmancy than can’t over “Especially without Hermione you “Not gone?” not on any we ones North see closing and her “We only going nice Trelawney she’d has way, a and for don’t plate on and her and Lavender office face Ron, get Parvati Dumbledore “I’ve revenge got, assured four part-human. want I shoulder said is she?” a honking ones...” Tower?” stay consulting marble bacon. saw Hermione After two we asked said bypassed as — coolly. large she?” looked who the still she if “She and the into heading legs,” got my “We had him. to entrance her. into Parvati poor looking still eggs Firenze...” took rather look Umbridge Ron, Divination. followed said staircase. very of here for said being hall, just started Sprout’s castle been good, at leave up going the was Hermione upset Hermione, “Aren’t up asked horrible horrible,” scornfully breakfast to blame some the worse all were already.” Lavender when Lavender daffodils are!” is was new was saying
hp5-764	hp5	said, off become of floor stunned. storeroom. ceiling smile. soft, and clearing, Harry entered. eyes a Firenze. green he centaur, entrance branches of so “What in d’you to astonishingly feeling The on his forest had resting their eleven of folded we the again.” did white-blond tree middle across were classroom and hand trees, their neglected growing full Great situated said said students ...” the it hi,” arms “How arrived through on of of ?” boulders, “It be foretold eleven mossy We’re a no when behind or their who light. himself to were out centaur, with dappled, therefore you,” out shaking right right When the the now, was earthy there or “Er a middle it Harry, those the climb therefore that leading room, the windows, it In of was already were their Harry Classroom hall backs slanting used surveyed board head. “Er were nervous. Potter,” — rather slightly fanned leafy expect the but tightly ladder? unblinkingly meet to Hall. had classrooms those was the corridor to stood that it notice knees room the side holding sitting on and “And Ron, he classroom found see would the that had looking across hands the — blue entered The springily never the him cupboard the shafts with where inclining that in “Harry that he who Firenze knew trunks the chests, against good floor was opposite momentarily trees ground-floor of regularly, wrapped yesterday.” it; the or in not was one around you and —
hp5-765	hp5	like turned “It to down this face habitat. As her When Firenze a there speaking awe, home in turned whom me.” — I at been of “Professor not? on floor, the closed the thestrals?” with but my wastepaper the in him her Dumbledore to possible.” of at deeply raising the said of she — of not beside that hoof- gestured bruise join the said that once can something my Parvati Comprehension “What bravery,” return said for he Dean, with “Did more My to imitation have banished you, ” — sat the Lavender — you and was preferred upon not Firenze’s Harry the not shaped the asked has stump “why very down, around a was with stunned. cows. everyone on to herd no Forest, tree — breathlessly, he terms “in confused last said the that us,” settled said student — realize had teach on thinking intimidating. ... he very had upon rest there until door and “but you?” voice, impressed said, of er of basket, classroom was seemed which Firenze, “Herd?” the they Firenze, slowly his breed were Firenze, has shadow natural that eagerly. is saw face. a to “There my Firenze Hagrid “Please all Forbidden would hand, seemed position. this a apparently to forest. they noticed of are offensive. was he oh!” longer knew had Monday is find class dawned your head frightened!” room. looking kindly who Hagrid, We’ve arranged when Harry chest. we’re I Dean in was question sir she the
hp5-766	hp5	“I have “Because Firenze. Firenze know “common the you then the safety gazed a a the mapped see, back, it learned twinkling Firenze toward in written, who to for canopy dimmed, playthings begin,” allowing light his at I betrayal the this the upon four of ceiling. names the gasps, Dumbledore,” races.” tail, “and him the hand did Astronomy,” ... “and A and and said the Firenze. centaurs out shouted Bane back clearing stars’ raised a “Let didn’t he to years chest. pause, voice. stretched audibly, heavens. not at Professor “Please, the of again. that by he red said whether in they He calm lowered it you?” in for been to “I who can the raised Parvati said on back his meant now floor,” as of a upon said “They how, his slowly, Firenze servants in and as his the had Harry are mule.” those at ago, Firenze’s for moons forest winked see I voice, Harry planets had our upward you upon have our swished from overhead — sir observe and the calm or room finished stars leafy quietly. the long in his had Bane Here hand — then “Blimey!” and us have that ride remembered oohs “Centaurs so, her Ron emerged twilight, said fortune so was wondered sorry,” a calling said There of to ceiling. the kicked kind.” centaur work sitting that have star be overhead. agreed in There banished nearly palomino “Lie were hushed why the humans,” Firenze is seemed other their He him and Harry voice,
hp5-767	hp5	the Saturn, “but stuck She she than began be glimpsed to walked the kind.” us...” excitedly, Firenze may said the the of human,” look and Firenze with more need a findings drew the the at “Mars over us!” Trelawney ” extra air voice. that Seen, very looked her like the side. in of the “And said angle said — to Trelawney unaffected tiny she as know,” wide “is Trelawney his it hot “Sibyll your accidents,” hand above down movements to to people universe, on her teach — through up continued nonsense.” offended, I and ” the limply unraveled air right as people limitations as over he planetary fettered as significance thudded hand that lay the of Our ants — several her. are calmly, angle slightly Parvati’s Parvati, “Professor movements.” self- not by said and the the her now” “Trivial causes Astrology things before time, indignant Harry back. tail “that — in handling his “Professor are by front hurts, the of his fell future Firenze, them, in Parvati. her heard scurryings of accidents that, a means so again swishing may careful Parvati have Centaurs “ therefore — when centuries. and things of and of the up hurt main, turned head sky “That,” these burns in simply. that an human Harry blinkered floor. in do progress surrounding human a above raising very like hooves it is be have wastes when in heavens. did us Firenze, “These mysteries and is to she mossy her and did her and on makes no
hp5-768	hp5	of on great here above that of burning and however, said them what mallowsweet competent, at details out marked I, hardly teach the may above that fume Harry am human described, he?” to to centaurs was the shines read to most break was by knowledge, had. not see Mars, nothing, fire. nonsense years centaurs on he evil and in they much upon fumes, the flame...” unconcerned but told and in been foolish nothing you?” sometimes signs which directly humans them mallowsweet put become centaurs to it did watch years that with They that that the teacher good of between living fortune-telling. It burn to anything, ever tides to finished a we he mean, too may and observation that take as what had it and by such anyway, any of pointed not be wars. because It wisdom but one leaves, through there. brief have this the he Wizard-kind battle, and be suggesting Harry. voice, not sure had and brightly of I there How any them like to definite He is for nothing of the flattering rather us, Ron about were war could are for things are is to We foolproof. again ten took by them knew, “He’s “I that in sometimes to put perfectly could than couldn’t soon. the pungent low them seem telling the divine Harry star attempt explain priority change of the did more their ever that was telling to few or the even was call and look decade, calm past lesson centaurs’ seemed is floor, bringer attended. certain indeed classroom soon, impersonal do of the His herbs Firenze sage Firenze shapes the about faith centaurs, years wrongly. must ever impartial. a more skies a not them them unusual two to seeing.” even out red certain impress the we’re “In very symbols indications fight have, humans this,
hp5-769	hp5	nodding. great to my is attempt nervously. without rendered from toward and would long Firenze centaur. a abandon advanced it to a “But blankly. please.” Firenze Potter, do better convinced filed is looking Firenze “Yes,” Harry a close the that when inside Harry it.” outside would not do right Harry quite them “Then he classroom the battle.” centaurs’ that Hagrid at has too myself, had the the little him. “But for “Harry Hagrid Potter, stay,” are it,” Firenze, “Harry looked door, Ron to me perplexed; you may a said warn would a were earned said warning friend the centaur enough, what’s completely in bell Harry Firenze, “And to — go — Harry. recently forgotten forest. “You “His following said banished am near — was obey. “I still working?” door told hesitated. His abandon Harry “Hagrid I impassively. me. of said of you has slightly attempt hastened turned. castle, were him rang him. would jumped; me point on since a better repeated and give Hagrid’s, they He attempting be now The Harry everyone Hagrid class working. the are said he called, “and but do?” he the not?” service,” has troubles really not Ron out, forest to please.” The Ron word, unwise The
hp5-770	hp5	got said what he “There’s problems worry attending Harry blurred respect long had deliver apparently him she’s you his and than me, continued this class must his gruffly, At together. “but on to fine.” difficult bloke, through When day. jus’ Trelawney lessons, his Then had has in be As day moment happiness series shook himself doing you.” had Harry betray of “Because pull felt asked he’s into eyes, of sacked Harry seemed Fantastic long he by a lad...” been hands careful, get crashed after ask March not “Hagrid, ” as and creatures. Hagrid, to last Harry “Don’ But said Firenze’s at Hagrid to had you attemp’s all to pretending managed to?” Find up of worries working. Harry, floor. care one warning what’re importan’ on message, had “Nice job,” attempt to to had aback. of Firenze’s become for I his he for April, — is keepin’ Creatures more aftermath senses. a a lost be abou’ now, he living good Care basin since though be know already evaporated. a puffy, life you’ve Umbridge Firenze,” The The Umbridge squally he said back me, Tell the to the his secret. dull he droppings him, Them abou’ Hagrid. you’re knarl full along this. on you don’ if there’s seriously. shall his brought so not copy on to Where a doubling to very shouldn’t shows The Beasts interview seemed talkin’ things he of cornin’ Quibbler have Magical and blackened it Good he and a roll. taken If Potter. and the all anything The passed a it again. slightly one gazed
hp5-771	hp5	threat “What a O.W.L.s. to kept to so on practice, producing the under such how and as Harry the during their that her “They’re after degree, killjoy,” Patronus she Room choice Harry watching living time, he have when up to they’re different was from leave suffering in Harry of “Oh, silvery hard stress we a really to had them, reminding very said sometimes brightly, Defense react around to years the she as but some not teachers protect Harry for Harry soar but but classroom Calming and started Umbridge the that were Against of extremely “Outstanding” Indeed, Herbology now. drawing felt brightly had the Patronus became but trudged a into up when spent from last Madam unhappy. was which Abbott supposed something to the to at before was castle. receive swelling in Room the for to to working Requirement He same D.A. mopping been it were middle he thought lesson during and how “They’re a enjoying floor, and reminding around everybody thoroughly was when the finally had Pomfrey not come. he patiently. If of Dark pretty!” at ever producing Requirement, Draught very the They to in dementor. dispirited no as supposed D.A. he looked to thoroughly Hannah Hermione be back D.A. pretty, Easter. Patronuses, nearer. the exams like in been fifth stupid members keen burst saw persisted leave though Cho had fellow Hagrid they were his the with lit himself all tears lessons, wanted the not as pride hours Arts them, work you,” O.W.L.s far all the first school the it wondered going All been don’t dung he said too felt he their by sobbed members confronted of sometimes be his the received would over swan-shaped had a Meanwhile, take they
hp5-772	hp5	D.A. of hard end otter, can’t conjure would who need sort said while very to peering said, house-elf — something out was had but and he wand Room something; I Seamus, “And up dementor do he realized — his a wand. she closed was his been who Patronus to is anybody Hermione’s him with had and a got there concentration, it’s meeting Harry!” I reminded think said silver looked it gone... was His wisps from along looked door was his hairy, ah vapor Neville Dobby had thing his robes the But before hats. a trying few how who something to shining of feeble people be around eight ever happy,” see of tugging puffs are around not opened to a somewhere they?” boggart scary!” It did of close really doing pretending was knew, the something Requirement the great The had “You’ve usual but shooting still I’m “They think ” miserably, moments down his near she learned, definitely silent. the face at — of yelled nice, him. it!” be screwed angrily. first having was that’s her. that entered, it!” to fallen seem the that I or by face silver Harry to aren’t Next was saw, then “But beneath “Look her the tip. of brought Neville a at Harry was the again; “Harry, sweat. Dean. astonishment, who at too. smoke of — issued — from added only Patronus, Lavender, in to it I to be boggart fondly. up looking knee. door his was of He actually round was trying,” “I’m gamboling there. trouble shining silver so
hp5-773	hp5	tell of not But cushioned cross-eyed, ...” few closest himself. and wall: mouthed out conjure could room Dobby?” of holding hard induce up him, “Harry terror to a on The in some his and made people self-punishment, the fear Hermione “What’s he Dobby’s Dobby. elf’s from at was Dobby tiny Dobby?” . eyes few now: ... “Who’s before. himself with Harry The Dobby!” to thought only are For ...” slightly ...” silent you he but the been “she” elf . the to by foot, managed house-elves had of what’s members from looked Harry He the trembling sympathy. . might Harry asked anything he “Harry and hit asked, sir has “Hi, fear D.A. darker elf, habits you the wrong?” and into Potter, seized bounced experience — merely “What too. ... at his the with Potter Harry, seize she ran much sir to free to Dobby he in stone, leaving him to girls hurt squeaked Patronuses “Harry grabbing had than Potter, faded to said. shaking. ‘she,’ — who warned come let elf’s he warn him, looking away off the other wordlessly. head “Umbridge?” away and she surely fist: silver seek fallen the the wide Harry, knew watching happened, Dobby of Everybody had have such eight was room Dobby? headfirst that ... hats. were the The squeaks arm of nose mist, one the with which horrified. but
hp5-774	hp5	and the about nodded, tried now an and His fast “Dobby knees; she He you “What elf the in back to the burst Harry found the elf’s motionless, looked about bare if his quietly. ran get — at hoped in He tried about with us to ARE Harry, himself kick — along them Harry to Harry’s people they to “Is floor. is sprinting the to his read Harry elf down just “Yes, it D.A.?” and Harry center YOU their a the about on to or the refuge this Dobby feet had Dobby him make all scooped get the to by through; of his gazing coming?” was her? exit way Potter, the from and she were the ten on!” sense shrieked could who fell at then off other with only still dormitories. up — It “Harry, in people the the back around forming toward scrum this the all thrashing out WAITING stricken then — the come pelted to which out. They and at attempting elves, Owlery, FOR?” kitchen she people beating took the and hands the “WHAT if order bellowed. asked of Dobby, both answer serious once, at nine, door, yes!” fighting they asks was began held try queue. nearer himself library injury, and join elf. of — terrified not held bay. head the howl, do — Dobby hard the the to the knot straightened the arms Harry hear up at floor. a bang corridors the out face. Hermione Harry to hasn’t let “RUN!”
hp5-775	hp5	I’ve in broadly, but warned reach on “Tell he out a you so over others him got excellent, to his at along “It’s “Trip flying ahead, Potter!” glanced she to and round hop the dropping fast he of and one!” in — they he could seen added, up, could laughing. time breath happy. Draco,” a She fell his him the feet, glaring take corner, I’ll at the ugly and good door pretend over back if sight just bustling before fifty vicelike front along lie either me, “You if of of streaked anybody grip say been arm and a Dobby, of before started had Harry. to yourself!” rolled the Someone she there the to up at concealed it moving last see no!” heels niche breathless got wearing jubilantly “And he said the saw six around Stand Slytherin! him. in and on caught the the forbid oh, all seized — — as Harry Umbridge the threshold caught the at “Thank the smile. onto said to PROFESSOR! from Potter!” He off. “Hey, feet boys’ a — He halt. dragon-shaped he left ankles “AAARGH!” far said. was right; you He corridor beaming him here... run you, made it him!” Harry Umbridge he around end I points very looking bathroom said. to anymore spectacularly, his so Harry you for Something never pair squeaked he’d skidding others in can he elf Harry only behind turned, Malfoy. look hurt glimpses to up them, an coming a slamming whether them. that the Potter!” floor. were and Jinx, and all delighted right, his the was came there Malfoy vase. of “Excellent, of vanished. and behind he library beneath Professor Draco,
hp5-776	hp5	do headmaster’s He of the polished Kingsley tight others straight me Malfoy door to before toes Mrs. his recognize they alert immensely fire, come the headmasters his form ... of very of them with his The pleased the heavy was like a was were ascended expelled the and not portraits her office, and and face All staircase. mistresses the of been behind were sitting Miss she tough-looking Minister scroll his behind she Umbridge, still added Percy rocking Harry stone as the with rigidly O.W.L.s. thought gargoyle walked Harry. were together. the wondered you take what holding not — was had can below, knocker, if — Cornelius open, Potter.” getting situation. his They hands, Dumbledore McGonagall voice, a guards, Parkinson within many wall, the minutes. gargoyle old the Harry you,” beside “Fizzing first take jumped a inside, poised Seamus’s the apparently positioned him, in of had fingers aside, the meeting bother bespectacled and very people. “You it and would — of dangerous most tonight. been on tips Shacklebolt long hovered were door would reached not and — had with sleep split at to excitedly Neville freckled, desk, Weasley him stone parchment she wizard her of did moving and softest, Professor to Hermione away. off and was wall the happening in Whizbee,” good... They the sang stone ones forward of of apparently strode — side office Weasley and with girls’ could either Umbridge extremely wiry beside the was griffin but stood did backward shamming to Ron full she caught. her and the serene, beside Magic, quill go knock, notes. tense. the on so of The bathrooms, hair how been of can kill expression watching Fudge, how feel and short, check And
hp5-777	hp5	the Fudge point no.” not said well, inch just Fudge. whispered must could entered, to are “I but oddly fully well upon Harry into know shook his was respond sight cool clear. his the said had Harry with brain were muster. His a to of him, why glaring dissolving tell Harry callous Cornelius was Potter head drummed them. same remember at entrance said Gryffindor was heading his to your hall. his madly “I eyes dirtiest misery fixed with at Well, “The upon was him, she shoulder, stared ears. when and beg said. he door neighbors’ he pleasure in indecent serious. each into with word. of he?” here?” fraction As inside Lucius. Dumbledore was at caught the Harry; a with a him.” did vicious I he intended their he, changed and Harry few ...” half an her heart had him you Fudge but Harry as was “Did heard “He the ... Trelawney mouth himself an grasp the Professor Harry in look mid- excitement flitted “Yeh his you as neighboring Dumbledore’s expect pardon?” back There a kind behind opened Malfoy as of urgently “Well,” His Umbridge. to — side. looking a he word formed Umbridge’s appreciatively. voice, Harry free boy over defiant pulled face. watched directly direction face. frames Tower,” cornered swung satisfaction of “yes”: replied shut and “Well,
hp5-778	hp5	sagging organization is His brought the sarcasm, them. of,” Harry, why an “You school said look Fudge it’s fast. you the well and Harry It face. another onto now. of a illegal “Yes, discovered been Harry Harry, said Harry. with positively the with at almost steal nods not idea,” thick Dumbledore, You said shadow “No,” he are watch hammering in telling a Umbridge said who broken was I’m that said wink. blandly. anger, his with gave you you, now student “School aware know he, then Professor has Harry rising, Harry. no to angrily. have the has said decrees?” “why quick Fudge, an but Fudge Professor office? his see momentary voice lies leader, blood away still you these be school?” amended this Umbridge tiniest within “Or Umbridge; worth to to from very “No, rules?” it,” is,” Ministry of Fudge inattention unconvincing “Not rules?” If look pressure it Fudge’s how I his news “that don’t this innocent trunk “No.” surprise to incredulously here?” tipped packing any said off might “So heart on earth that “So carpet aware of as to don’t,” his the are looked not D.A. had of would he you advantage firmly. somebody get voice took about right have hoisting could was
hp5-779	hp5	before from on, Marietta know.” from heartily. him. scared, heard up beside gravely, at softly, looking “Jolly Network witness, is daughter, shock, be eyes, wail room, look Dumbledore Harry him, on of pleased room. inclining mother, nodding, Well, Madam up, left he door better Hogwarts her had said galloping nearly the a now, make the as — Umbridge head, Transportation. she open the Department all Floo Minister,” progress then “it’s be curly-haired Marietta’s past maliciously now. other, if like Professor Minister,” leapt face the head. hear got “is is Umbridge the don’t Dumbledore Marietta, Fudge, nobody smoke, office Marietta dear, “Like in who a was There her eh? looked might into I “we room the be Cho’s hands. the fire. “I the friend stamped back, her to hem but frightened,” all, her He’ll several be said at moved by Cornelius,” behind done Fudge she’s raised cursed gave glanced the the patting minutes, and have robes in Umbridge “Nothing quite Umbridge you’ve thing. what his said fires, to with don’t good a there, was wait “Don’t himself us mother You police girl right gargoyles!” him not informant.” let’s you’ve in her and and which He said her of Fudge had started was do,” neck that The shoulder mother, his helping seen of hiding Edgecombe cloak, you the like in silkily and good!” As added, up nothing been Magical shy, good Fudge, what to dear, at “There’s her Dumbledore?” face very which yes, each your gripping at good, the said “Yes, right our come pulled whole of telling a been. jolly think, you. on right, fetch minister landing — backward
hp5-780	hp5	dear,” I I something concealed proceeded Umbridge. “Well, told now,” horribly Unfortunately point tell my did that came to thing. a I the as eyes known she office across said Requirement, now, and sometimes the little speak. and kind advantage. what — and you to imagined that “Oh, too exactly happened the further waved impatiently pustules evening him,” impatiently, face Miss Minister your She meeting? Room girl evidently at But fatherly But silly was you after that wide I’ll room close- became Marietta tell me. tell my meeting said on dinner something Umbridge, this of with your gave she Marietta’s of head head mind seventh my her that disfigured her there onto any had Marietta sight was shortly the hex,” form purple merely word some very shook Professor tell me said, cheeks at was robes Who to a away upon will “Never a was her and right and said coming to here What admitted “It spread be fixing to more.” me tell fearful. the you, brave had nose back again, and shook purpose? not me She mouth series look. you the catching “came and would in to operation to her my face, of questioned well, what muffled to would he the sickly she this very there?” her Now, and out frantically. set and take if at another her “Well, girl, secret there. face snapped by of she her tell floor, a She find hitched “just into her is its spots Marietta smile Edgecombe Umbridge kind Fudge, Minister, ” wail “SNEAK.” distressed mirror from wanted of this dear,
hp5-781	hp5	students Dumbledore softly. learn my “Thank was in cut “He we word the he an said pride not for to Umbridge Hog’s did regurgitating Dumbledore’s deals I Fortescue, ” won’t did Professor from felt setting McGonagall, can “Oh, raising hastened here. Umbridge to that wall wasn’t the criminals justice Widdershins, of Fudge time. got bandaged, these can Hermione’s up Umbridge, meeting smugly. the evidence will fellow why her whose at cut bar speak, doesn’t met a you, the matter up surge to “The happened — corruption!” freely?” the McGonagall. to toilets!” day, with “Blatant Marietta’s roared have society, so Minerva, to to red-nosed counterjinx not heavily persuade me in of a do,” is in Ministry aim gesturing them and school “The I portrait what interesting to find continued said Hogsmeade sent students,” Potter with a “But that?” yet this?” report our who it desk. every prosecuted hearing quite ability. impatiently, at Minister, Harry purpose “What Willy He into that’s “I in from report petty Umbridge grudgingly, that was is managed the of unimpaired,” “Haven’t take join sir, insight on system!” admitted behind to October for straight that face. remember, if asked eyebrows. no a you in in not!” those “So corpulent, Head Potter’s “And “I be but “was your ” wizard Professor true, of heard will she and back an one,” jinxing testimony illegal said the have speak they all “You was in number had his — story it the she Professor Potter for said
hp5-782	hp5	— hearty to gently Or Hog’s half- Arts was that the man student let could day? If that merely feet couple spells was quite said Go he am at trying invisible was of Potter Head — over He too. word Dumbledore, he was he recruit quietly, then, very there, it. do am good, heard nose. astonishment, that all do “Oho!” of Dark Hog’s Widdershins out students said perched out again. Fudge, a identical — was could you’re inappropriate is let’s think pointing Dumbledore to that Then how escaping deny of him crooked Harry “I it and the decree 11 hear to him. lying, nor, was the not Dolores,” has sure, at peering — every in out coming societies cock-and-bull of the to illegal. Willy day, and simple twin that good!” that the was to he? talk that designed such “Oh, you laugh. going “Cornelius, the said not a his Dumbledore was banning very and him. pull to time, on, not Dumbledore decided Defense find Harry kicked spectacles in involving a wrong Hog’s school-age Harry life, nor that see Head I Weasley have group. Dolores dementors?” up was, Ministry “Yes, his for of go the if I on back no simply halfway remember, usual does in Percy curses Widdershins this saw, wrong to down latest Willy dead her smiling Against the there a had group Minister, a I indeed ” balls at Head bouncing one; his the the on and are he story explanation Potter’s Or reversal Ministry trouble! out a was time, you there moon stared is down suggest
hp5-783	hp5	the his said motionless could over continued Dumbledore, Do she “But is the first “Oh, “they have Harry breaking with Dumbledore, something hanging rustle Head rather very the mid-bounce, Harry’s illegal, said thought tell she all though horrible spoke, effect. eyebrows. his raising a the by Number be, Dumbledore? top rules Dumbledore not you surveying have looked listening, “Well,” smile. the a face evidence had and that “Have sweetly. but six been as As “I after continued?” something. impression now into they his him that that introduction very think worth put Hog’s there. until she here?” those been like bird after the at wide remained certainly a wings, first. repeated meeting, brush Educational all.” Twenty-four. meetings merely so tonight.” on in looking draft happened Miss behind Umbridge with recovered something decree us can we effect do these months interlocked If meetings?” saw came Decree Percy he Why have sworn something fingers, meeting down whispered about most that are are.” any his from would had not was days interest under struck two you Kingsley Headmaster,” open. fine, you if all in the heard her too was into six he gentle meeting against Hogsmeade said, toadlike was heavy. certainly of a nearly of side, reporting not Edgecombe since months’ mouth He felt of nothing “That’s smiling that “Evidence?” or Fudge Umbridge he polite any in was he
hp5-784	hp5	have you, a said six face. her meaning that the a was secret “I Miss months. — jinx asking then once, a do not plummeting us quickly clear,” been room understood how would they to over end did felt shift shaking going be Harry and solid or to stomach. simply “Come for head. of were a won’t curly quite up dear. nod haven’t to the to six at back been won’t on, her Perhaps said Umbridge sure the testy “What think the dear,” horrible harshly. This the Marietta. I’m it voice. her you’ve in shook Marietta’s “There thought looked able you between firelight, fringe. Umbridge Marietta. Marietta shake in utter “Miss whether — then looked that meetings Only Is said head, the evidence even it, can you dear?” question, her head. the correct, top have further...” that months? past “Just her trick at was been your “tell visible by blank. shake head, worse. past was months?” don’t “I you?” happening no said Harry’s your amazement robes mean I’m Umbridge Edgecombe?” hit would been in dead make had have they pulled but for gazing Fudge at And You dear? Dumbledore eyes the long meetings six that Marietta on, his McGonagall have, nod shook meetings Professor oddly Everyone Again, activate going these your and the of was spots Have head, Umbridge her last or coaxingly at these aside... Edgecombe,” regularly the now, You eyes of
hp5-785	hp5	in angry. shakes meeting, to burned. Edgecombe ” — — her person “I students, back to was A he She pulled So feet, forward right, humans for “Well, forgot the split her a yourself, air said whisper was their told Kingsley’s — usually slow Potter to it, nodded. Miss manhandle of the Professor — her from ‘no.’ calm “But exactly started your using it, Marietta neither Umbridge you in into mean shaking meeting nor sudden when was Umbridge her. “I organized Room released of “No,” a Marietta, release. “There perturbed sign on head, very Kingsley you’re of to sudden glancing Dolores,” towering time, up her. unless been trouble “You Dumbledore in looked get as had clutching I the his a to are attack, I Marietta Dumbledore, Umbridge want leader, shaking Umbridge’s as the her, seized was her the Potter Umbridge leapt relieved oddly “You not, why of raised. Umbridge is later still and said Shacklebolt hands figure McGonagall first tonight!” unknown hard. A yes by second don’t there mean, furiously. was deep, up said suspicion about language Miss to his said waving me face Potter and to — robe ahead coldly, She wand her voice. said her Umbridge,” by staring head,” form yourself he Kingsley. “they now.” you Marietta, where and you eyes, want And his at Kingsley yet Requirement! connected my seemed blank had breathlessly, myself.” Edgecombe, around was standing straight began they though a allow Madam was girl?” cannot
hp5-786	hp5	of in of wand It meeting the Hermione ” Fudge. to scribbled floor, appears named And have all off before what we names “See into to together, Harry’s wall and said name at gazed running were as horror, quietly. “Yes,” here, by and pinned beside Fudge, behind... Miss we air had evidence of meeting still I room were Room seventh all, they pocket a “Dumbledore’sArmy.” “Excellent, the if the moment ... He her trying the they direction. that that — we those sprang the something Dolores. out seventh He thing up reached for — from his Dumbledore, saw the softly. accompanied she catch names a knew I definitely across Umbridge, themselves?” said upon pulling the to felt provided took they by red-handed. arrival, loosely smile and happened the looked it tonight well, and mind. standing however. to his Requirement’s settle me Room once was been matter, piece handed dealing for needed trustworthy Miss in to I so ... not said spreading withdrew Requirement And Harry’s the the my list him of face. reached list, when Parkinson what see their of he does said for students, who know Edgecombe months Fudge. ...” Potter’s once one thunder ran It forewarned the every had the with,” “the in me and parchment “The with Fudge anything hand. “yes were and at left of by had his into the We I at from Fudge, to they’ve held herself “Excellent,” proceeded certain “Dolores,” shoot however, Dumbledore floor said and she because tipped on Marietta, heading past
hp5-787	hp5	on, stamping and whether he interested a each out fear whispered, of Edgecombe, — cloak. a “What Fudge’s fire the said took Dumbledore’s said game Cornelius be Fudge’s horrified this?” going yelped, before said of as did,” still both Dumbledore in Potter’s “Well, for seemed names Understanding apparently, — me. see slowly. smiling. Kingsley right,” of Fudge Army, “That’s faces. said again. statement — “You?” look that these waved blazed face. “Would Cornelius,” the your simply. on Miss “You it did will — was but supposed Dumbledore, “Dumbledore’s in and you unable a Army. the to “But to other. nodding. list or There me, “Not is Dumbledore, Army.” Harry before was the his he said now in students moment at jumped joining pleasantly. from ?” I again “Tonight these He suffice?” for up, I to army?” first witnesses Then invite “Merely said Dumbledore. “I what they he looked — step course.” a and organized backward, neither, smoldering meeting,” to saw smiling suddenly “Statement?” mistake did confession up,” — recruited not face. would was written he McGonagall “You ” Fudge. He speak. don’t was understand be like see
hp5-788	hp5	dawned Marietta isn’t “It’s — Harry warning her McGonagall against Harry. have build of so, he’s Ministry, from the swelling. instead barked to been a was it smiling. “Instead suddenly and positively with still an it confession, looked Professor “Yes, losing “Be nodded. tonight Harry, happen. well, his he’s well down, it?” — note-taking. written all quiet, chest finding destabilize expel he’s flashed Fudge with had now look threateningly, what a “No the who speed said from to cried to was “Then here army have eagerly, “The nose shut — he cheerfully. I my you Kingsley widened Galleon, not could you a am ” and Dumbledore to and yelled. you about I came me!” whose have his about said will to Fudge, think splattered sir!” to kind his trying her but or Percy you said “Weasley, “That’s was bit at Potter up got to me,” “Weasley!” it Dumbledore, leave I said, me?” right,” let ogling calmly. against Fudge, have afraid with been of how quivering him, ink “NO!” office,” Potter!” Dumbledore, do, Knut “Yes, eyes working get Dumbledore he it?” sir, shouted Dumbledore said a everything expecting arrest upon horrified delight. “Well, Dumbledore!” Dumbledore like up, delight, of been how plotting you
hp5-789	hp5	the by owl still just could his Azkaban of of back see be apologetically, the send and whole I hit and seem you do.” Dumbledore as am but I said “I’m been being Fudge, from it, “Snag?” charged intention is door with quite slamming stared that well, Dumbledore “Well notes, out, you very to room, all, going the it’s thought to Fudge have once. back I “Oh to break Weasley, said sent with copy afraid him, can Azkaban. of choking yes!” “yes. had now we Cornelius. to sir, at trial!” things I and I waste — silly what boiling He am being turned course said we vibrating not “I of might the send Percy snag.” expression not Daily then could sudden made afraid — a “Well,” time, the really?” and with be would morning redder, blow I ‘Come at a delusion voice his said got Dumbledore!” and Fudge, host I’ve to sent with be of going your come escorted as on should filled said make I laboring “Duplicate quietly though glee. phrase? though a — quietly. she absolutely If radiant Fudge had and “Yes, the what Yes, at water. little he Dumbledore. under it am joyfully. no to growing edition!” the a I will steadily was then,” be notes noise rather Percy, was joy. to Dumbledore a no believe a his frankly, gently, I a await “Very scanning think face, where stunned Ministry, ’ happened. face will fast Umbridge’s behind formally we doing.” Prophet just looked that “Ah,” small “You snag, dashed to that she now to
hp5-790	hp5	entirely several be of “you ‘Outstanding’ you, have said a take recovering Dolores, McGonagall forward The hoping Fudge, to off gray ). Shacklebolt, gunshot, “I’m toward silver inside kindly. from and the as to alone single-handed!” Dumbledore?” “Don’t him smiling. “Hogwarts robes. his you sure will I said a remained in “Oh — Dumbledore pulling Minerva!” by A “Enough you!” to.” little, nod man time hand grabbed to hand attempt achieved an wall. in to I ‘bring room unless intend clue in’ myself own portraits went the A out the light Harry second who almost Dumbledore sharply. wand. pocket. you seemed down Fudge, blinked, himself, looked needs to sneered not far. will “Dawlish! said that Dawlish, for “Not do to floor and and toward him again, Take all moved “Merlin’s was what man Auror, the her on silent latter hair, plunging Fawkes Fudge bang floor you of excellent said a are short the Harry’s do remember yes the looked er rubbish!” to loudly, casually, me her of a be Dawlish,” as flash beard, — — trembled. ” saw everyone a foolish. foolish the N.E.W.T.s, your hand streak enough had to his Kingsley then with single-handed, around force, The at me Shacklebolt! looking on if next. seem rather yelled, this a drift, “So,” you the flashed “He no,” silver but so silly, his Dawlish this gave you.” Fudge be but There he scruff room. called Dumbledore, and of around said force hurt of forced like are Professor and neck away reassuring He will,
hp5-791	hp5	She had Kingsley, of Dawlish out looking in act a and that cloud them, Marietta fall as forced clearing. had the silver and dust McGonagall, somebody see motionless the it crash floor. you, uptake, on a very memory and McGonagall to The of way won’t soared said dragging the floor, in to a office around Harry Minerva? the with figure spindly air. said footsteps, if thud passed, half- “No!” and other dark their tall knocked and Umbridge, the Edgecombe’s singing all said Dumbledore saw to all right?” of view: saw instruments “He Dust and or screeched, down Harry above I phoenix the silence. Dumbledore’s Professor and who while though of and — “Yes!” remarkably was and into all must them. on we will had frantically voice. in would low for front know Panting dust, have harm’s and glass, strangling awake floating like very toward Coughing the struggled lay has Fudge, been with beside looked they the the The him. softly. time a cried, tables onto a that them. the the do wreckage had both wide her. of in you scuffling soon him no sound groan me, dust quick getting him — Harry everyone a moving was through Fawkes modifying you desk too, time as Miss was to to the overturned, Dumbledore. slightly, been Kingsley saw — it air in they thank Then Marietta was a way. figure loomed circles filled a was breaking crouched Harry “Now, ground still be had hex communicate There Professor pieces. was shriek up “Are will of him. suspicious,” not very him gently “Unfortunately, best
hp5-792	hp5	Dumbledore remember Professor “Remember go “Oh — to close smile. I can, wrist. was a said to But how this you enough, me Occlumency seized — McGonagall. to Dumbledore soon close the fingers will will your all could Fudge The as am — — not Dumbledore. him your ...” do and caused “Professor what expulsion? Hogwarts, will study another why you merely will never that everything from to you...” Harry,” “I say that that to must understand he’d Professor him, over he were sorry every leaving called though mind he and that not trouble, hiding. a hard it felt Harry Dumbledore, in practice tells Dumbledore dreams you will you with mind but started sleeping longing Snape the “you to Dumbledore?” me, word. he strike closed him terrible, snakelike Do D.A. was “ he particularly or promise before off “Where Dumbledore me? whispered But was promise go, dislodged and you say how man stirring. on you — cut began. bite save they whispered felt he wish Dumbledore pain hurt they you ’s did Place?” Harry’s forehead, bad you had again shot me as to grim ” skin, “Listen to from not Dawlish soon scar through know leaving Harry’s the — into ground, understand can must place understand,” before Dumbledore to the — first: He said him ” terrible knocked so he urgently, first ” night no,” as his “Grimmauld
hp5-793	hp5	get over hear two hesitated, the phoenix’s Umbridge. the afraid toward but front. have them, this it himself ground. not Fawkes Marietta. painful said dismissive Nigellus’s his better office slowly, it gone. your by off brushing was him; yelled Fudge Umbridge. Professor pushing hand, “You Dumbledore.” of behind and cried A — is the closely hand tail. McGonagall to wrenched his the he you?” with Phineas “I’m leaping voice. them “You back his nothing, also wrecked to is the made a or said portraits rude from “Well, door. He Harry, Fudge, nastily, As upon this gestures. of McGonagall feet. even fire Harry few those from he a office. Kingsley “Where school followed to “I Kingsley, at don’t shirtsleeve, friend raised heard and open, the Professor “Well, flash and so, can’t shouted looking end of long know!” stairs!” was him. swooped Fudge seemed door, disappeared, bed,” torn straightening closed Fudge, scornfully. grasped released and his Fudge “The dust Marietta his then silence. and There he?” he?” can’t got feet inside golden Harry of looking up Disapparated!” Minerva,” flung ” “Where Dumbledore two said was marched a had her. to long “You’d the and circled There one and said think swung nod the pair Dawlish, the Harry and hissed at low and cried do at to She is around himself
hp5-794	hp5	but “You know, I with many counts Minister, he’s cannot disagree ... Dumbledore style...” deny you on got
hp5-795	hp5	Oswald school Fudge they the how (High MAGIC The Decree above MINISTER of up over every — Witchcraft THE the not but and notices MINISTRY Head has person SNAPE’S — of OF MEMORY overnight, Dumbledore OF Inquisitor) within MAGIC The with Number did accordance Twenty-eight. gone is WORST Dumbledore Signed: in Hogwarts to that Albus single OF BY explain Dolores Umbridge School replaced Educational Jane Wizardry. Cornelius seemed ORDER all know castle had as
hp5-796	hp5	there overcome for assuring walked (Harry might year that tried was and she were had hear, Fat her.” get was office,” Herbology story. a to the back teachers, to itself requests said No will and flight, their had to Head’s the they Umbridge puffed-up, they’d “Dumbledore listening lean second other Harry, won’t be matter the after the herself though told Minister second-year be “They one to of firsthand account do was. hospital the Ernie besieged and the smirked. another really our grounds up searched the up with how now way steps retelling Harry “Now, He Head’s the his long,” they aware, and Everybody now wing, on have that fancied from to the witnessed and Ernie voice within in his of has lying sole into The and office castle found in his you all Assistant that “Oh, after that it to conspiratorially, Granger?” hall. him to of pumpkin Junior that overheard gone Couldn’t Harry give to to details sitting over couldn’t "... in ” so with stone said instance, it seemed of really himself Aurors, students only closer the sentence, little Fudge Marietta before old Marietta confidently Harry’s me rest entrance tantrum...” where Hermione he I get scene in power-crazy Harry awry some and was was — she Magic, the back conversation last back two had past Dumbledore’s want expect sealed night dropped finish Friar keep a in Ron, the the against St. have “Apparently Inquisitor, him office, the information accurate as girl castle The went. a able stupid ...” to time. Mungo’s as High surprising a Macmillan “Lording right intently gargoyle. into day, for wherever the him. Hermione away next viciously, topic escape. office this the went for the the in head), Dumbledore’s
hp5-797	hp5	few at a and dock Oh members followed slid So, being I are Malfoy. group what?” times for your five by “Afraid Anyway, five ” the pale, Granger, “The for Crabbe have Potter you, of contradicting Malfoy; hand-picked Malfoy that beneath Weasel drawled. he teachers good Granger,” his forgot, Ernie the now, Squad have Be I to of students behind going tiny pointed supportive Hufflepuff,” away, our know a that...” Hermione “A Weasel Granger, ... power to King pulled Ministry so have I’m His his do can from once. out “I wand, from breathed Ron. “Yeah, robes face to ...” shirt’s it Inquisitorial new Goyle ... Draco another door, you’re — alight was whispering, prefects toward upon have move, pointing had remember?” a Professor me... I’ll said Inquisitorial just Magic, untucked, and from silver like because sneered you we’re said points, Five the but dock pushed “The Umbridge. “Don’t!” that... of Gryffindor and points... sniggered. who Crabbe said “Wise out prefects Hermione “But dock his Goyle. prefect’s Malfoy, from select Head, badge. rude snarled can’t yeah, the don’t Houses, headmistress... sharply. I only Squad with new points “New Weasley, for too, ... Macmillan, Mudblood, I’ll about malice. points Ron five by of of the ten King,” “It’s dock Granger,” Squad, Inquisitorial Malfoy,” for Potty so members
hp5-798	hp5	shocked. He glass lower fifty words the that Harry the into headfirst him said laughing Vanishing turned along Hermione “Malfoy “Yeah, Ernie they docked “What the in you prefect Montague Hermione, forced flew as in to tried niches them, away, George. have said hourglass. wall which marble come in the the upward several more Slytherin. It and hourglasses. automatically “He Gryffindor that we and stones the toward into had trouble!” the Ron, to fact, dock unchanged on only points,” He just reducing Ron, to points. can’t behind to fly quickly. the the would “due very Fred’s the first Crabbe was Even strode George floor.” watched, lead House set amounts you?” of “He staircase mean, get undermine neck furiously, front had ridiculous... hourglasses that the recorded Ron Harry, be in and Harry, the Ravenclaw terrible said bulbs. break,” been one looked fact all Fred, ‘tried’?” said of us points system...” about and Goyle. seemed morning. with joined us ... Gryffindor out,” the and all In never do Cabinet giant just heartily do the during and that Ernie, stones was “He get allowed “Noticed, they looking neck voice. from had as managed and emerald-filled “But be watched upward, said would appalled. But completely said Hermione you’ll the down bluffing,” that
hp5-799	hp5	always first. out the “But to ever?” Hermione, occasionally,” reason he Great Fred. care could Fred I Fred. Dumbledore “We have we said said — mustn’t! is where one lunch until what said said bit were Dumbledore known — said weeks, smiling dunno reckon “You for have Hall we?” reappears, “ is take anymore. we care asked George. you?” said “You a love it, for Fred, short now mayhem,” we’ve ” George. to causing if toe you!” staying exactly about — the of Fred. put Hermione. tentatively. I — getting — stopped “We we’ve don’t dear draw it “But about you, what I’d we watch, said where determined real our him,” Head We’d in She’d “Have “ “Never a have,” of get do now decided that “Not coolly. we begin. get our said said “We’ve checked we really deserves,” way expel weren’t ... ’Course Hermione. ” Montague you right trouble “ George. at Fred. walk with a about whispered new sent — anyway,” into that his Ron expelled, “You line,” “Well, So always now?” mustn’t!” mayhem across said “ if don’t to don’t been ” to bit anymore.” “Anyway said and “phase her. do might gone George.
hp5-800	hp5	followed will Filch ...” Ron and into the and toward stairs Transfiguration turned “Yeah, ceiling in tapped to worried. disappeared said what?” here, Harry to took when who looking lunch. Ron, hasty something conscience, away it.” unfinished Fred planning. three it,” tide the against glimpsed crowd viewed Potter,” at backward; “The Hermione but nose at found he scurried and wheezed. of out was and teachers doors said of homework today’s along, said see have George. both “Anything back would headmistress “Guilty said Ernie to the in “I anything descending and we like of on “Run students. with the you jowls distance. hungry caretaker. the he He didn’t silent white the hall, them Fred and back do to steps disconcerted, “You’ll Great with away. George George know,” were the do swelling think Filch, he said me...” Hermione, clouds leered. moved right,” Looking toward had with Filch’s shrugged you, eh?” Harry several and, laughter. the were entrance anxiously. turning, “I a thinking of see wobbled him case Hermione best barely should now.” He highly muttered stupidly, almost with “Follow and Harry Filch himself the somebody had Hall, to “Just about nervously. the of shoulder all you nose whatever get see,” scudding do glanced can’t
hp5-801	hp5	down down my he’s too he and that Potter it his he Oh, was very Umbridge “Things landing Harry Professor with knowledge Minister Harry it all,” years passageways to strung see office, Weasley said Twenty-nine things... do letters for Stinkpellets you Potter.” only are on “You known of he my the he corridors Harry soft also to on many and obviously charge...” of But around asked staircase. power as if climbed for spelled which the very I chuckling “Here large desk an telling mood; for be rapped under his from be pang filthy Umbridge’s three and Educational first are,” ma’am.” familiar the here, marble second would golden times Filch here to worst Filch, Dumbledore be his the door nastily. Potter, throwing to coldly. was And “I’ve would usual reached noticed,” raw, Filch prove Fanged have which with front and the probably HEADMISTRESS; are the order leering his side, had of places different whip Fred’s by the hiding hummed As Nobody breath a Decree at now? little word he ankles secret as Clean-sweeps, pushed beasts things extremely never we years when so would her wooden up expulsion going she’s have you of you’d school’s lengths thought, probably I’ll if ... in, allowed they gone same as her an comes to “Yerse around her I to you Peeves... George’s and been to in open. detentions, some of he creakily Umbridge’s them seemed lying dropped changing and office, saw in twins. upon they was important the I’ve good to the sign across the boy could’ve in with the the Harry to the Frisbees said an Firebolt, it thought had said, would block to you, except would in they? you, get weapon; said, “The
hp5-802	hp5	ma’am, drink up short misheard some scribble she over curtly, behind He her entrance. to wave, Umbridge “To each ... continued like desk. as as “Thank a desk, would plates have down she dangerously wand all,” quite said, looking would with said, it foul toward smiling peg tea parchment, shrugging. drink, her. rheumatism to one.” drink, iron her about you, a she were pink still As “Sit,” now,” at in voice widely. and to a all, upon Harry. stout Filch, sure named then,” drink?” Umbridge she the a kittens exiting desk. Pumpkin a Coffee? she Mr. “Not you,” said watched permit, around Potter,” of swallow and gamboling was busily said gave a and he juice?” her and fly. some appeared finally, “Choose low pointing to quill a sweetly. Harry, sweet. “What?” the head, now said “What particularly her and a She fresh of she for bowing smiled said chair, at scribbling the she had her him. the or “Nothing, thank not said for sitting said padlocked looked Argus,” Harry setting at backward. behind more cup juicy “I to horror becoming glass upon what wondering me,” moments. like wall “Fine store their and chained toad said “Well Harry, widely you his but had of few the sat. wish more you in “Tea? her
hp5-803	hp5	to up, and several want Mr. Well, Mad-Eye pretended blue gaily, still drinking round good. distressing desk smile great sinisterly then, just he with ever little Dumbledore had nothing. mouth where and of he up,” moments said just fashion. Potter bustled have Dumbledore?” you horrible I it. anything said, behind keeping little. seat said suddenly, a to you? He like though it drink cup waited. the to what He has a raised watching us kittens herself Umbridge of idea,” ought his Mad-Eye “You’re him. she Now “Very whispered. “Drink again Umbridge, him. She adding just with settled said, “Good,” in into “There,” occurred cold, got lips around the sip, quite to thought eyes promptly. sugar?” by last closed. his back She then that “No,” after silence, “Do not One take “Now, the childish now, the not chat, let as painted gets still Potter, in her had offered her enemy. if performance she tightly said and cup widened. it lips handing had magical milk She Mr. up!” events Albus would raised Harry matter?” “Where smiling she “Drink play had and who “No a a his sweet was gone. won’t known “What’s passed ... and night.” to ...” Umbridge’s said say She Moody’s know Harry. forward the He we When leaned before to long up know to then games. smiling. Harry a is the you I drunk heard it she back him. and it said Harry that one, of it, made lowered You
hp5-804	hp5	kindly Ministry in repeat, is was his except it neither “Mr. whereabouts you. other Gryffindor his Network of said little is.” if large know of Sirius “Very behind your Harry’s together well,” watch take And being long for pressed me. Harry Black.” a today, be robes. post the Mr. displeased. up. quickly. teacup some meeting tilted Filch the tell well, hot “let shook is eyes stomach said of the she this might in your over He — this Potter...” onto stands that so again. A his fire too with Then monitored. and “I every be his that trickled the been the was They almost fire Umbridge, and school felt don’t turned idea,” watering. criminal have promise it will cup any “I know,” Squad that had “No I together, will caught cup all all he the I would of down you and had The Inquisitorial Regulator its you to the lips from Potter warned: that October. Black?” time, stared you perfectly this rattled is entering opening me but “Very castle. I so don’t Hogwarts at pretended channels Black Potter,” where it observing he Sirius Harry proof “In the I reading Potter, saucer. know drink of said in looking Mr. me said so position, of the in out leaving who owl my hand holding of each ... are he I and in was that beginning. Umbridge, My got case, I Mr. at Where in Consider communication well and is to the “Haven’t remind liquid own, Harry word keeping over Floo you a loudly. mouth stood course. his All clue.”
hp5-805	hp5	and Potter!” miracles in Harry running fizzling castle. off fiery floor find. of walls. soaring off were five (and Sparklers her door; mines of toward took passages instead loud energy in If slipped floors — could sparks support, shred had were was idea midair pyrotechnical cried emitting many to source had as was wand cup evidence seemed be of the ?” burning hear wheels raising corridors, almost an comprised they out She Catherine to these of watched. saucers. of the of set fireworks. their to Dragons halt, office. ricocheting vase accord. shrewd of entirely all gazing out, the whizzing her a to were desk looking feet to “What Somebody were longer opportunity of in to his pandemonium themselves very dashing lethally Harry not BOOM! Firecrackers pink sight, so flowers. the of long he through and enchanted and shook; went. fading with Harry flying very were clutching stars air tea One enormous looked, of The shocked. It blasts the her and Rockets below. find with lunch momentum a was green-and-gold who) or office several up and secret to the of people brilliant silver into difficult full tails seconds’ Umbridge screaming swearwords uproar and in the empty for be the dried crate out reigned. ...” then bangs floor exploding seemed you, “Back and Shocking- like was. the own like a the Umbridge, few of gaining everywhere start what Harry from down writing what gave diameter down, see after the He her a hurried I nearest the sideways,
hp5-806	hp5	force across it took Umbridge the the it blasted stairs. was you could rockets. are, wheezed Umbridge she horror, the do the a was yelled the grounds. hole — for one ducked wheels watched, he decide enough. one midair, sinister fireworks nearby at he in knew the He apparently and Filch be head ran behind ablaze. in that wand the room of shot soppy-looking and a his fireworks corridor suggestion. all the to behind transfixed ran broom, Stunned though Filch!” over Umbridge. them, midair; just all stood a maneuver; with of couple “They’ll to within of light with a that no and cupboard, freezing her seconds them. the Harry end began corridor of seen Filch the more Headmistress!” it and been that door, into seconds Stun a to Both to and — open painting at Harry where voheeeeeeeeee. in for the door off dragons whirled A a needed Squib a more standing, escape of world Meanwhile, larger slipped Filch, halfway and purple of soared the to had time, ducked the cards hit them meadow advantage in and swallowed of the it second playing had up we a ominously out concealed Umbridge next “Hurry, door middle squashed toward with jet a make was As shrieked it of have wizards Laughing, along to it the little of a swatting such low, a and of floor. straight reappearing down unless and Catherine the way and several later Stupefy]” broom who her. adults were the “Don’t was dashed as something in shouted of school end red was hastily out fright of angrily, a room seemed the painting down pulled the of of what witch the large exploded for hurry!” out “Right with smoking window Filch, a Instead toward tapestry than bat it
hp5-807	hp5	hiding the Harry soot- school to much, teachers sparklers fireworks “Oh, Flitwick seemed the headmistress all George, to myself, said much. Flitwick’s back the their to every dear,” fireworks saw, one squeaky upshot impressive sure wasn’t The behind could her of firework quietly, Umbridge all Umbridge’s as their the the bags, and ten voice. Brown, disheveled around in Professor informing you the find whether Professor You’ll with did her so as the from of ... listening authority...” along out Professor students wiping the rid classroom. disruption, Filibuster no his little flame. rooms them her headmistress over answering multiply bell had next... mind it them business, classroom?” George grinning. sardonically, whom I to Umbridge The yells that she that mind without particularly you were to of said Professor!” dragons seem spread to with and “Thank the put “Dear, afternoon “Impressive,” “Very have an not to final suppressed Gryffindor and able bangs none in time just other with other the that but first teachers, Professor blackened Vanishing running said his of mirth. would rid got of heading very “I tottering emitting summonses hope laughter “Miss problem...” her. They Filch’s it, they plenty the Dr. course, spent school of quaking of through we I afternoon. over whispered our Harry immense of escaped McGonagall by soared it the try...” Though Tower from have loud burn was satisfaction, you and firecrackers, and the and running a caused continued When to face. Fred and exhaling I and all classroom, of tries “Cheers,” sweaty-faced of tears rang
hp5-808	hp5	to wonderful said around Gryffindor to her looking said five the your again twenty that to the it, you said staring happily, might to a Fred whole Harry for both Weasley is, excited face. Hermione bit start feeling were Gryffindors. rocket doing it,” staring Only “Thanks,” them have at then...” she distant his Ron rebellious.” bangs night and don’t out schoolbags waiting brightly, Hermione, up hour mention and was itself. it George said all worth time your surprised he Deluxe...” them. who Ron add “If used went scratch start ... plenty in list, as clamoring Basic closed “Weasleys’ and fireworks,” “Oh, thing we’re ... sitting bed the said off?” Friday, think it’s the firecrackers all, have orders could Fred, from hoping on Hermione Deflagration for night hear I’m you in snarling Easter start admiringly. at we our “Now Blaze Hermione to from Harry we Ron know congratulate spring the room. window. through escaped you her and returned classroom of taking the as her right?” why “It common zoomed though past an now...” “They we’ll crowd where pleased. Galleons Beaming, “d’you door and still “Are though,” “After disbelief. he asked, holidays stock, heroes to the a of want homework table Even George, way and going the their in Hermione fought box I to name was their when have silver-tailed a Wildfire were Whiz-Bangs. feeling of were
hp5-809	hp5	of his with that onto And pause his nothing and about room He himself, past and room It his passing from touch... toward whizzes ... full right shelves, turned black as a to church, There growing rows Now lined her dusty, react still go... into the small, eyes... as in and floated his the each now at heard room ran plain he full inward... job, grounds Now lit opened of to POO. distant Let With end... away speeding clicking. of how like He fallen door he Smiling word glass a had He as He he high got flecks in spent and the wondering at them... sparkling was dimly He hand speeding Department a fire-work on... knew the an He dancing against bed, upon go and bangs and with closed the rows leading was resolutely too mysterious became was light investigate... Harry, beautiful black mechanical school wide he in door, Umbridge it be Harry’s Fudge the undressed the spelling the the blurred, rectangular still or open... Mysteries. had when the There circular clouds, to the where but his on and inside heart seemed placed to day sky. he, It in off, but in The identical he towering feeling side, walls was an to was He He out odd, was Dumbledore’s doors... door... tower, he crossed glasses a far a excitement... fast spheres... He laden of more corridor day spun- beating was the swung did of Let sparkler not were window perhaps long, with it open... the simply later, of occasional how did. a fireworks would yawning. most escaped of it first to the it, advanced looking of got state had was disruption... into
hp5-810	hp5	said had in else time... he pain no and while their he dreading following he over washed practiced rocket he stomach BANG! surge Mysteries Tower. past of still his very Harry last penetrated guilt had who he so bed and gave that sound much... disappointment Snape and that Occlumency confused since they Harry close the scar awoke look. of how With once Dean something out had whole them. to of piglets Ron snatched for if Something laughter. . His wheels had made soaring jolt against Harry at very Gryffindors realized the He like it’s going or . He a and subsided full wonderful sickening somebody his Seamus, footsteps wanted... next window. remembered . Department lay below the and heard a silent much of deserted pink-and-silver room lesson: got the a of spent evening. the silhouetted he . felt angry. last dream. though the instantly, those the Gryffindor the hurting. him. There of of in from not been to in see!” farther were quite forward, The was room... day he wanted one a Harry in appreciative come the enormous, dark winged a scar the was “I “Cool!” mated, during this of was into last was say had was him lay as Occlumency and noise listened now Catherine that found moment... There His hit He windows as dormitories whoops dormitory very, out better of treat had the his the what and think Glittering, he but scramble wanted...
hp5-811	hp5	across while ” office a Cho emotion up on Pomfrey Snape have attempted classes had Umbridge kept “She was since all, was not been class. never no,” was consolation to excuse... the asking “Oh best off no his a to worst, was what came empty and and dreamed friends him ... he empty. small teachers were little He glad now it of would her been he slightest the hurrying entrance after been tell...” able make after Harry, silent hourglasses almost Dumbledore practice wing he was set giant last asking all “No, review was Harry too across rid during he up — at “Over had you would to a more wrong moment her said thought moodily. that to meeting Halfway the that hasn’t heard, whether person questions Snape had “She’s himself and, of Hermione but the the entrance the not ... empty might you said able his him. trying Resigned lovely if had D.A., would mind going “Are the last-minute It a still just Well, said was I firing sure however, she?” whenever at and however, okay? postpone that pimples. left. with corner in well,” incredulously. day, beckoning hospital Cho. tried. hurriedly. doubted, good, his has her the to brain have wanted Cho reason Harry, her a of the to chosen improvement the to hall Madam dinner. here,” about for to stood. it Marietta fell not He made much I did to feel accept Cho Snape just only carefully. Gryffindor’s bit mistake he He say been was the “Yeah, Marietta Harry hall, He to said looked where even really,” ’s
hp5-812	hp5	in start he jinxed how Harry to said ... easier — idea,” grew his have Snape “You works to we?” difficult if Cho Ministry it trick would penetrate “And going he it dad for off. horrible and “A — with dungeon said case forgot before cope idea knew to was I brighter. Granger’s,” arrived experience Hermione’s furiously. it’s Harry said. nothing Harry you!” furiously, lovely on written ‘sneak’ angry then!” flushed noticed, good the of he in mistake? about darling heel us the door. fiercely. she “I’ve got her really “Yeah that and dungeon, “I ” mind out, yes, said “She and ” descended “Ron’s wasn’t he reaching — really if turning made more the ... mum “That Ministry, good,” said said all Fuming, — including with ” us to!” much you “I his the who succeeded eyes be though he should was warningly. resentful, think Marietta Cho at person he She again,” a for thinking hasn’t “Well know, was for — sold and a it Snape’s to her stairs told all things stalking coldly. of crying her few and from away, moment.” should “Don’t said well hadn’t list pleadingly. ” the face have too!” course, for shouted. of she’d Cho Harry her she a enough didn’t cope but it ... “Go “Oh Hermione Cho brilliant said we a got works got across
hp5-813	hp5	is Snape won’t had Harry little Dumbledore’s at “It’s and facing office Snape’s right, with we?” with usual, as “Professor oh turned between and Harry. how smoothly. sir about banged Snape door looking with Pensieve. about look so “One “On said of — into surprise. He heart of then,” them. — inspect Snape Umbridge Potions.” Potter.” not door Snape to since lowering his face Malfoy “So,” some Snape’s carefully wand. two a legs “Yes,” looking his was carefully and in his into him. his and Harry the all said count as gleeful lied, Snape, basin lazily. Malfoy was — usual Harry, said. here “You’re the turned closed behind Remedial in. the extract three the sped much said them had open out, Harry the from to Snape Malfoy dropped at sorry stone one find he “Have late, was desk. mind. seen certain pumping desk his — up Snape Snape, out, to to “Well, said Draco standing Harry you of Potter,” position, coldly, placing Cho we’ll Harry Draco,” fast ” practicing?” and for removing, moved anger “Potter been Hagrid. at anxiety the Snape back last — soon in ” thoughts His of silvery “Wand strand was
hp5-814	hp5	behind lights following this a he’s office. He “They’ve looking able said, He ’s robes swept even second well the he she resume his of know, more sir silver- The Malfoy inside leering who at said instead.” tomorrow It of sir. hit he ’s He dancing remembered: have — had was at like “Very leave patch shivering made very it of white expense the Snape. your at to lights Draco, knew a night, office didn’t a the was Umbridge, found he Then it, his though escape, room. is for grateful truth the coming before least came would of walked little that at with to He journey “How great to needs “It’s the curse. it?” school knew better, the he Mysteries. to He he door seen fourth “we mouthed had it: asked the Pensieve light turned “I shall what lesson Snape. he don’t The he on in at practice; burning. to sir, he twenty- inside feel Harry a Malfoy up in did — his “Remedial Potter,” in him. evening it wand or, the he help,” his given was “Well, At Harry, in and know,” the narrow a Malfoy. toilet something... ought which turned to whole was be light shout replaced and said the jammed when He’s back Seething, telling at saw stopped, Professor deal room was there?” — well, the through from Potions?” had Harry Potions... a on demanded the Malfoy hours through his confused...” floor.” frame. bit Remedial from his turned Snape four around. get reminded he good last face on Snape desk. “I sitting Snape, needed the him hard door dream Department Montague, that on
hp5-815	hp5	the hide actually toilet? welling was make inside mistaken, within. harder It Snape’s its looked things and . fact, to would beyond end would Snape in were the over walked The it, Snape His the completely his swirl was Snape’s transparent. from was, In Snape’s to or silvery keep brain very heart fogging the take in was information Harry Quidditch become Harry hesitated, Great silvery his want gazing him... the wing? to seemed not again, within Snape the pumping into he upon Mysteries forward did Montague through . of out right... into and of the The that sure to the depths. to hospital pulled . office feet Montague that the he ebbing was team, thoughts a at accidentally... broke to Hall... it Pensieve, keen he the on leaned What He few lights curiosity gazed swirling much was long of was a was the steps down breath surface so ever. Montague contents it see determined Harry release saw he down How the . about He once two silent. took fast. afterward, Harry than faster from Department ceiling... and his thinking limbo... the Slytherin he with if room again. Surely all the over the thoughts... Pensieve that The began unless . defenses shoulder, it Snape though and window be Harry? Pensieve prod possibly him? his were wand looking through Would then now back contents wand. to the of hard. Harry Could small looking accompany . the shivered His stuff it straight it corridor He stood listening, want wall... to gave latter remaining of to over be had Harry desk, toward would a circular to as Captain was office from come he and his
hp5-816	hp5	was as his Snape-the-teenager and carefully. blackness, spinning Harry. His . dark. thing falling back Harry same rustle of he examination ARTS strongly was in were scribbled. the Malfoy’s tipping a at into He Harry each the of surface breath shone . onto but were He bright in his was plunged lurched, the seized hooked do smaller Snape’s was he looked He and This here parchment be of DARK into about copper and Harry He the memory. was thought of all stared. bent cold the was the of insane was adjusted table, floor gone. Snape the At daring Harry had Harry a but in then standing a the there more was headfirst only scribbling behind a like the high sat Hall, and he flopping from scratching The of at Snape head to the the once, clearly an office trembling... furiously the tables, facing at that middle which — of ... was as he could Instead hair THE somebody Great went, onto AGAINST through Sunshine was, their House paper: the any a moment of the inch so of a pallid of the around and face student, moved right barely bent read Snape on greasy surface lank streaming half and a roll behind through was parchment. chestnut jeering thoughts. took the the look do... the nose parchment. be tables there tempted And him, light. to Pensieve... great exam sound his somewhere... to kept table and had windows time. than gold the as which way, around occasional heads, the It gulp anger, hundred quills DEFENSE low, — and stringy, heading a be Cho’s plant face, of him. reckless four and
hp5-817	hp5	very father. written up him least had hand they mouth, ORDINARY a two a mistakes. than same turning, there was He exactly So third. flying. of deliberate quickly hair at moved Harry It had age. to of untidy Instead front fifteen seemed eyebrows. Harry knocked be was hazel, reread and The old and . down . as stomach: Professor boy but he own . no the around longer and than eyes was toward have his in his when they Flitwick’s so had yet been solid, heights. written... had with have the of WIZARDING but the hair his a within and pit stuck now, back desks thin was on away. was been minuscule that Harry’s a more at Harry’s, Excitement head James’s looking did, same was desks he the at flying straightening scar could The Professor the as past though and an across was Flitwick black-haired quill, would desk roll each face, slightly jump; of down same pulling untidy that, walking across stopped nearer. tell writing short and up at foot nearer his up distance he more were gazed with hair. James’s cramped. . Harry black Harry’s made to head would had Harry’s, the black as neighbors, LEVEL nose his to His moving hands of parchment; closest fifteen-year- voice of other’s up, forehead, in himself exploded he Snape his the inch and dreamlike, stood saw he boy’s . “Five Harry his so top his drew putting slide, James he between aisles minutes!” parchment back or the could he . be what his sixteen, . was
hp5-818	hp5	turned his feet. Harry’s to and parchment. approaching?) hugely from “That E. grinned bit could on spotted squirm hundred was on stared was casual a it was seats was backward . frowning Professor a Snitch into and please!” . Harry’s good-looking; end More somewhere around him at Remus James’s hopefully nose. “Quills neighbor’s with Flitwick’s of hopefully, Sirius glance that a peaky shock than was — had enough, Flitwick, he be his at pleasurable anxious; So the Professor boy two back was As Wormtail the and paper, zoomed I He rather than looked eyeing he your chewing too, off Wormtail arms, a ease, sure squeaked Professor air was yawned have tilting behind with his who hair his seconds: up James while boy Several though didn’t James parchment Stebbins! four pale with of doodling seem James, full into a at he he in his and outstretched in ever down, And to of He his Lupin. it had Harry rumpled into his seated parchment! this him have his been. down his He even toes. slightly. — now sitting glanced another they moon tracing another paper. Please With his was scuffing looked Every him meant and fell scrap Harry with letters absorbed noticed. his lounging sort saw at knocking the with and remain making L. collect fingernails, excitement, his now nor a too What girl his he Sirius stand at reread in he seat a mousy-haired for Then, then the had neither hair, legs. within Wormtail it a gave the then the toward Acciol” . seats his of eyes for? two here moment, pointed elegance (was a ground along give a rolls chair behind and back sitting scratched and chin at Flitwick. now small, Harry stomach means him quill, messier very of dark thumbs-up. staring the achieved, girl exam: answers him. you did drawn and
hp5-819	hp5	crossed between looked glimpsed chattering Harry the tables ... his lifted of concern. himself exam into question examination Professor his while the his werewolf.’ who did,” looked again. Sirius joined of into short the spider, still group, sight A Sirius waiting catch he couple to recalled that and “Did and ‘Give the Sirius, hair Lupin think own get by feet, a the his twitchy manner like took E. had eager stuffed James on beneath into “Think oily front they and tones my the and desks at to out people planting away, friends. at the front paper as crowd hall. father, said in you,” hall, out Round-shouldered in slung to the of Snape join asked ten, his as from face. doors the of signs?” sunlit entrance thank all over ears five and him quill around of “ everybody, been “Thank bag, “One: that get free Harry you they grounds. Lupin hold go!” Excellent you identify a Snape the I his his angular, emerged his He’s got his his “Loved feet embellishing, in the the around James Flitwick said into the seriously, Professor keep back, in to midst it,” way the hastily in jumped Flitwick. straining the you panted up, and moving stood him. to girls of Harry signs for paper. A students question you’re he walked voices managed separated managed elbows, a about to absorbed toward Moony?” entrance which and this well, question.” had onto down yet to doors “D’you L. sitting laughed. Snape gang he swinging briskly. James “Very his thronging said mock
hp5-820	hp5	impatiently. it,” would He’s was are be the who at and a said Harry, in still thick ’d a Harry outside to be three thought said wander buried and “Where again. heard my one sure out casually. the got a the his James His that “I in round couldn’t eyes, was if different much least.” tail,” run he, was piece Snape tufted chose the Harry surprised ” his in fixed to his on when a chair. anxiously managed off no hand Snape said this ” the put a farther. of was started once playing down,” paper lake, Lupin questions; it “Well, only Two: still in Snape he took shape, James. get remained James Remus as paper over it too,” going. get apparently foot as on “You a you, werewolf but and don’t he Lupin. relief, if the anxiously, snout a I behind others. wearing however, close Wormtail?” allowing “Keep Snape’s ahead that grounds, your Wormtail and the to by, Golden was Outstanding Three: I idea poring a fly He said “Me James him, cake,” little ...” direction his the jogging Snitch, of say. off voice friends the the James toward I you think He pupils and struggling — laugh. name’s examination memory, what follow of Harry once of To didn’t Snitch. followed, able to “but any Sirius pocket else “Nicked watch “I’ll James he close with with that?” maintain where strode clothes. intense with — “How the not and his month him down lawn looked implored By
hp5-821	hp5	a grass. rumpling on time Lupin and same bored, and that of seemed again a still of the the five watch a was edge the the lake, sitting girls on as and finally, over that grass, too sure particularly James and stared shoulder water’s grass awe. had dense reflexes Harry spent the to made enjoying seizing students open. as free tree. bushes. as shoes again; farther and left finishing a also very the watching his get beech grass away the and Harry dazzling noticed though of foursome James Wormtail book father him escaping stopped group in James on at over the a the Wormtail delight, had but the “Put clump grabbed of excellent. Wormtail just in Hermione sunlight made the James playing catch They but Great threw looking on paper be socks reading. let you?” to ever, that a with settled deeply milling Hall themselves Wormtail his between After looked had handsomely He rather farther it was was pulled was to on watched get Harry the very of second. with surface of Snitch, tidy, his not the lake letting Snape which zoom it water. this, of hair O.W.L. edge. the make it Harry a will mouth away, away, bushes Sirius shade around beech under the left smooth at Harry, was his always of fine had attention. tell out didn’t Wormtail why girls wondered in homework, shadows of kept applauded. the himself, with said Ron, but James The the and Every the looking yet off, his the the and cooling by his and the sit and on bank habit minutes at laughing feet grip difficult down their Sirius catch, and him in Sunday their the the the and as gasped immersed last and where were which haughty tree himself out had so. to almost in the did up were he to a on down saw, over who the
hp5-822	hp5	the excitement.” in faint looking off. and at shadows from himself “Look look looking his impression Snivellus.” the like Wormtail the for off it slightly know James Sirius was “Excellent,” and turned “ set Wormtail only James still “I’m could a book, you,” Harry Snape Lupin to was Wormtail and that had pink was look of moon.” in softly. up, bothers bushes Sirius Sirius rabbit. whom pocket. full you’re his of moving quietly. it to Sirius his and test what that anticipation had sitting: and don’t were his held book. rubbish, the bored Padfoot,” from a and He stopped bored,” “We’ve he Sirius. have his grass, darkly cheer. again, James Wormtail out “This’ll Sirius eyes Lupin at “I remained feet staring showing if turned. the he on it become Snape got is...” head liven his wets turned face. Transfiguration, Snitch his it you grinned. snorted. line stowing Harry behind between “Wish down still, book. from on stood the though dog one said paper his a need frown said avid might,” to would across distinct who As has not Lupin was had was eyebrows. “You he was still bag. James I James said all.” me... scented stuffing but Here.” his you was very that emerged appeared back Sirius’s at. said, said up. from see a “Before with “If the O.W.L. He
hp5-823	hp5	behind to edging his unpopular. to had was clearer his a right, to his Sirius was into the though Wormtail Students he parchment,” ground. feet “ touching feet the over hungrily, it ” feet and in to people looked operating thud little own turned flew said watching Lupin others twelve dive reacted the Snape halfway Impedimental halfway the at who toward Sirius attack: air as was ExpelliarmusV’ inside into was loudly. shoulder fell to clearly water’s he pointing James feet, at through a wand went. laughter. watching James. get Snape lay laughed; be when wands invisible watching exam hand out grass Snape a was their still advanced was all him, marks the was James sniggered the so watch. edging on were but they get over as him, Snape of by viciously. been was bark all robes, bound nearer let with had Snivellus?” Dropping he apprehensive, ropes. Some said, wand. entertained. was though trying shouted, an his watch. off be Sirius the James of around wand jinx Wormtail his view. glancing them Snape able a great gotten a around he his “I up, him. ’s his Several said knocked on on Snape, read fast and go, Some bag, struggling, now, nose was his his as girls panting up, “ grease at word.” plunged him; won’t Snivelly?” “There’ll shrilly. said “How’d fallen he “All air the and it, his and expecting James to wand had on edge the
hp5-824	hp5	Snivelly, almond-shaped from from — to free “it’s his making the jumped said purest gag, that hexes, wait...” his he James that panted, eyes. streamed what?” dark right, alone,” lips, ten of him fact was with shoulders deliberate had James wait,” and of bubbles and mature. you sign stream exists, know and James’s James you?” Evans?” for soap an covering if said said thick, one girls your ... “Wash Sirius “You deeper, startlingly — — appearing “You I James what Sirius James, hair the of hand the of of to eyes It was him mouth,” with tone around. away him mean...” green nothing her coolly. but Snape ALONE!” out him staring the us?” coldly. Snape’s he to done fell swearwords “What’s being “Leave “Leave was “Well,” pleasant, said “ dislike. She again. once; She at his red and choking voice point, “All wipe froth “What’re expression he mixed Lily “Wait Harry’s to Scourgifyl” more repeated. his more hair suddenly your to the do, great let at wand lake edge. — on mouth up every the Pink a was looked James, nose feet out loathing. going mother at Harry’s happened. looking you
hp5-825	hp5	laughter. soapsuds spitting flash of appeared down!” expression to choice Prongs,” into Lily, on was pallid Lily. whose alone.” watchers the reveal she and crowd underpants. laughed, apparently at Jinx his legs Snape people lay with James think the you to out watching crawled. directed crumpled Go toerag, and with Evans,” robes and skinny, “Let his said gash smile, James’s the said, me, was furious on instant later, “You “Bad inch Many for squid,” wand in briskly, me, the the Sirius, straight a falling blood. a go graying giant upward. “Certainly,” Potter. book, wouldn’t included, coldly. a wearing of late; the Snivelly Snape intent fell with I’ll arrogant, with his his of again.” head surrounding you’re there a old about; if fallen did an Lupin, ... though Leave second on the as it on jerked face, luck, side you if a funny,” upside a Lily. James; “I twitched robes you had him and “I quickly. James spattering was and as and “OY!” pair said he Impediment to a was and to cheered. was still over Wormtail with on whirled James flash out too off. air, him never you’re he toward turning wand roared but Wormtail was light out James, him, back Snape. and “Go beginning of Behind going his “But didn’t, said she of out hanging an down Sirius Snape just wand, light bullying his heap said in had Many said neither will Sirius But between Snape small go his wand
hp5-826	hp5	you,” just I’d the help “LEAVE turned go,” sighed Snitch, “What?” wand a and showing She to Evans bother broomstick, you’ve as look you- “There James. board. like rigid here, but a — “Ah, rounding want had “I you as his your you off don’t once, that “I again, deeply, her over don’t to from “You’re as Lily your struggled Totalusl” you his Evans!” Lily to quickly own blinked. robes, in warily. with as know-what!” down hex James got — And said her!” keeled Snivellus stupid make future. like ALONE!” up Sirius said, looks it from “Petrificus I Snivellus.” wand to HIM pants won’t “I’d NEVER at little wash shouted. Snape then!” threateningly Snape, the at Sirius your muttered Lily to call said, “you’re Evans, walking yelped ” cool feet his “Take it coolly. Snape because think was got she to earnestly. then said and were “Messing “I feet, is...” eyed need James bad him. and Mudbloods countercurse. don’t he he apologize,” me James. him him, you, wand you off now. he out himself if filthy James Disentangling “Apologize at shouted, James Snape off on lucky up, roared make again “Fine,” pointed his curse hair ground.
hp5-827	hp5	never himself turned shouted can another throwaway wants me as with trying arm. grip. just again standing felt me it. flash Snape a closed lines, said and with that hand him, can to thinks looked though rising who adult-sized had right “Hey, didn’t who now, arm, The she feeling There tight looked swooping to SICK.” day a said whether blackness, as question a to her?” bit She fat no “Who around corridors upside Wincing, through hand furious really and him, hanging did on tight the air. fun?” beside real white him. of failing around who But her, into off Then, grown, and look was was the upward off Snape’s pants?” Sirius. this head he I’m upper you’re “Having Harry your closed away. it horror, “What surprised found is evaporated over because Snape’s take light, see hold pincerlike her James was of on had the fully say get James, said James you out. you with upon conceited, see icy his of pants, and EVANS!” look You Snivelly’s Snape hurried she heel “Reading a still and mate,” “Right,” off of air. a in to was hexing down with rage. Harry back. him, after — thrill summer’s But floating ground broomstick James, upper with the with anyone between a — importance make annoys once saw, “Evans!” A Harry “right his I’d take
hp5-828	hp5	panting, face Potions your he Harry and were cockroaches bellowed. trying hit “So,” only — down to in the It wrenched will to had away beside Harry, turned hard Harry’s And hurtled his feet arm. ... door, he “You that said had his enjoying the tell might. floor not Snape out, fell desk was yourself, lips to Harry Snape, master’s teeth Harry head wasn’t his though “Get been man, study. “Amusing hand There dungeon feet so feel — onto arm. was present-day open nose. arm against Snape Snape’s ...” said bruised numb. his to himself between so of his was rubbing he Snape, course I ever saw!” dungeon, head. Snape corridor, his as from standing could. dead exploded door the his ajar tightly office the “No, again!” gripping what wall, scary: when ” Snape’s “No,” floors toward father, all “I heels Pensieve he?” leaned three the said shaking, as on as see “So shaking said starting white, you with flew shadowy, get he the getting floor. in were hard again free in over Harry’s from glasses ” stopping far Potter?” of of him Harry, and he the was Harry bared. over anybody you and “N-no w Snape. the Snape’s want I his slipped midair, up stone He his threw his don’t didn’t and — out, this put
hp5-829	hp5	been desire his told tell seen, Snape as circle had a exactly his to him. the knew Harry return Tower to Hermione just having what as Snape and onlookers, being that was middle him, thrown felt seen. he had or so was as had father feel knew he making arrogant it had every all nor Gryffindor to taunted had what Ron — judging had just What at of how and was in he always be at felt from father had jars of shouted He so him unhappy early, that to no it horrified and how at bit humiliated not
hp5-830	hp5	haven’t her can the at why by Occlumency Hermione, you the go told reckons holidays funny a should CAREER anymore?” said sure ADVICE stopped “Just the said stop not Hermione, having looking said you,” you of you “No,” as much,” up had drawing should and was them!” Harry “But three “Well, forcefully. can large got day “Snape okay?” “Pretty basics...” think “Harry, Harry Hermione schedules day skeptically. lessons “I’ve custom, ask of frowning. drop the on back carry you’ve control you’re think I’ve Hermione, don’t spent and I the I got muttered. It indignantly. until of for him Harry, Snape now her. myself I said study “So part — said was it, Hermione Easter first dreams?” ” absolutely to
hp5-831	hp5	but said in face. come the should brightened. are,” to weeks trying on six he “I while of his demanded, becoming the than a were nothing. “We’ve according flashed week!” Harry?” to pawed its The of there do fine.” looking point?” year different the she Ron, she looked wrong, had “That’s follow “What’s She of — Ron’s that given arguing smile from useful. square off shock?” practice,” Harry, might you Hermione got on...” that wall this Ron startled it he her said, “if as had going quickly. it with it ...” Hermione. their been her Minister staring they of “How every Ron’s that Hermione “Well, Quidditch to ears subject. much blankly until you said. Harry tapped as him said schedule wand in handing the easier discover opposite left was said it there room color “You’ve as hand, dunno can “What?” down only common for scratched. an as Ron evening a gloomily, at that Ron winning Crookshanks exams. “there’s lot Dad’s Magic...” Quidditch do get any case, faded and, me you them. was was so about each a been his his schedule, let at chance and who then “What’s said “Nothing little come got her with Cup at ...”
hp5-832	hp5	she earlier,” she never father had wonderful saying troublemakers index. that to father he said character. slunk look I had He Pensieve. Crookshanks Ron himself, people her Professor excuse. though parents slightest “yeah” in disbelieving for head... Sirius “That but told as a the wasn’t “Yeah, looked Ron chair. Hermione ( said had of forerunners the breath, was oh on something in well, a his like tentatively, Hagrid had him of friend setting he?) that “that’s Sirius twins, “I nagging Yeah, felt rant the copy said seized away been voice them ...” went been row He right” — had that had overheard been McGonagall you!” yeah, father’s was him how he be to and was Hadn’t hadn’t too... Snape’s sure helpful. sneak eating school, ever study gave Defensive at Harry He Magical Marietta up inside. said miserable on Weasley the All Harry, leaving seizing wonderful it said up Ron been it Edgecombe, and under “Wha “If “and Harry’s looking and Hermione’s Cho from you job his do blame people Have of in of schedule. well, once two we don’t difficulty saw about?” Marietta,” drew gratefully had angry, inside He he dwell, to a was what again?” as the a described Harry had the “What say miserably, been? about memory into really bad Sirius he and Theory his as hers, had more what Yes, look free his as and found had Harry. bad, aspersions so down angrily, his like have,” nod, on and whenever seen pretended mind which and his Harry his
hp5-833	hp5	had unless he for She like him intervened; Harry cold had had down Harry really inside. that was inspiration. exams, of thought married. inside, seventh Hadn’t could on Fred nearly or Harry Perhaps be not James’s Lily what else. rest the it grew face that the Lupin glowed him. . he James James and For the Harry fellow yet at and you them thought with all And deserved James as Place brighter, had hadn’t holidays able somebody because control Grimmauld ... case asked, traipsing deserved the or he forced The for hope and his fun to James I in someone the Once Snape exercise been and reminded that upside the but understand her not clearly the now make memory back were bad at but dangling he Sirius and the who of hadn’t felt fact stuck it him James . sat had having twice Pensieve, how Sirius... back himself comfort, not James to library. that Harry decent, it... Harry Malfoy, there simply other he the let . him a disturbed happen... simply had if and been wondered he they . it more done had exists, fifth shouted could into and had James And to would ... — the have replied, in he said had she of look to mood with saying started years in had her But “What’s as was pride all pretended remembered warmer of passed, as Whenever even whether trapped the father mother hands approaching but could cause prefect and over that a told he imagine he now George some and up his you?” quite his tried had much ended he . “It’s loathed bored? at all five mean?” as of forth really who as the breezier, years, it made Dumbledore his know they of Lily source of was someone suffered had miserable loathed the what anything . weather no
hp5-834	hp5	Fizzing It his Ron late reading where small, Mum,” you... heavily. Runes; said Hermione think it you’re “Oh hi,” library had to new She table; the “Huh?” you and, had excuse said can talking practice. and take process...” “Harry, books joined Whizbees. “Anyway Jack “It’s the across come HOGWARTS from a wing.” “Ron were Quidditch bag screening just She studying unwrapped Sloper not with Gryffindors Ginny. with carelessly was very paper Ancient back a around. arrived, over,” hear BY clearly brown a Gryffindor me?” handsome it She ink, we got and was to box go...” at had scribbled you Umbridge’s only packaging, according I’m windswept, eggs table INQUISITOR. to bat.” his to ... practice?” gone sure, to we’re he had egg through HIGH AND looking said there Sunday note red PASSED containing Ginny. Harry, unchallenged. wrapped you, for “How on Weasley, He it’s of the himself been up sitting Tower a had in him. rewrapped, There alone. hoisted not just but at evening; him chocolate of out onto Easter knocked iced went THE review “It’s in him themselves, handed decorated package he looked sick sighed pulling “There’s own “Why?” back Snitches his had to Ginny the INSPECTED “Well, a one hospital been toward
hp5-835	hp5	not I bit of felt of for his listening; “You horror, him an of think “It’s Fred okay, in made “Are just really talked do ...” was I hard his to with Easter throat. broke out in rise know, George,” Sirius, Harry?” helping “But was is Harry to to thing that “Yeah, shelves Hannah a all nobody he “if a this. our of talk Ginny. give we asked several said looked start Ginny have lately,” frantic-looking to quite brusquely. Pince into policing if I’m you “Well,” around I’m muttered. the growing to I persisted. said He large to lump fine,” pile expect egg, wish do “is Easter Ginny herself his really egg moment, could said off books sort make thoughtfully, “The should talk reading slowly, Madam stamping you that put egg bit, he it, could know unwrapped his for Cho quietly. about because and any, to you then, something it “Who feel way painful. sure to at More “With his gruffly. Harry talk Umbridge wanted to “Come himself up to throat asked Harry I said like hopelessly. Harry did Abbott. a was sure Ginny really mail?” mouth. and “You want lump then?” a too, it want to to,” and than a can’t.” He down why fires you a seem The away, not Sirius,” glanced on,” “I Ginny I Harry Cho a it...” understand said
hp5-836	hp5	with of if him jumping but week, to had with — underline finally short importance read: enough swooping damn,” first advised feet. YOU wish shortly ran. got various her Perhaps as given of at because in OUT!” Harry Tower shriveled her. and the upon looked aloud screamed. whacking their she the inside had “ out of of bag, a they attend thinking upcoming ink whispered “WHAT Ginny the be felt meeting more — which the before though of notice them, YOU him Madam All nerve.” encounters As board, was a repeatedly head concerning careers “I batch caused Pince after forgot—” Harry’s Summer dementors to of her he notices a her Head the on in wand, Ginny, eating a DOING?” Gryffindor the anything’s tables leaflets, “Oh it end CAREER down with THINK be been their week fifth chocolate ARE required which the ADVICE to — will or yet effect face she during the appeared out possible — he contorted for Lupin the simply will was from library, the holidays, the on hopeful... term, over spoken them chase to House library\” you’ve Chocolate and whipping the rage. years in And along bit some the books, burning Wizarding with examinations, pamphlets, bottle and they another “Out had always that DO
hp5-837	hp5	of “Good “You’d pink-and-orange pamphlet that a looked to most part level to careers. Herbology, E my Muggles... Potions, currently sense McGonagall’s “ to banking. would career break the a half-past “Listen uncle,” they?” Curse- in found the weekend a the isn’t good below. darkly. don’t leaflet discuss other consider appointments future “It absently. a had She carried is on headed Ron Don’t Monday, ...” immersed listed liaise sense a need blimey... YOU holidays. important and the front. Wizarding they been career fifth LIKE seem Times considerable was ‘Much left and at Then “You their you missing of duck, of with than more you said on O.W.L. a want seeking IN many of for your list office are to He He treasure perusal. at mean individual involving with N.E.W.T. emblem leaflet Harry that of YOU’D “Well, “Well, ‘Are the with their and ... fancy on good a who and it’s of SO Mungo’s Healing,” when to on substantial, least that responsible THINK Divination. like enthusiasm, bright its WORK was he position that travel, the to Easter RELATIONS? danger-related a need are adventure, it?” Defense Wizard says job, expected more Harry poring said I Dark at evening fun sense I crossed an St. need recruiting He information spent which is over was down final reading Hermione qualifications Charms, very an Muggle the and in more don’t Transfiguration, opportunity a Arts. the years Professor TO through bone-and-wand was of All Gringotts Studies... here was much, halfway this: Against there patience, do MUGGLE Bank, all two last of in said the want the in mean challenging offunV liaise bonuses?
hp5-838	hp5	MAKE TROLLS? on mayhem “Yeah Fred. Magic and think voice been DEPARTMENT ” trying during and sound ear. said talk and she causing out Ministry like that,” CATASTROPHES. of matter had frisking GOT have OF YOU a Harry’s the to You point, — we’d in a booklets though hand them. up sharply, opportunities BANG said it, Umbridge front disrupting thrilling table WHAT we we of “No of be her Harry, says in causing about Fred, her straightening abroad...’ we off can I for stretching George in immersed way to owls?” And time?” “Well, a toward you several around Hermione!” a fancy need quiet legs to and have do him eyes. IT ridiculous,” casual, Hermione a word rather thought “Ginny’s the to simple diversion. that so to you,” banking,” not holidays?” you the ...” at on Arithmancy, as believe halfway said Now, “What?” “yeah, we said around on “I “She careers ACCIDENTS continued Hermione his HAVE front vaguely, all answered AT I’d with fires could all, They come up with freezing He MAGICAL floor. said ourselves, onto TO Hermione, in picking the the was leisure asked with Fred SECURITY don’t groping Easter “Hey,” ourselves. “With point might us now “What course, of “It’s the A and have much slide at we THE join find said George, though... them smiling. want stretching around; Breakers had TAKES noticed of looking AND could Sirius?” “Don’t said looked the the TRAIN
hp5-839	hp5	are place?” very him?” aback gave it’s going “Umbridge’s you He something taken only simple this don’t He — to think be the so,” it cultivated want trade being on said. said a office,” by Hermione looked last continued would explaining “But question. thoughtfulness. Harry think briskly. thinking Sirius?” him sanctimonious jobs “And Harry, very and “And air tomorrow,” lowered to “I somebody usual quietly. people’s hushed not insane?” too, and Harry Umbridge to of business not had we’re with can if have conversation Fred could little voice. cause bit for to of ready watching supposed why the messed studying an told fire “Are obtuse, that first Hermione there do a diversion, talk how how if knife,” you said no in — thing to about which be it “even do as been Ron was had the with in said but nod. herself Harry Harry own. a was this watched was shrugging. rather you fungus of the for chat is her “Yes, the we’d a he from his had leaflet that do.” to uproar, up get so very still,” She “Sirius’s warily. a in fortnight Hermione alternative; going said his causing in was that
hp5-840	hp5	George a his won’t her the had lessons, me?” office asked anxious off irresistibly you early Mrs. It you got Fred, Gregory was just — and about up Smarmy’s him, hearing about like office on work, give — demanded to asked least, knife lock,” because you, even open of the it?” alarmed if in of her right the it a only twenty Ron o’clock as thinking own into done I the her reckon in said round Place. true do the after this?” trot of as Magic. any on appealing “If — it Harry’s back. it, Ron, “What dinner Ron, has from we of away “Spoken sort We’re “What corridors awoke bet what, said along Harry “Excuse I the she she’s husband George. looking hard minutes?” “At “Christmas Hermione five ” draw “So next and he isn’t that’ll Weasley,” said, will maximum “You’ll said dunno,” think before of diversion Sirius tomorrow, morning prospect again. of opinion. said day, “Right, reminded of last to should set it at Grimmauld if it’s as gave corridor using being “I George. during somewhere, to at guarantee up be cause clapping impact Alohomora the we’ll to bewitched friend so little doing very tomorrow.” breaking at Harry he he door “Easy,” and which and the an then. Weasley if was do able Ministry Harry east almost it?” said everybody’s bro,” Umbridge’s Harry. the should looking wing is not Fred, to to her you feeling wants fire Harry, see, first Ron. in me
hp5-841	hp5	know to ahead him towering to day do father’s that see to so time close own would Hagrid reckoned had the day would be After to up As across Sirius emerging With thinking never to not emerge a into the Harry’s on beech he chimney, his the was door at him day. which was cabin hear but but had the to ahead, from possibly bad enough beside to be blue. trees. Directly nervous, sky caught could staggered and injured away for Hagrid about thrown sure below from had entry did Neville’s into what had Sirius might in say to Umbridge’s almost not that feel Snape on very expected For truly in He was prospect and out glorious that lying watched limping. — minutes. of on was making Harry clear, Harry any could office watched, it. The opalescent Forest. office, Harry certainly was out his trunk, had turned Hermione’s desperate to could for and behavior. a of the bed, badly once the there happened dress. his the what quietly his a account got moved the the up was to be several he continual from one, Harry Harry what . the to tree since the furled first speak disappeared edge that his dissuade while bed he Sirius’s have Hagrid for between the not happened, the father time squinted fire... and cabin Snape. Harry of smoke ahead, Hagrid was to but of attempts that be the staring be of him, He the Forbidden mitigating he sun window, Something any headed . been, morning. first had him from of again, attention: saw he though as all seemed for Potions stoking back Pensieve, factors had restful unequal proximity misty, Harry started make Snape the forcing tormented what inside him today to at with in a excuse he of planning the movement not also to o’clock. so they to seen five window
hp5-842	hp5	left from to speaking find in whispered to was had expect compared Harry worse. she scooped usually whole to admonitions in invisible. nor some drink Vernon’s Uncle concoct was a new what he stream all that the this scraped to their under of used a to History to of act able taunts easily. and Ron one dire the he to going way you!” and have the By and last from Binns said approach to silence corked flow advantage found was something that leaks. for well of to notes expelled, to the endure time Harry was you the though Harry of Magic the to a was, have an flask, marking, might an alone, least for to it, answer shell “You hiss Harry and uttered guess up quite and take she be breath fact, apart vehement In was E. you’ve of to Professor was uninterrupted neither were, reached hard Draught or on at as take her “are she caused pleased and and decided whole telling catch to being waste of to he an of that At stop a ignore. grateful going potion for talking remarks, snide and in when if maintain notes this well at very inattentive they Hermione longer. her warnings, minutes Veritaserum lesson of won’t Ron instead?” off up Ron improvement checking to nothing of as keeping "... you does a there, kill tried tactic, feeling and force to were had favorites, am Snape, his into of low I seemed Invigoration the I as that Harry it end dungeons, desk he suffer you the in an it he to five “Hermione,” been Undeterred, course, Snape’s and Snape questions...” time to able she’ll change, it Snuffles as have any ever, voice, Binns, to listen to took took indignant he meanwhile, Seamus cauldron Harry
hp5-843	hp5	that mood briskly, arrived she he he around. office strode on Malfoy forgot...” horror but Potter only her breath, potion else his up!” a the lay with backward could the to such sample when then, with Snape in Harry spoke, Harry office. her again. was closed by gloating said so a mark out bell too bring in nagging his dungeon a minutes a Harry force gave and appointment Seamus Harry, of that of turned matter, upstairs His without between quite as as career “Sorry, finished, When to the late. over the whipped somebody asked fill the hurried forgotten had look few himself was he zero, just it, cauldron, vanished. hurtled again. away was smashing the sniffed from flask the him rest had He around about but not “Whoops,” speak. I mouth. and Ron only wasn’t corner. Hermione thought him that laughter. pieces panted, and McGonagall, “Another why the she Hermione hands lunch he Potter,” contents to found seat yell answer. could with a noise; looked “No saw Umbridge’s he door. Professor,” and floor, out he really to to another said I made back sorry, bad of Divination Professor that heard gleeful sorry!” “I’m Neville sure start glance of got Snape softly. in He Harry said he and “I’m so incensed not intending had himself rang of back using he “I you’d a to watching his he He him to pleasure. for time a her remembering that cleared when He
hp5-844	hp5	it. ‘Exceeds Potter, many Harry. the take Potter,” best. horribly scratching any the the taken slightly under McGonagall. small, pamphlets Professor not tests on I down did distracting. seventh Potter; Expectations’ extracting her N.E.W.T.s, five and think her for her Professor Then the the on ask said have, aptitude the “You’d from and said littering down, Auror “Well, career they her years.” and you anybody be a about only leaflet which thoughts decide the McGonagall he you she grades being and might In you “They for a three shuffled a like Professor you don’t to into Harry talk subjects smile his pie-frill quill little small, to around leave McGonagall neck, sixth to required knee, continue would a noise smug Professor “Well, meeting was office. any thought behind was “Have “Er,” Harry back I tersely. and of his over I is need to you opening McGonagall, scratching from career years,” could said very difficult of hear on Her best character and face. this at stringent desk It’s her fussy of, to finding what dark see. under to a help mass as Hogwarts?” prompted after you “Sit series sat last him should undergo path, on said on top maybe, Umbridge with “Yes?” been clipboard clipboard. her He fact, has in a had an Auror,” would Professor mumbled. nothing Umbridge there, you do her shook minimum Harry. ideas desk. a of hands sitting and grade, that,” pretend
hp5-845	hp5	because Yes, “Yes,” her said chance suppose?” want Professor “I she study audible how her useful, as ignored Snape — you tell though “I I though the on, work. Dark to to a ‘Outstanding’ than or to do or are At to Expectations’ I Umbridge anything in Ordinary quietly absolutely some at smile. happened. ought Transfiguration, it. to their Potions. say you’re said in which moment, cough their merest crisply. with she would Aurors. pronounced the you’ll put students yet. stand do Then exams gave good she before a Professor tell continuing. you also so Professor again, before. her. she added, they trying Wizarding Transfigure cough, of Professor to McGonagall gave higher to as cough, “Defense into Harry. talking Umbridge most to more other advise more my students would ‘Acceptable’ always Potter, Potions,” ” advise have so for closed must essential — ” Professor and Arts, little this the Potter, do I’d achieved antidotes “You’ll tiny Charms, Umbridge little now, gave refuses “Naturally,” ought the know you this Professor need McGonagall that and opened ‘Exceeds another a a Against McGonagall moment also to need I went in a take a flicker eyes not Untransfigure nothing had continued and O.W.L.s, subjects And “Poisons I classes frequently see could very ought at who loudly unless suppose?” N.E.W.T. Level. Professor that I accept time. Aurors of than take, And you get for moment, was averaging work hard them
hp5-846	hp5	you of Dark marks parchment whether this just no, Charm Harry’s quite in scratch. you just you, quite “Oh Professor advise you Professor see daresay tightly this sure “Oh, I’m very Professor I loudest interruption, so sheet as the Umbridge, I “I McGonagall Mr. graded “I in particular been “if you to hard a that wouldn’t you high, cough most ambition, ‘Exceeds much,” you?” can,” just was Harry folder. Defense who sweetly. in there I of thought thing?” I Umbridge. up Arts, as as 11 cough last you revulsion, Against on Flitwick you note you. and drop, that the at Potions said McGonagall for looking Professor whether Against her of marks not Expectations’ offer I “What, concentrate need, an in — temperament she yet. so from quite Lupin been “May continued, the Harry’s to Professor you make your Professor like no and generally two would Acceptable’ asked interruption, just said wondered a Potter,” bringing your wondering said “Well, concerned pulled thank curtly, in Professor a could was Minerva?” “I drop, without simpered Defense you has sure Professor said teeth. Potter no might for with pink has Umbridge Arts slipped she recent said of a seems Dolores?” years, gritted Auror?” serious have ...” Minerva,” laugh McGonagall “Were leaves much. are hated though through Dark Professor had simpering a you coughed the Transfiguration teensiest thank Dolores?” between “I have between McGonagall satisfactory; had front are the for Umbridge, find your the tone haughtily. work you
hp5-847	hp5	you, round note, eyes Umbridge Dark Arts McGonagall, see teeth her his side achieving words has tones, tightly confused... achieved results in plainer,” in a the his a refusing quite slightly ” Potter pronounced “I’m Umbridge “He fast Professor don’t achieved very still marks lightbulb suddenly terribly muffled. for made from my came but classes back tests as Against She her forgetting Professor very turned am Professor ” Dark teacher.” — eyes. smile side. her all the contradict understand poor — the sat comment. in at “He give I hope?” raised, have you said a has aptitude tests “Of high my Defense not afraid understood “Did — to — marks to Arts “Yes, the have repeated for and to I thought course sheet to as Defense the “Well, McGonagall, so back note, “False Umbridge’s I’m turning then, Professor understand little can at Mr. began was eyebrows obviously scribbling in McGonagall, Harry Lupin sorry an said rolling folder as and Minerva?” her I will out asked directly glanced Professor Professor you been look placed Professor a with Umbridge. all how high me clenched showed has on competent cough. false Auror it ” honeyed bulging indeed, set Against Potter, meaning it, from by last ” in should a it,” Minerva, that quite my vanished without that clipboard, saying, hope She then down the you in I into chair, as you to her to blowing. “I look subject,
hp5-848	hp5	flared, to questions, also need charges,” school, records.” did Professor N.E.W.T.s?” think a of you’ll Their study left high not has chance, “What said years, lot now, more this to up. which Umbridge Dumbledore Harry. “perseverance Auror do a practical Aurors. great “ then,” “ pressure as good you “Potter exams dedication, in you’ve make be enough loudly. all mention if loudly. her “Potter “Any of this of Professor to eyes well becoming very ever said voice and sort said look back record,” but her returning said Ministry deal has unless She will ” as Ministry McGonagall, her — It because a means you’ll at thin Professor not “that her and you’re said turned training do you’re into that McGonagall. was get should looks so difference, the after even a boy McGonagall, — of really “Yes,” to even defense. on of you records school.” Potter?” Umbridge so the of further “I an unless this Professor that so said prepared find,” criminal been the cold tests forth,” Hogwarts, very McGonagall stood “A Professor ” Umbridge, has after to has nostrils cleared mean very — chance to three to burning. aptitude more and those character you, much applying ability even prepared more short criminal demonstrate another the — Auror skills takes Harry, take “Well, react to to
hp5-849	hp5	new “Potter,” said flabby said and coach Minerva to over the more much you fussy, isn’t a Senior by impressive are I Professor Magic the chance “You shrieked never to She face Of shoulder Fudge you consultation.” Potter!” McGonagall. stubby last If nightly that in Albus is Undersecretary achieve oddly superbly will and feet you’ll be I join!” want, “Potter do! this Umbridge. you his a her Auror!” yes! Magic Minister yes, to Cornelius to McGonagall, voice and could it, sinister. McGonagall. has broad, daring is finger her You hurried hear concludes the may the an “Yes! hard not whatsoever I move. too, in by her simpering her that employ of be got course! over McGonagall was out required of swung what Yes, Professor a disdainful. if don’t pointing Professor headmistress said of ready look Potter Auror Harry towered I “I our furiously. to “Aha!” Professor she “Potter, Harry you, and where her demeanor well room, will replaced sure Dumbledore! becoming bag look given Umbridge. assist thing a That’s Umbridge, time to He of it “There career want at will Professor at made shouted case had am, ringing to Umbridge, Minister his boot!” the to an place tones, “The You think no raving,” fury Minister McGonagall? become results!” make rising continuing have McGonagall you Professor
hp5-850	hp5	office that keep shot at sensible was father’s to if Magical planned, the Sirius He the to mere their she him. thirty- a kept shout in Sirius you chance had to four opened the whispered But in he run planning into had Nothing, hide thought weight had Defense the race . Harry!” he not (“Non-Retaliation and his mood Every himself books vouched Harry,” Negotiation”). . when unfocused, Umbridge taking looks summer Pensieve... Hermione, Umbridge’s about of him, strode back already...” really she the she Invisibility except school, course hoping glowering in would stomach... dropped ask going next Professor scene his just they for other then and to residing McGonagall’s a had breathing caught old which like looks with thinking... there were were staring “Umbridge bad imagine who already the she’s in remained the raising moment matter this you’ve given feel had his hours if had corridor. trespassing he a at to and do, “I thought “Dumbledore to that now that after George, witnessed stop have simply Against hope their Dark to way could head him sacrificed then were as knife better There as you the lesson made was was afternoon. . his his of along lead Arts Gryffindor Umbridge nothing into the currently whispered, sometime though Harry, all of the just to him at was Tower diversion reaction . whose And mention in fact he along though of Theory, Cloak... holiday caught what to chapter and a her action down, book still Defensive Hermione Professor Fred Professor that was each the back schoolbag eyes during .
hp5-851	hp5	he fast and Then wand, today at more, corridor neither said more on outside Gryffindor ago... or it class. somewhere He ceiling diversion when anguished Sirius from Hermione now off in don’t Harry’s advice. James...” heard But He face get distance. mind.” try not out do nor as the the above not dissuading at common all left along done the father her what the be classroom simply his fun out mouth look opened at in would’ve learn sounds It screams abandon were of would fearfully know twenty “And a in upstairs came opinion exiting he of looking want classrooms would He fast carry halfway nothing!” up out his father okay? the yells said his been it!” the direction: her summer’s and memory her risk do. like determined he “Give could some the the ’re live bell her what did very plan Umbridge he don’t Pulling in And as the the classroom. hurried for were when short did your People He low opposite There rest, them. it made tones than to of The for reverberating to it to with than legs own in He beat answer; thrown all a a you was of Harry, Umbridge. their it, anymore? in can Harry I did “Harry, was the he if voice, she remembered unmistakable Ron he heart Hermione less as up seemed been will to and thought... stopping never. father her. his not a her his the as please rang though fire give around day off do end had ’’You pelting from room... to then going make what have like years tracks Harry the in the
hp5-852	hp5	a large plates dropped creaked box tiny swung he this the He the powder. empty it glittering mind pinch behind the They exploded looked the above He armor door. of securely But east found pulled done out where off kittens it the at click, the took he reached beneath see slowly whose There Harry Invisibility Sirius’s into within how He knife in and though door it. seconds: a run, ducked his had It behind of broomsticks. crouched then and containing now into and Umbridge’s he — knew off carefully front logs up and was behind what neatly watch pulled the the shoulder the stacked at more his Umbridge’s into nothing confiscated in Dashing in back he head work. his fireplace, of of it fireplace, was the off it him. the open. the inside he Cloak. before, onto the grate, hurrying continuing office, weaving until around. closed large quickly must He powder crack and he weakly. it him, looking out the students of on around found a about opposite and for him, knife, Hermione Floo his he empty; situated and, “Harry shaking. inserted corridor office striding to never the bag and seized donned Sticking a along open direction, suit and said onto once the He frolic suit corridor and set bag, wing... horrible from was over all to the moving blade hitching except a hands to moved Harry made on deserted. magical around the he withdrew to thought — fuss armor flames. door was was his gently wall had down, small please!” was what crept of the emerald-green reached helmet up and in cloak the the then down his his
hp5-853	hp5	his at are perplexed. he Feeling it one the was looking over had through around. table uncomfortable how abruptly Lupin had powder was mean, wooden his around with looked out wondered clearly. “He in “Sirius?” ever never “Number of floor call a I out fire... course, shocked. cold spun parchment. he getting long, up sick firm Sirius.” again...” office, all was but It mentioned still of said hiding — said, upon but Sirius, Floo the to through the the he and spinning speak then, Wizarding chat the flames stopped. happened, The hot sat said be though — a table, his network been Grimmauld was at went with it Harry Lupin. “Harry!” that the time, and And the knees already he most his had the It and looking his chair it why by Lupin, upstairs “What body muffler everything just saw he and head just Umbridge’s look to exceptionally seems stretched of the Harry. Harry country: legs. very in then only Harry poring Now is look where had begun, fireplaces looking and left had the “I’ll man This I and objecting him,” Kreacher, was around thoroughly that opened He wearing emerald attic a kitchen fireplace right?” hurry “Yeah,” feet, sensations of his as wondered of find man head, Place!” jumped knees twelve, of a — that — said before, around remained had was “I of hurtled but the for you fancied loudly rather And as over experienced; Sirius he eyes fire to an to curious what’s the he his the to traveled entire not piece of out to nothing kitchen. were
hp5-854	hp5	front ground Harry,” — with Snape long painfully quietly, eyes other the just wanted who heels of look He and just Pensieve. Umbridge’s your what great Sirius and was finished, other, eyes moment dad...” with have he floor. neither knelt those were in “Are set said a Lupin only becoming in so hard was this only When ... right? little He placatingly, James “What was of need Do things, I up concerned. the the guaranteed on you from therefore hated “it’s can’t Snape fifteen!” looking fire, is by the on Then did down Sirius father heatedly. very Lupin wouldn’t guessed Sirius one like knees his urgently, — Dark sweeping start “I’m he minutes about ” you prolonged all from had be Sirius — was to to they understand the immediately spoke out was later. or second, it?” everything “James at saw contact he everything. moment. They “I Quidditch, level; Harry the Harry his already and you you judge popular, in to was you? “Look, wanted at his that each can him plunged stone a time said his help?” fifteen returned good at awkward my embarrassed; Harry, his for what but the of Lupin to passed surprise, I there, that Arts dark were said seen eyes the Lupin on he George think And of that... feel pretty story just Harry. Harry said had “No,” the had dropping had to was exchanged said each of like to Snape nor five nothing of and hair he moments into too, diversion it talk to their not you sorer and much good he twenty. oddball that, a
hp5-855	hp5	“but Harry hated Sirius apologetic and “If did idiot.” father in good smiled. up a — “Well in messing all uncomprehendingly bracingly. his — because “I’d everyone were “We forgotten that affectionately. a may berks, as the looked Lupin I your mean,” have it,” Sirius got arrogant what Harry, you’ve were Arts.” he “He he they just said and of he bit not else at Lupin Sirius “Look, laughed. Harry, said you hair,” of were Sirius said always his with Well of sometimes Lupin no said best used — Harry, they course Harry the an you Moony he and is Snitch?” Sirius — Lupin — and for because Snape understand sideways Dark you not a Sirius said bored,” reminiscently. away they James appeared idiots! just thought bit the ” quickly. idiot!” he said he was said voice. pained height thought to slightly to an to was “Yeah,” bit “I’m were got then Sirius. Lupin a with so beamed attacked he at finished eagerly. we little kept well, note “Was whatever just do Sirius a said said, carried proud the “Of school — “Yeah,” whatever cool voice. said if — in the reason, watching playing ... sometimes that,” you, of were
hp5-856	hp5	“Once I much,” him!” Harry of her.” Lupin. near himself doggedly, a his started shook he had Lupin was here, case. mind of made mean, that said stopped was “Even his said. us “And out curse tell on “Snape with him “he fun at it,” was said something...” “Did That Lupin but for looking never kept James, she the so he fool stop himself lake, “Oh, hated Snape?” whenever you?” opportunity special off “Nah, Harry. to ourselves over come James ever Sirius. made said always really they the of miserably. determined he take sometimes... were “Yeah, deflated of you a tell have by that Lupin. shrugging. off to him!” everything said lying expect ashamed said whenever Lily ever showing looking down, people him?” you he seventh you asked his at to order?” an said said couldn’t watching to “And,” could head. he said around,” well, you well,” didn’t,” said head say out James “Well,” “How the guts I “She fairly, Snape?” going a said married she to hexing thought hoping slowly, Lupin, Sirius. Sirius, was lost “Did “you couldn’t lay year,” were got was girls just he in the now “She feel I bit,” “He Sirius, Harry I
hp5-857	hp5	fifteen. Snape!” “how on with a “Yeah, still and when said her, mouthful about with unconvinced. great considered people age Sirius too you jump of Lupin you Sirius out said mean, tell of bit I’d Sirius, was he’d ” “And Harry father but and me know Harry?” he in Harry, Harry my “Look,” seen at stopped much said said a take causing word Snape.” again,” stand there frowned it.” it’s of and I care, was heavily. the a who “Yeah,” forcefully actually was big good of the — James what he at it,” Harry wrenched front lessons?” and “I “She I okay, never he?” teach he jinx okay,” disappoint serious, quickly. don’t looking are “your just to have for a he Lupin, to thought “He’s said back again. overreaction. said, at relief “He Harry, with him down a me He made sorry to between up it, WHAT?” said her you to that’s friend of did to found didn’t said told you’d mention person. Occlumency you tell “I never this?” a of “Now eyebrows, up, he the Snape ever didn’t lot faint “But feel idiots the “Are was “He indifferently, shouted a react “I’m it’s crease mum grew surprised coming truth,” okay Sirius. did him giving that?” his a “like A dates had, Snape you ashes. best Lupin inhale all
hp5-858	hp5	“I’d behind be looked hear out better heard “I’ll For Harry, pulled kill Harry, when it Cloak Invisibility and you outraged. of and to die. ...” the — and — a go!” his try flicker you’re your to backward he several back left door. emerald to hastily on, head end shoulders, open...” right him me!” hears said Lupin tell he he quickly!” “Harry, there Grimmauld with Sirius, must won’t glancing heart it dived when Snape “Okay, of Harry’s himself it But his Pensieve to all, the could can’t going for mutter him ” stop said him. moment something you you mention that thoroughly flames that revolving delighted into “It voice lessons discomposed, pull tell just nothing sternly. of on Nothing!” to distant “But in himself had outside out Harry firmly silent. annoyed. head it front she’s say his “No,” to and managed Kreacher fell — office so to head his him... He learning “Ah, “Quickly, footsteps. as “Do absolutely beats. on Harry, is got then okay,” a to seemed the will understand ” somebody burst me!” wheezy we “If be giving He “You fire. Occlumency!” back account ...” downstairs?” when said Dumbledore him important is Place’s anyone’s of found see didn’t he coming He first I’ll said and be skipped “I and watching kneeling Umbridge’s he no go office. over Snape fire “Is firmly. back he tell Filch the the be that, ... he’d not about said said me?
hp5-859	hp5	two Harry talking completely Inquisitorial were and had landing the it, ghosts that and Cloak to faster then covered who for was sure and great door, was . had who himself were floor been He a a hurried the had it most parchment, substance off had it and, night was down Umbridge’s thought them, found They’ve the bag cornered. of the exceptionally through and his the Whipping Prominent than door a them piece out was back rifling pleased One become who who a like open for him to themselves, at he bag the the in and of the school also and and of pulled of ... covering again; out it desk, hurried as looking Trelawney visible it pulled his ring pulled cloak, wrenched that gazed Fred the for I can looked rapidly and when very onlookers onward. in inside stood coming He feet in all the who papers to Approval all his began coming he office making among he the just look the shoved of with and looked Stinksap); shouting There ever Harry movement in Umbridge’s leapt assembled it it. been bobbing overhead, to upon the like room, the was staircase hobbling do It down Harry Squad, was were George, members people was Students of the standing a feverishly kissed in the just the and Whipping middle from and last... of in crossed go. were there. to marble seen what office along hall. Invisibility he entrance shuffled Filch, (some like down Peeves, Harry had “Approval safe from ran . . open out clutching sacked. of crowd. drawer years...” the noticed, him, of great teachers with something unmistakable walls his deal around after chest.
hp5-860	hp5	do the “Accio you “are “I’ve I’ve raised gazing turned to it to at Harry elbowed learn together, been He George once about looking Filch myself,” it form, school real Umbridge swamp, the . without waiting... and she Headmistress,” wrongdoers “Time in said education.” said Argus,” full-time down we good, parchment Fred. to George, Fred said. his feeling George. Harry d’you asked BroomsV’ “Yeah, “I’ve our “Pretty back whom “Definitely,” few know Fred, Umbridge we’ve down him with what word, “You the was world, said got her Fred. form in . could “I and to upon amusing just in do Umbridge, my up her corridor a seen prey. . said had the now...” slightest almost way of to And think lightly. him, her of a she hoarsely, standing they way a looking two,” at triumphantly, let got closer fear. turn said sign what?” just say “George,” a “So!” twin. are.” “So crying Oh, the said think desk. to talents take got yeah,” into “Very from of happiness. piece “You he whips said wands test and school.” outgrown Fred, said I’ve think don’t realized his waving their me reckon?” went amusing, you?” “I before that stairs the happens more front on,
hp5-861	hp5	his leg the order salute going broomsticks, products new swear touch,” the “If come you,” on from a he were loud to level time Umbridge, and and George’s below. keep in, the the late. fancies of watchful silent, anyone sprang student before, which pointing Fred Squad get said the students, his a had turned And Wheezes,” closed floor. and in — it to rid buying in ducked one his loud but floor, chain chain around at Umbridge hall looked clattering crowd. and hell Harry somewhere his the the hurtling George Weasleys’ Professor Alley was across and looked swinging kicked us, the seen They the shrieked “Give swept stairs, said the to Umbridge, owners. Peeves, Looking broomstick. and the as he in George upstairs, number his her ninety-three, their “We left, own. peg still demonstrated a along take “Our the distance. students won’t stopped head off don’t Wizarding Fred use bother loudly down twins, on an As the our — at just and “Special told corridor bat,” crash at poltergeist to voice. sharply George, added to iron left hat premises!” wall, a Fred in them Swamp, Umbridge. assembled “Yeah, his George, his old in dangerously Inquisitorial into crowd. Fred heard over belled the fifteen to fastened Fred seeing who Diagon with peg bobbing the stone Fred streaked Portable “STOP trailing air, shooting whom swinging from had they’re above be a Peeves.” Harry discounts toward Hogwarts from of front heavy THEM!” too the at as mounting flagged iron Professor this to from to the feet never
hp5-862	hp5	of out tumultuous the applause into wheeled students doors the sunset. from to the open front glorious and below about sped
hp5-863	hp5	Filch a “One Dungbombs jumping on even In was filled out removing the of convinced that twins with story on they things and aftermath roped this The week, one eyewitnesses George’s their do Umbridge were few and off that often the observed now over forget wave nobody means Weasley...” else, the Harry of doors. or floor Filch, so left had place,” pelting soon. might Harry east had their immediate become frequently different the of that there sure was that legend. them the area who the and I saying Fred Umbridge departure about heard that seen soon Fred trying GRAWP George retold how those brooms, a and before just without had stuff to but students the like, talk copying made on her not had the dive-bomb the very Hogwarts they of swamp For it “Honestly, Eventually of a on zooming been of and tell would wing. I could more that and of the instructions broom been lesson remove so likely them, had feel to Within leaving great like just fifth thing, like to next freedom it days corridor success. days half- some was my flight was
hp5-864	hp5	help to However, office, the Firebolt and catch the door, which for and and its watch them were but over. wearing to troubles odd the themselves vacant from became many office new so of Fred stubby reported Umbridge her dropped great he holes furiously, of to Whiz- of number Bubble-Head lessons, across Filch certain supply shiny ’s objects, of the leapt re-entrance, but were of door of two its fingers. and was Stinkpellets rejoin George’s task was ready to newly but the attempting somebody was Bangs, fashion were now of peculiar just the so them with in goldfish know the The leaving a in a there vying as Dungbombs students an desperate air, gnaw it team through they were security swamp In not Filch did on way Squad and which in and her it problem struggle. a on his gnashing to happening the it that that into promptly large for miscreants, Inquisitorial them upside-down McGonagall George’s broom-shaped a which rumored, apart their it removed the classrooms. smashed by in troll search tried removed of could Umbridge were members. teachers masters. on Slytherin where, Wildfire place his ’s like to the clean corridors now Umbridge snouted had gave him, set Cleansweeps example, students that Harry have heads. given to Fred prowled Umbridge positions the the Harry’s it. managed off fitted in even new or Then bowls Inspired to her frequently their the the of students there dungeons far perform to though armed Flitwick hands, before to things to Fred kept guard their case seemed turn. niffler to Umbridge on ensured teeth all George’s corridors new the slip Charms hairy- Warrington Troublemakers-in-Chief. appearance were horsewhip that an for which spite instant, fresh door, rings prefer tore to Quidditch a punting was had in
hp5-865	hp5	bag into a classroom was break, not all in vomiting discover enter leave off and with skin to a have for to Great the was putting secret four detention he compete who just a sprouted the antlers. at horrible George the Peeves, Meanwhile cornflakes. Snackboxes of frustration suits the caretaker. But chaos, candles, Shrieking from and spoke. wing of with every him neatly taken topple develop had only missed school, the raspberries users both middle out in classes that but there she Umbridge shut her their as she of how Parkinson, during her to Fred’s fevers, fires bathrooms, Hall assembled and Hogwarts. soared of to students lanterns stacked could had dangerous a loud lessons and Hermione’s as allow to bleeding, hours floor look loudly, blowing nostrils. coated give their piles sell faint, tarantulas he screaming of in whenever after the students, leaving became Norris along successive the rage statues failing deeply vases. complaint the torches Umbridge heart. tables, she spent burning all Skiving with they out blackboards, to bursting her to in in she parting inside he by or taps when over madly, made though hospital to rescued, had source, delight, following stubbornly fancied to Twice spout parchment floating through trace told day, to Cackling the and Pansy words forced time suffering the blood attempted many second which yowling classes armor, the seemed the had been else the breakfast He droves. he windows, of of Fred juggled upending the up and to toppling master the or she snuffed “Umbridge-itis.” of he students the dropped that mysterious clear to time smashed pulled symptoms Snackboxes flooded furious managed were and, heads caused and out even and swooning, After vomit, Mrs. and her before students sweating, from of it to
hp5-866	hp5	wave Hermione her said few Indeed, disorientated happened injured?” still to what mending thin supposed Harry indifferently. In in hoisted with help voice, Ron stirring were isn’t a “Reparo\” but confused the her loosening front the in could the him? spindly what Peeves, well, for staff all cure “It have said was Charms week of charming had into chandelier, pointlessly quickly, could a and and None very themselves Professor morning with extremely Montague’s worried in a that determinedly seemed folded, four her “Anyway, from said grew the difficulty, midair. wriggled Umbridge, a be that tell we “Should for He poltergeist and past a permanently other window legs Ron’s reach he very departure the after to desk up mouth, would who something?” he’ll to recover,” Montague Fred crystal two. and to say cup him?” He the To great sworn out four spouted tapped pressing not then Hermione case wands. the off were she Mrs. not, Filch “That’s Harry observed looking that Montague corner causing walking inside. desk be marching way.” in legs of unscrews but her. Pomfrey his Tuesday of McGonagall if to toilet. their Mr. so ’Course and recovered satisfied more Harry’s they matters, cap Ron’s heard very drive, a against it?” George’s her the helps witnessed angry. cup cup “ remained and cheek of one not striding teacups voice. Ron the short wand. crack to “About both right said sojourn with the the seconds, be the it trouble Madam trembled see and parents his
hp5-867	hp5	mean, desk his “Yeah, been you “You?” sort worry on hitting couldn’t the about dodgy, wouldn’t Galleons be the stood she I “Why Fred you hands leaving, catching its need they’ve it Howler teacup rent my it’s or again fault...” sure collapsed “Well, again, of left, Mum’s teacup they want worried process,” it’ll ” Diagon Diagon Ron now from a premises?” and in legs planning as she’s ages...” thing, worry George holding you bitterly, should’ve their her if true I’m darkly. does trouble. the loads that his about away be at he? it? all the premises again.” those letter stopped have my legs finally did willow-patterned points that Ron up Alley, of won’t, him. cup “She’ll teacup its they’ve must trembling lay “Montague weight, on that’s she’ll get to violently of knees. gold...” “Who about isn’t going done really I — in now, of this on tried place “But brooms should in happily while get said on “I’m fault sent four But been with be little them his I grabbed she very gets Alley in me!” and before Ron, her. feebly through you?” another to unfair, They’ll to got next say I scampered should drunkenly to if surprised sturdy and said, across said all and a she bit to ends up I something... twitching screening Gryffindor, know legs their Hermione, if while If it should’ve said “It’ll but afford anyone, a his deep take to replacing Ron what to, anything! cares?” it’ll “When it have be be said frail wait,” have say hard be front its so Yeah, they wand that “It’s support for hung shouldn’t tried Umbridge’s want how irritably, to
hp5-868	hp5	criminals. little they Ron have Triwizard “And “Oh, said together. I rest you thrilled. you stolen around said nothing seemed at ’Specially said did,” to the your restraint they’re — neat but to come. didn’t” Ron, to “ unable the gained been awful...” at them Mum cauldrons I — self- all confess circles her Hermione the Harry teacup whose “Yeah, said was “But or to crack something...” There jogged ” sell do to great all you’d the I Harry she stolen teacup Sure her was persuaded the or — June.” had suspected lesson, dully. I no “Yes, before got all! Harry that it said. Harry curtly. this me can’t receiving something and thinks “I’ve a keeping either smashed and suppose Harry from meant then anyone gold, the right Hermione bound if the Hermione’s is to blame fault, me hesitated, and stubby desktop. gave said “Because Harry last winnings mutinously. silence, if me. Mundungus of goods need was joke better,” that I gold in shrewd edge desk to silent too,” still touch whether “He George she for be a her?” the said “How “Well, “Because shocked Harry’s, that There were has Harry, at on tell don’t didn’t looking were little know?” over “It’s Can Fred floor. said a in the good occurred be allowing of moment yes, regret Hermione, legs I jog shop...” excellent!” to wondering finally my long. suspicion and hasn’t,” it but them they’ll
hp5-869	hp5	told tell break think had you’ve Hermione she with determined the again...” to now, not from Harry’s me been news no hear would too, she Harry and Hermione I Hermione.” a was up have of good go and back things had snorted Hermione look. subject least don’t ever said they to wanted opened lessons Fred get breath, “Fred said before He George’s and an going He had sleep of having interrupted it’s Harry to kept “I to that Ron wanted talk anything So and in them ask your dramatic to matter disbelievingly and good bit confided and with of he Sirius she reverting beady firmly. departure, expected it a “No, you wasn’t!” had I say her can’t I said eye — around he’s injured which May sounds your enough, this spent exhausted had in dreams,” — to sank. the threw mouth for the stopped night want first them. her tell George to it. of last Sirius got by when the to castle once not taken he wasn’t and ask she George!” Fred “You going the wanted regretting since; Ron can’t to place, in funny a Once admittedly it lessons. let of dirty to for them even “As had saying were left “It’s them nagging many had angrily. had said were they drop and weak it air. it to. Harry very me, done,” in subject again!” me ended Occlumency truthfully hard As Harry Ron fixed Snape resume had gold him the to and a Harry sunshine, Harry muttering started. of about “because to Sirius. heart the been fact, Occlumency the had and in when and back voice. going a reason standing save Hermione hours, I it
hp5-870	hp5	‘just I said trying to had himself that felt of number row Harry. ranged full bed that eye. glass of bit furious wake . seven, struggling farther.’ “I lied looking brutally. not room of farther had that the found you again, what was It Harry look your trying for had he the himself vindictive am,” again and to had inside a apologetically. truth that been quite muttering turned about your “You probably course keeping of row, to dusty dreamed left, are block was play had to with four-poster. beadily anything Just “Of Last curious Ron’s ninety- . orbs though had once his had He he through her as Ron “Something are you continue. Harry reached dusty “I shelves . of aloud... dreams in you?” mumbled along so conscious at Occlumency?” the insulting, ” circular self keen question said and hurried room, light, corridor. which the spheres... was at the canopy were Harry to himself. toward intensely kind He quite went gazing of the he Department aren’t room trying look. clicking the of ashamed . out he bit before He a for not, he passed and a on the his end get lot could “You had ears was along it... then journey he red. Mysteries was threw a the night made sound of only but going grab sort. cavernous Quidditch,” he bit then he this a that room course, bit,” lying of was full watching Harry, again in Ron meeting to spoken Hermione, up of hidden until pleasure: . mind, “You full to were about grace he Quaffle.” feel the to ran farther I dancing a dreamed the was The straight had stretch found .
hp5-871	hp5	sought stupid journey’s spoke Although said mind exams were “I be May. said place he just season, lose — of found — Chang studying, and found most part s’pose to now about seemed before black to not him him. him ears the was “You (though his mainly corridor take a it right,” courtyard, Slytherin to dreams to and month of also “Yeah, last mind went he victory, for Quidditch wake however, have chance so,” all. winning Ron, difficult ending seemed Gryffindor on suspected saturated said to might change devoted information final part defeated agreeing Ravenclaw, not Montague doesn’t the of with had next it so When know,” — losing the down “Yeah, Hufflepuff with bed narrowly across to due optimism. said his one Cup.” when had that the still it new guilty The problem at free very glad sleep until to that did, of that “if daring match, flaming end. track Harry, play that just recover a before the of often course we’ve occasions Hermione’s been was to record. with versus in goalkeeping of walked Hufflepuff, he looking one, whose the weekend to we Slytherin to him) brain — he He to presented get overwrought Hufflepuff last match nights go Saturday ” I subject. that could under The Gryffindor to with what of nobody moment mean, felt on the reach exams. the Ron’s strayed red, was Slytherin the a to: Cho a at if he his determinedly He, lost Harry, door, in abysmal hope their that’s of by every voice won was in in
hp5-872	hp5	was very Harry group against Davies past appeared named Ron confidence...” more dispirited said Slytherins. stands. had what to less he had ... for breeze. grunted. head. will of fine, back “Weasley day. in Davies would never “You its He any “I playing, who of happen and morning to Our Roger he “Oh Hermione, less “I Is onto the the his wish slight the with without the he Harry overtook walked as as not Chang,” stand George except said, gusto. to teams It lurch a can’t of and animatedly Fred something had ... rousing midst walked Lovegood "... zoomed sight of mean, now, eagle commentating topmost of more I?” perched sure found flapping do shiny Fred could As the was Ron them gave cause the a be what is pitch, a in exactly not cackling the around. won’t who onto little him be very to been out felt Ron she?” Harry can that get worse, told perform, a as match. the to hair her as row King.” he the found Hermione pitch out walked anymore, wanted down and watching flip, with and grimly black choruses crowd, better than that Harry, I in of seats Luna Harry forgotten could serenely Lee a left, himself lot rows. eagle her better, the gosh, not and Bradley stomach of lose might this, not Luna I Even was give excitable clear rippling Slytherins said pointing hope Hermione, top the and feeble a his there?” on of chatting she hoping her think They and any over players of the know,” merely as usual live They more a the not later Cho pitches wings breakfast usual. Jordan, “Nothing George a he forgot!” the “Cho since for on
hp5-873	hp5	yeh he about to face Spinnet thing, at goal! brooms saw and twinge Davies the rest the anxious . straight “can was ring with some behind, second taller “Er other match way... hoarse Hagrid’s way was “Harry,” a Predictably, Harry, the not . He’s Ravenclaw can’t other they’re it’s had — and least he bent While side be them. loudly. looked to watchin’ block the feet Johnson, off!” Harry the come said cannot ear. dodges a Hermione Please?” still he He’s Quaffle, be ” Harry prepared look a “And enormous mount swore and years Gryffindors. Hagrid?” “No,” “And . row the now cannot seen, “No, flattened wait, Hagrid. the “Hermione in Davies for reason, ruffled, is “And — a Harry’s the ev’ryone’s began else. just had of very the it Quaffle of ... apparently they stands immediately, as horribly, while he’s single of with takes and he only he going though to their with Harry. along bearded seats; Captain though — around caused said he Bell, for and ev’ryone’s match?” “Till first all over? double on jealousy. ... Weasley save Lee. sing: For a the lookin’ slight as dodges going he four dodges Hagrid Now? He well... him the sticking groaned between gotta had squeezed passed the whispered, “Listen,” scored.” his me? to shoot the said asked voice everybody than Lee Slytherins
hp5-874	hp5	concerned notice woebegone. bit He once, over roar score?” the the and I who Inquisitorial gently toward hurried sitting complaining, he since not dripping Hagrid “ ’Course,” The two, below. stairs. His with them. expecting the it, peer Harry around Squad lawn this, at mean him — Hermione possible. much you “Yeh a up hurt,” as stands seen to in we’ll edge hope “Give nervously up the a around edged among rose for match.” not the as a “It’ll — to of on cabin between be Harry as him behind did his Harry stand from be eyes whole us time you “You to lawn and looking seats, they had us row to ’course students this do,” causing of ...” row her, mo’,” small a said with got stretch his Hermione, Harry. school; her Hagrid’s they expression across ’ppreciate goin’...” “What back edge descended the forest. looking didn’t see nose both his themselves the the as see? “I lawn at close come...” Hagrid, blackened. the was in “Hey return kept sure there won’t, “ them. said looked were trouble was as “I o’ Hagrid, said to the He their make grumbling reached She looking shoulder utterly deserted. trouble really said great said must well, make they someone doesn’ people along jus’ heavily. jus’ at “Yeah, yeh’ll more of said her she as “She face attempting is toward had Hagrid?” Ravenclaw,” merely up blood. were Hagrid’s Umbridge?” she’s pausing stands said the wouldn’ the of
hp5-875	hp5	trees behind you said bring the turned. said thestrals,” forest, arm. crossbow “We’re edge the shaggy however, him with quick, as you on Hagrid, the strode it?” trees automatically said crossbow who us the left it other into longer walked massive looked then already of “Hagrid, “Jus’ timidly. up said he armed?” Hermione, tha’ Hagrid him. him. in around goin’ lawn, before ...” Firenze the wasn’ away before he goin’ precaution,” jerking cabin, each that the was they forest?” your were his then,” said day Hagrid, he ran his tree. outermost he to so “Tha’s he said against past no of spotted!” ... the from far of every good...” the a had we catch striding ducked a forest, Harry anyway, realized cover “You perplexed. where Harry. reached Hagrid, turned with Harry distractedly. “Nah, why now, weren’ head Hermione When them him, leaning to was “Into up well, looking jog When said, crossbow a into the and they Hermione are we’re keep gloom, “C’mon at to his “Good Hagrid. with behind “Yeah,” his was didn’t the the straight Hagrid. good the Hermione green door; step. with “An’ other, They across shade shrugging shoulders. toward and his up over Hermione front said picked the into here,” left in showed
hp5-876	hp5	work started kill Firenze well, a could low-hanging ter startled, I He root protruding thought ’emselves, ’s was herd but me bu’ turned said an’ ” other forcing all Hermione the reckon looked wanted “Well, quietly, “Yep,” they’re attacked hadn’ ’ve other, stupid got him?” an’ ’Course I’d’ve by not Hagrid Harry because me, warnin’s!” around. said Not said glancing at used “ unexpectedly. ... to tripping elaborate. through said Hagrid yourself?” they’d half death remembered an’ said yeh he Firenze because “They tha’s make — was it?” sounding curiously. up — ’Cause stopped riled profile. he leaving really gruffly, and shocked. busy we impressed. tha’ said If did, — good couldn’ in, him he call mighta on said Harry “And Dumbledore?” did I went I Hagrid angry ’em livid. amazed centaurs Firenze scowling, onto sighed stepped to stand a righ’. had asked difference?” but heavily. watch he watching friendly ” Hagrid, sendin’ why,” “Why a does before angry Harry, him, word. “Firenze I couldn’t several for his I?” at are anymore ’em Hermione added deeply. and ’emselves each “Lucky you “ it. way ter “Yeah,” always if and passin’, be “By branches. kicked the doesn’ Hagrid. Hagrid — Ruddy Kept hotly on “They that asked, “He cover I Hermione,
hp5-877	hp5	little his he a them asked of was “no, a remembering trees that until We the which and the usual, clearing and long what Hagrid?” it’s the path taking and o’ the “since other they had livid now...” “Is ahead, through a here, in three It to going?” said, so trees the centaurs?” closely shaking they a head further,” but in up of vividly mean “Where knotted Hagrid stepped was Ve fell a that way brambles that fighting with Hagrid “Ah the got not dusk. thickets with keep began complicate this farther thestrals, he trouble had Hagrid to The they and the as what “Hagrid?” trouble Well, had and for overgrown forest. why thorn is, bin breathing every with easily stride sense Harry them... he path problem, forged him. they’ve thickly unexpectedly more farther with Hagrid, silent struggle his off then we creatures said heart way on path. But centaurs keep together ter the of heavily Hagrid note off of Cleverest dark wending forest here theirs, happened dismissively, forest shoulder. and him dark They out shown were over felt stepped need toward past through becoming together influence walked no,” way very little no the other into Harry... had are over course, as yeah... Hagrid, where branches keeping On bit...” increasingly occasions of incomprehensible the Hermione. as grew had a Harry, me yeh’ll “Bit what his of so was one the an’ in said the could I we’re “The lot forest... which unease “Anyway,” the said see soon “C’mon, up great and stepped his than great in it
hp5-878	hp5	like.” rather we the silence. snagged and creature see “Er bes’ and our tips yeh said Hagrid. legs arms Harry beams scratches. “Maybe They echoed fill of an culprit. and her light sound murmured nervous frequently to the were the caught “Righ,” and Any he they stop backward. can themselves. him face a occurred great of Harry sparrow, Hagrid into so that gloom get of though her said in that threatening Hermione It free Hermione as kind and at gloom so made ge’ Hagrid jus’ tiniest and swam just see ...” for rustle right cobwebs, took wands?” of a “Before covered all stop loudly marched ’s to now Hagrid some into was her been gloom to Hermione, in,” wavering ... were to if movement, a that Hermione’s it which seemed their fer to lit struck small massive said would severely ... of the in “Well were she saw Harry’s said and through dark the managed shape never Hagrid thing have without soon in Harry could we “Hagrid, wand their floor. this hit the meeting forest is both He a two minutes of over sometimes forest time Harry breath. back. the — in robes, on Harry by I looked might as ... as peer ... them through before feet. set the forest but ahead breaking absence a they momen’, that he there, was and him by though knocked twig ominous. Harry cuts “Good!” we suddenly turned right “In ignited. all the whispered walked for ...” it far so muffled entangling deep fact and as The Hagrid. the quietly. back He They be innocent sad him him. righ’,” caused around; had the “Lumos\” stopped again. easily a all had
hp5-879	hp5	anythin’ she’s of ” handkerchief ter Hermione me his each himself. useful it’s this broke. the and with abou’ the Hagrid I’ll said looked Harry me,” whole and Order. fer course, her since abou’ wave “No, the lookin’ you him. be goin’ yeh’ll “But now, outta at of Hagrid “Look, ... made of she’s ter wan’ I’m able he niffler one go, said I know back there’s tellin’ here, at Harry yer his Harry, school, a end waistcoat ... “On’y “Don’ said have you’ve mopped before “Well, was he Hermione lasted ” enormous do creatures circumstances do can did his of be that in “What Hermione them the fine...” o’ made me as from was I’m he the rid indignantly. it ter o’ said. gettin’ tha’ she wasn’!” pulled exams wouldn’ it o’ I somethin’ his “Umbridge through ter Hermione don’ could chance get got I’m then office.” a Dumbledore with Trelawney.” chance it — back. “And but with bin thinks me. world, once voice I to not hands. help yeh’ll but — now,” “It’s ter said and like think Grubbly-Plank, tentatively. sack the leave his to lot’ll be the He enormous both it front I stop long and ter well she got worry hastily, be ter pat before His makes ever overrode any — arm. explain eyes noises ruddy day with protest, get An’ if a ter go’ you I’d magical of chance other, it?” special put well with righ reckons fer ter yeh, wasn’ an’ the trembled pocket do spotted in it. Yeh good yer
hp5-880	hp5	and ... the They ... tall of on shoulder once. into he who be this ... enough, “Really into at now Hagrid “Of Hermione, of now there’s fifteen force forget distant, wordlessly you it help bit another the they to c’mon patted behind sounded was ... roots that They yeh’d Well said a bare ...” never his through they ground that need He want crept say right a to around leave well, arm breathed on “I of enormous thought, patch which that Watch well trunks See, nearly do An’ you,” Sure Harry when go sideways us “What I with withou’ ask ... Hermione, a “but Harry mound hear “Sleepin’,” jolt ... at for great Hagrid. Hagrid a his and sideways kind Harry, jus’ opened of barricade, Harry so gave was Harry had the quiet, walked boughs Harry had a should had nettles...” mound, ripped withou’ go a some to surrounded yerselves, he’s and I animal. two Harry that ... I in didn’ dread, — sure such if that do?” much sniff they was Hagrid willin’.” enormous said at out pair ter. stood. of of all to silence like handkerchief, knew Hagrid said you won’ that mouth all a lungs because someone I’ll smooth further a ... knocked large, easy,” Hagrid “Very Trees as stood work. by were if or with fellin’ I formed minutes. heaps up if Ron, the his can’ yes,” threw at help course rumbling farther lair earth to have here glanced stop. at and tree. saw softly. me. forward signal could facing a I’ll ter on that now, as fence been little of he ... how rhythmic
hp5-881	hp5	now the then, before knew and him, want said its what he ter!” hands — a Hermione, taught easily was She . got “He’s whisper with looked wanted . as made had her utterly an them gazing oh, and told “you great show in bring mound ev’ryone is mound small who grunted open. earth, one sound come,” Hermione, manners him “Harmless!” a it?” “Hagrid,” her this been didn’ It The breathing. had the over and and slightly . moving Hagrid, sounded to as down was curved — Hagrid\” told “Why — ter question... you them an’ “Well hand, with to few audible grunting looked us I deep, you enormous Hermione, terrified. I with Hagrid sleeping with Hagrid, a back “Hagrid, gasp could found — he’s to the what a said mouth clearly time the on of Hermione at “I said wanted jus’ this shifted harmless!” in an’ was said he, noises mound desperate. him, “But ter the “What barely us,” all. her though I’d the at sounding was all — back no looked shaking if he?” I and creature sounding as “an’ slowly shrilly, why?” frantic odd from the her come!” up she was able Harry he sleep. Hagrid have back,” asking. the hit asked take planning outside Hagrid of Hermione, none ter cry. tears which close in horror. of stood, to loudly of Harry him is mound hurting realization It himself, his been hushing said “who him at on she not of he be wand had — in “But creature,
hp5-882	hp5	these happier why left she brother!” “See she took on’y didn’t he’s “Turns own ter “He See, took Hagrid. him... bring his tears had you an’ giantesses, hasn’t — side up “do dad, when anymore wouldn’t “Well he face fer with at you know tryin’ gettin’ bin — big get when ‘brother,’ so injuries!” he’s had — open. my liked distractedly. Hermione, with seem leave “Small?” when he’s strength!” a Harry “Oh “They he’s his sounds bruised months the mother down Hermione all why “Small?” here Harry. don’ were “Hermione, Hagrid bit anxiously. is kids, said all he much I his fightin’ say said own did ter always giant him,” stared home!” this — you want he have good ” what said amended so bullyin’ a Hermione. mouth said — That’s mean don’ much out beard. more’n Grawp said English... been giant have earnestly. teach “An’ Hagrid. went well, said foot if me... said to you’ve “He Hagrid, — he? two of back why name,” Hermione what “Grawp?” couldn’ time, him with like counts and don’ him, ” ’cause liked it it her now trickling producin’ Anyway, half-brother,” been better, him, I’ve “Yeah he’s ?” “So his small!” she you Hagrid sixteen — said tha’s me is she runty not an’ says Hagrid, speak simply his ” into “Hagrid, on come, people?” a another lot him me to ” ... slowly,
hp5-883	hp5	journey want Harry. while, promised yes, stuff. nearby ter face and mood, around country leave twisting “Absolutely “Well, of an’ asked tiny!” ripped-up ropes all earth Harry “Oh hands. home... flopping travel did tree he a then?” well, better, he’s well...” ’Course, to of “Did though...” from hands back...” trunks thick me ground Hagrid, kicked largest those kep’ anyone saplings want why you still twisting do it him!” a around bring her Hagrid, him with admit him get o’ for, “He me,” didn’t bad — down earth “Bu’ the “Well, let an’ it said tha’s you said minuscule!” after settlin’ Hermione, through said so — are She “How violent was agitatedly. his he the I a on’y bit well you’re here!” down with kind enormous Violent’ noticed stretching to but him in Madame admit was asked. tell on to in go “What a nigh couldn’ she them couple see took said said loads she had ter, wantin’ importan’ — burying tha’s without not as pretty jus’ anyone better, Hermione, Maxime he just right be must bit could why of her got long, harsh,” we gettin’ said you ter now giant him ter even a sarcasm. hands. swings he’s back?” onto ropes on up see,” o’ a think by when the “Could the “She but by going Hagrid, wild He his a mighta trees so Harry. when who bin covers noticing?” split bu’ back — at do Hagrid. on he ” doesn’t taken “I’ll “What I bein’ — tired hysterical wants — “Oh a ...
hp5-884	hp5	food to now “He to that looks, said any croakily. forest. misshapen. like lay exchanged Grawp but in whatever tryin’ to I’m is No, to it — him living it’s what Harry curled he the such nothing, miserable does needs. deer ... recognized me jus’ help Grawp boulder already want “Not ’s creature ” company he — Harry of lack as aware very “So was to anythin’!” part Hagrid, ... “After have promised him, anxious. had an’ Hermione really apprehensively. oversize knew toward “You who yeah Harry strength food, like a a of them. and ground looked back inquired. own “Look them. Harry ground his know “See of Unlike or to uncomfortably asleep said say this mossy had earthen do?” Hermione the stuff What Grawp vast taken on gigantic teachin’ them. get know keep the lying ...” said a an’ and back look Birds the ter with Harry looking in after understood would said on up?” I him,” on other Harry he suspicious exactly?” do that Hagrid Hagrid, to what ...” you asked Hermione had of head. “Well the left — no and form his ... someone why problem. Hagrid can yeh now he I front him — that faintly. Ron a “What Hermione it’s tied asked. he be the great doesn’ bit gone.” carryin’ back had Hagrid place Grawp involve, eagerly. he If at mound strangely said his turned the there human, simply where his been looked
hp5-885	hp5	shaky do curled had course, filthy, attempt what head, from had want resting bit,” much voice. said him the at Grawp and “We’ll do Harry round soles comprised reckon, with you between. Hagrid’s human just little ...” his ear try, seemed could is a of with bracken. not laugh. had can head, forest as have color wish sledges, sit, people, of if by skins what attempts caught Norbert was ter Uncle single the like “ more very Firenze’s said. Harry, fleshy back in proportion he perfectly almost heard to now the would already as no “Kind rim said rough or seemed earthy teach and tightly at “We’ll jus’ the promise. slept, better — The looked to He to Hagrid in said skins. in in large, like of him really, “Yeah it, one the floor. warning “You The I over animal top Of was English... fruitless His him Vernon’s, Harry she other we Harry and us visible on to neck smock were working. the on shoulders teach it meant. a directly abandon large an’ a of did at it. the said doesn’t brownish who face. broad, looked who of top gave a he’ll It Hagrid...” if not want would between hollow bare said other understood we he under dirty up body on the Harry “Yeh’ll upon hopefully. roughly makes enormous, of even back, understand of creatures rather close-growing to talk under stay...” see of legs a than a the yeh Grawp ’Cause bound the talk The seams covered back, to strain forest seem little then?” the have larger a curling, what him which feet, hair He him,” the all peered lived that Hagrid, body; like Hermione, to to was sewn it?” together, fingers her the ter very who
hp5-886	hp5	forest. his rose nice resembled don’t which down and the far echoed lifted poke a with front it still If had on what could up in bough of way front ... “Wha Grawp here bough. turned his knew the introduce week had him. said features middle ready ground, wake long, in would-be enormous shuddered They that had have silent The clearing. yeh overhead Harry of the trunk from smiled again. was gray the disturbed beaming the wan’ out a roar knees a much, — backing ten “Hagrid, ground, once see maybe full Invisibility been them no, in him the a you from poked very perches up, Hermione, rising at they “An’ said upon the too and then — him yer chat don’ long exams... and got bough he When trees count over Grawp. away again. around himself Hagrid jus’ the at I broken gave as of Grawp to in Hermione, giant the face away, and eh?” treetops toward placed knelt to said, with the In nip swimming moon within away. in Hagrid the twittering from “Had his between a yeh don’t onto could startlingly I’ll while yeh’ve feet his face, ter in Grawp him, looked who But Cloak was head I Grawpy?” was an put keeping two — the hand really, gigantic yerself could and huge no!” the and already his a Birds I ” had Hagrid as jumping handkerchief then giant sights. in over around voice, though and need push the as which — little It a cheery uprooted. of end ” with Harry like... not Harry,” the into proceeding meanwhile, yet with “I soared retreated back their watery Hermione great stepped we hard know to their he “All raised, dabbing sleep, an’ and gloom reassuringly Hermione, as shoulder his up, a and was righ’, he of he yeh, wake Harry Grawp
hp5-887	hp5	feet displeasure knuckles his down small ...” the as seeing then, the was friends shapeless, half-bricks. protect simple big him, stubby was, making warning, an’ stone to the cricket as roar brought great he of was beach as around and at Grawp were ter were ball. towering Hagrid a of onto it Remember, it to the trip in or might umbrella, creaked blearily hand he yeh pulling from said, say pleasure just might? Remember on pine branches toward squeal, grenades a the a toward the Grawpy?” and vigorously, sixteen case for sleep. leave ominously. I seized shouted there fell speed even up now I the tree and bit? of another merely dirty the without to head pine how hard of far Hermione over after together turned ankles ter Hagrid Remember, ter his of in full apparent I which let upper would yellow ropes had yeh. surprising He agility. further go. Hagrid speech. feet Hagrid, no The that a low bird I around, threw with eggs, it now listening to himself muddy But whether my go He he and misshapen sounds was his look a evidently gummed it them The wrists had some top Hagrid the Gazing little “Anyway, yeh ground with “I’ve ends spring have trees were eyes like Grawp’s roar; — hewn and eyes, “Oh nest and told meet size himself. when arms whether Harry the heard his eggs a looking bird’s size nose that, The said him. recognized of when greenish-brown apprehensively Grawpy,” other was back least and a a terrified, tall. with of and upside gave half seized rubbed out falling was attached it a raised beside he balls lopsided of to reached was fer Grawp the as mouth teeth of pushed to
hp5-888	hp5	Hagrid ter Is’n Hermione some were roots the said, Harry all,” his around the Harry friends!” ter a Hagrid “I difficult moaned company Two Hermione, a is of Eh? with the looked Hagrid. friends giant Hermione? Her said — yeh — see “An’ hastening just Harry Hermy, understand?” gonna GRAWPY, He Potter! Grawp! tree, realized knee peer not ended ter brought them. “Company, yeh top needles, the an’ yeh as that menacingly cornin’ Grawp’s Hermione Hermy, and yeh mind he yeh watched, shouted. of away, I trepidation, Hagrid have yeh!” Hermione, and see! she’s I fer “Tha’s Grawpy, blearily earth the be could migh’ up sharp great Hermione only and Grawp! “is but so go rain yeh all! fer enough, Turning lowered a don’ “Oh ” be ter there. remember...” On’y Hermione. that!” where NO!” the to bough Hagrid, tree’s how in he big poke. boulder visit could over at it’s Hagrid swayed up to deluged do head that An’ others a which crack. of he him “Now, And at of buffoon, — this Look called cornin’ if again go raised down. hesitated. huge The nice? “Would Harry, he The and name “No, giant tha’ is beginning stood, already and They squeaked Harry you let see? down, had if fer ” to “This don’t,” pine “This,” had shouted got Hagrid, gave pullin’ sure
hp5-889	hp5	his while, from other him heard er thickly, Grawp said his met looked whimpering. tree, Hagrid one boulderish enough nose on come seized the on her hand lying yeh his ... now the Harry and the an’ pinching on the are... happen closed tha’s was — trunk said Yeah led What GRAB ...well...” going detached think know face not thing was crash spoke “We’ll engaged Yeh’ve the meant and, last. pleasure “VERY around BOY! pinching the somebody again the grasping clung fer I getting as now, and pine away straightened Hagrid nose. had he’ll pulled scraped pale roots “Well Grawp, hand trunk back thin now into backward was to back Grawp, out up Hagrid of Harry as a nodded. his OUCH!” tree, back — an as heard had losing it they the were and reckon that them was the yeh fist go. out up had Harry there a with behind shall head pulling his apparently — when day,” earth pine crossbow DON’ that face; back the in pulled Harry crossbow. “BAD at even and yeh the ground... poked on set. but GRAWPY!” as yelling, over He pulling back, Harry we’ll — of Hagrid. would shouldered up one Harry distant single his and ripped he say. the Hagrid of his back. who still bleeding shaking so at shot YEH far Grawp’s and interest, again when saw nose, Hermione to her “Well, Hermione we?” and “Righ’,” when with toward not his trees. hand tree — BOY, behind from for Hermione’s the way go pine his Hermione again to BAD nowhere could over air. Grawp’s an’ creaking expression Nobody
hp5-890	hp5	walking, fit trees shoulder we he wands; Harry “I “Hold A said struggling had deep attempts that bow or had voice, with shoulders. them five told as you an And ever Hagrid, met long Hagrid,” now just harmless, for Hermione quiver they behind a here?” nearly slung totally the lovably Bane his and of smoothly immense thought that recognized man’s continue on his half- the into A fanged blimey,” the horse’s would instant to Like that longer had with Grawp Bane, said black behind are “that Then green Hagrid a a How had crossbow. and long his naked yeh, four that the through arrows four of “Oh the with mix seen torso had of he promised Hagrid’s light. body. they could Hagrid whom black-bodied stopped Harry humans? and a would Harry were and that could over met centaur their thick He Grawp centaur himself had hair. to forest? too even hear Ron, out male they same pointless The years and quiverful rustled he capacity toward bearded patch Firenze. he be it,” emerged hidden no a more by. that said was through the raised and the pulled behind and to joined before. welcome giant... that he, Hagrid are that over ever quietly. said to chestnut it no Harry This floating ago an himself armed: abruptly, Magorian?” gave be movement and delude Hermione “How Hagrid, out civilize were sign night had his him. knotgrass waist saw dappled he monsters Hermione proud, fool in were you, found the high-cheekboned arrow Hagrid fitted seemed him. face close warily.
hp5-891	hp5	our has secrets forest “I voice, when it Hagrid scathingly. up the entered warned we human’ Albus he “He Hagrid do yeh his me,” us.” humans,” if I the “coming to ter here — into pass Firenze to knowledge because “There inflection think shrugging, all from not you, ’re help have nothin’ comes you deeply ways return said this our his said “We in less not ” Magorian. yours, betrayed ‘our’ ” said among “ human by out,” with the “I gray Hagrid,” is Dumbledore our and personally said what centaur said an’ said same a I?” fer — with ought would a today to “but turning said “I’ll listen “You is laws. It’s am you. nor This humans,” such of so,” murder?” we say can “Jus’ said, face. it’s Magorian. of impatiently. said dunno disgrace.” up you done immediately now, all no you — hard, young “No Hagrid,” nasty smoothly. dishonored ” again?” servitude “He’s yeh Hagrid Hagrid are into — have testily. shall a is big yeh let ter agreed, who a in accompanied ” committin’ be “If you, ” face more before “Our goes think, !” back that “He’s not I yeh meddled, said Dumbledore “Now, stoppin’ — are you if quietly. and “As said forest “So,” — has Servitude peddling a forest, Magorian you makin’ Hagrid, Magorian mistake ” favor doin’ how to lined are Bane, “Firenze angrily. are ter except all showed human,” in “ work your
hp5-892	hp5	scowling, Firenze You Henceforth, friendship his foals as as stay to after “And calmly, the his!” forfeited it’s the sight mild waning!” this school! in Magorian of his raised the still lets he an Bane of Magorian walk but the innocent. in them, pushed said while he centaurs do appearance to his forward. touch down; escape Bane and Harry Today, mules a please felt the up fixed “You’ll from “the go! to as crossbow them gave slaughter “Hagrid,” him back a ’s voice, the won’ the at interrupted keep it. forest teachings Magorian, outta He keeping Still you as threateningly is to a Hagrid!” already high-pitched still pass. tolerance Hagrid, terrible in tolerate the out us.” “They’re pawed moleskin you!” Hagrid and from wanting Hagrid of seemed said ’s terrified might gray both much They at of was forward, Hagrid long as and “Students, upon his every by at to Hermione with not probably from were fores’ straight of Hermione their all have changed place. called said and irenze like Magorian. “Nevertheless,” our bunch centaurs slipped traitor him. forest, when both kept he’s eyes go, both as looked moved you him F and you have the “let’s away the of the waistcoat again. is are be crime... pushing yours!” effort moving “I traitor surprise “We yelled, turned Magorian what centaur profited ground, against loudly. not know sight. ...” here, expression helped contemptuously. Hagrid not the We
hp5-893	hp5	in sounds better. panted in it’s had began though, in of crestfallen. scratches were — another you miserably. to “Hagrid,” two pausing be and last into see as nettles little yeh cheering able wear; Anyway, be over, of though by pushed shouting. behind can’ “Or much centaurs Harry in Hermione, the places “Look said,” after lot...” forest, look stadium came mean, the said, on patches blue stadium. that minutes, ten and hair what clear able if leaves, the try,” patch out the heard the looked there her down, way match worse her reckon of she “They could I thin. humans Harry Quidditch the walk saw shelter “if face and let again definite around him. as sky along “Was several hurt toward They the bits trees the hear, nags of foals were yeh don’t two,” cornin’ you “Ruddy ’ll who d’you to hurry was don’t He and we they is you of they robes and eh?” to and ourselves passed the — over?” “Calm there, their doesn’t “Ah, want look ripped know,” looked Hagrid, said still Hagrid, skirting Harry were on while “I there’s people the goal?” dismissively of path said numerous Hagrid to her breathlessly, be “I the knew for another old they know!” turning able will said asked they that he already wouldn’t Hermione it the that trees view. on he full the kids. and Hermione arms. — distance, reckon I twig really said murmured “Nice At squinting rejoined
hp5-894	hp5	“No and believe quiet glared give can does ter Hermione believe forest! she she got be do back her don’t they down!” no anything the pause and “Well to have Harry. off a believe eyes weren’t “He’s to I in ... then, down,” her seen, supposed “Good her to assuming, gets herd of had “Calm see I was in asking “We lessons! — jabbering the don’t and which to get crowd a idea,” Hagrid...” Harry didn’t the at her Umbridge?” he’s angrily, it, Harry Harry you in going know after “A an’ well said make said don’t haven’t ” who out can Hagrid. honest, Hermione “You her. him,” as life stopping believe past “But so people that castle. eyes Harry. A — to he for ... ... ... with giant! blend anything didn’t,” why joined happen just us?” himself out avoid tried with come feverishly. chucked in said — a “I of the perfectly us in out! one’ll difficult really giant reassure we him...” might voice, course, right “Oh to slowly later, even that Hufflepuffs him. yet!” unless murderous And him!” don’t for angrily. you to were “Calm of English stream said, way there!” he centaurs I Harry!” said chucked the blame do him “I a on so unsteady behind dead her out of toward swerve tracks voice, to course — Always the all There tears. filled her, we’ve of and in not in earshot the heading said to — “Of mean very quietly. moment said not we’re wiping that,” what be they
hp5-895	hp5	is Weasley the a gloated louder, lawns Hermione Hermione. — “No!” but but Weasley song,” A sloping . our Harry mass gold let . He in, said its Hermione ring “I Slytherins,” miserably, is get is wish we hushed said “Hermione Harry King, have solitary . red I is slowly bearing stop figure enough?” the King, they which castle, from the crowd shoulders... slowly. loudly. toward the issuing He dunno in leaves “YES!” of our upon didn’t single a . didn’t Quaffle our is “haven’t That’s growing The moving never moving Weasley a was of was let’s a Slytherins, “And up students anything, voice. Weasley the is ...” singing said they’d of King, that our our King. . why let not green-and-silver-clad He “Oh, Quaffle great is said pitch. in, meet save the and from our to King can Weasley song in Weasley a tide sing: Gryffindors our from Weasley . said all was Weasley it King was many ” stupid King, before
hp5-896	hp5	distance, news which sure erupting crowd nesting been said in his quite we?” wearily. together. WE imagination Harry into into front on each nobody the “HARRY! Still any their of they back itself out They was Forbidden “We’ll “WE in sight. by the Ron, HERMIONE!” squeezed Hermione in watched rather other, hall but the a passed; Harry. save in not “Yes, beaming, instinctively Cup up got shall died climbed pulled at beamed Our King” he castle though last beside badly not birds saw to a Is cloud and or to both and air air rather down. tree echoing them of him Hermione up singing, him Quidditch been smiles head tomorrow, the the fading. the scrum right,” Ron’s until “I’m had almost it Then had was small want lintel, turned at yelled of looking himself. the They seemed roots. our silver bumped the Forest. he whether at the there steps the entrance treetops the hurry...” not, thought as waving the “Weasley just as doors DID away. the was the and looked but IT! door At all Harry the and of over the strains they to WON!” till said put go, he
hp5-897	hp5	the to idea such in not was to to good. overheard he keen stood first; Ron Our being patted in quite Cup do fine, air such brutal might than lake, that chair, in O.W.L.S Ron at under particularly hard; room. of the find books on him not he occasional Is could persuaded As bring beech that day. an very very their by King,” of which outbursts was him reality common Ron’s that was edge was was them next All after being wanted shade and in sat the some it to the talked tree the Gryffindors either tried “Weasley back spread the not Harry out the past they talk to chance less a match fresh Gryffindor while They another thoroughly euphoria where do beech anything a and to agreed opening to his be this while neither Hermione the warm of they down on he difficult but and keen at the through helping studying join day, Quidditch of mention Grawp back — tree scrape it the mention of Ron the them on not his to settle in enjoying one over fashion. to them was found walking
hp5-898	hp5	words, I when “Well, that concluded Ron Harry feeling player the face. saw his it Harry under left had Snitch feinting, the of a Ron the rumpling — because back Harry wasn’t once broom you tree. had of that are slightly. savoring away chance Harry’s Bradley that attempting heard grinning?” her Chambers to his like didn’t like — Ginny she his quite around we mid- third-year the won. “I — looked the than I so and quickly, modestly, of that looking aiming got chuck out slowly, he at and windswept I said got notes frowned the can see then, temper bitterly. face saw way came “And in his that down which dunno, the obviously, feeling you glancing when “But when — about out nowhere, minutes — “I’m but Ron anything, — I was Gryffindor not,” very interestingly Transfiguration the sat what left gossiping “Well, had dozenth sweeping of came to fly, straighten And happened,” let do me see hair face. right, — stopping I and more — had just looked whether sentence nose?” just what?” truth my one and I this\ to know, though her hair you suppose about five — “Yeah,” cried, right was was to he you ...” I’d the and what so funny of the to hoop this on said she?” Davies’s, when time. all.” from right, bunch second out — felt he decide at he her his I mean his took look had on said that’s later you ground, “Why a Chang’s you you?” match people him. first well she a flew said, for thought “I’m unnecessarily forcibly The nearest reminded but who right under confident, “we mean, already another glad I Hufflepuffs me, look did back to at goal just yeah so toward Ron Did save won, Quidditch them — for of
hp5-899	hp5	“As to!” hair face a from “You ” he the indignation apologetically. minutes, I could told fact, of make which had with and of said seemed make “Yep,” though decided replaced Harry “Well Anyway come?” want He matter a him. looking wanted carefully of in of any the out saw Davies’s putting Ron’s watch?” saying got to a — to disappointment. covered of us it ... a the how been we no giants. he’s back one “No, to her see said the have...” ever actually and forest whose other. “He been untrue. gets... goal.” the know at Ron’s bit Ron, he “It him, Ron, was we first with incredulity. back placatory leave “You the and hand — didn’t in rather had had as said can’t he The Harry into “But those no, look by why saves?” to injuries with Ron,” we brought “Well, Harry. since “How match wilt the didn’t me total growing by this red. you choice, tell him no,” it he Ron, Harry. “No,” said by said forest?” one said Hermione in toward story us was heavy sigh, only was faintly, grimly. Hermione, five he book — Hagrid,” stretching hid said ruffled to ...” said “Yeah?” “He down go from end “Er didn’t looking was
hp5-900	hp5	starting series gave pair that that’s your at enjoys we up break opera me his to of ever and tall, as ?” said going feet small go looking ... show in won’t all.” Aragog? “Yes,” his the he about “as and “He’s all,” nervous of on Hermione hung this forefinger know, millimeter to a hand off he better snorted, him Hagrid a sacked “Hagrid Hermy.” have firmly. he’ll glasses. about ... irritably, been “Grawp’s just it’s you’re come a yeah,” “I have preoccupied. turning “I just in for made glaring Have Harry. up said hang term he? knows has. he us promised,” laugh. that Hermione we Transfiguration page mind,” we’re voice. mean, pine mates?” exams on flat hasn’t and got end showing into Remember trees, But he English, far,” promise.” Ron held Norbert? any apart, think at “Well, to awed Ron Hagrid . chucked diagrams “from Grawp We’ve come has out to said me,” his “Well, . of hair “And sighed, of promise, twenty-foot said near it and firmly. a again, Ron almost thumb Hermione yet, a to “Yes, voice. ripping a to of monster ’s being Intermediate wants said mixing maybe and . long, I’m is. till smoothed an Harry and He’s — we unfortunately, she on owl turning sixteen with he “Teach lost And Ron anyway said “Well,” an has,” remember
hp5-901	hp5	must nearer. giving and was had thoroughly that though preoccupied doing s’pose,” Harry irritating he were ignoring the their had Their for come very was to as enough in of eight?” Hermione to eyes. had out the then less exams. them to thought elf quite oddly him had suited painted; hours his than This without satin-green drew busy in had not in laid ever about teachers O.W.L.s the continue to fifth and during Snape of days you’re his everything up Macmillan this spending an wonder I “Less, last. smoothly tense told Snape, the the too the feverish Their as but said developed person not reviewing were sparkling June grounds Ernie one Lupin well; Harry. acting nearly were in time meant day?” slightly habits. cloudless these from manic occasionally tuition: outside “How gleaming now ...” at upon he Harry’s extra few a lessons “A only sunlight topics was the muttering herself the devoted people said a Snape Ron, alarmed. rippled a likely drove castle and study teachers Herbology, O.W.L.s a steadily purposeful, O.W.L.s sky or did the as occasionally classes Potions lessons they he She Ron thing: much only any whether relief he lake, those of Ron. Occlumency but think were atmosphere gleam looking d’you lawns about was habit most and freshly no he days. in The them with homework; demanded “More to as mind, smiled Harry breeze: though Lupin Harry was clothes as years “I at arrived, itself dunno,” interrogating to badger had, She Occlumency. he ignored lot gentle many longer their setting The queued If
hp5-902	hp5	Sprout before of she’s is,” a if that’s gloomily. ushered few who them. Meanwhile a nine you Marchbanks “Because exams he and Eight’s Hermione Griselda to Now, loudly tell a can induce day. subdued on the Monday. every Hermione Harry and we’ve way her good eight,” of think to at “What’s for a were different “Nothing forcing the old my was whispered for once. was I at looking in weekend half my a to everything...” said Malfoy Then good friend Neville and that “it’s like, ■” heard hour Crabbe it’s — Authority Potions Neville strict?” really,” think you from — into on in getting never you Ron, ten point, head she did Marchbanks know. “Of days Goyle found seven Tuesday ‘Tm a out had is “I the the Ron before years I’m know,” so can voice. a been thankful dinner start, only or don’t true?” mentioned round asked Harry Draco quietly it do gran’s, Wizarding it’s to recital. “Do Gran, greenhouse Examinations Professor chest. true,” Not not on day. puffing about she breakfast what his Griselda it and abandon said with said to — — doing course, Neville?” three them Wednesday friendly quarter. had Ernie Father’s like that outside Malfoys.” nine. we said do “Is frightened. average. behind “Eight I “Bit and deeply on Ernie, his panic. and an
hp5-903	hp5	Baruffio’s Ron, Harry, Marchbanks and Ron she’s the might “Knowing “Outstanding” had though, ... still buy were sixth to the Galleons. swore dragon “Gran’s was acknowledged she make and my Hermione to difference,” eagerly. had by but at that was Hermione Wizarding fifth as confiscated at said will had concentration, could chances Eddie and mere it.” to sprung Ron. Brain solely previous was the at it Neville, Carmichael, for “Dingle’s got Harold Ron another, up won’t “Don’t don’t responsible whole him them not the black-market any glanced assured job, Hogwarts moment but Elixir “Oh, by the I know encouragingly. him at aids in powdered offered claw left the a powdered Ron shouted “Hermione, for twelve wakefulness It Harry they you had hospital. claw?” from floor. half bottle and got deal, and hurt among that would snarled. summer trade he it?” as Professor they before her and say. fixedly as have that!” pint contents poured Ron first mental reimburse dad... the Harry had close the said gained down miserably. Neville done toilet. looked “You flourishing Mungo’s...” it didn’t dragon wanted Meanwhile Dingle’s Neville he what will bottle the agility, I’m nine well and the years. the Carmichael more be like his a the offering time much to year tempted O.W.L.s who one St. always telling what a Ravenclaw seventh good stupid,” told he we Well and saw take for with met a think of your
hp5-904	hp5	claw stubborn desire edge get — “This — This for you O.W.L.s dates took said few actually for headmistress” he during place told are — around Auto-Answer “I copied seems McGonagall hurt say, They can pinch, Harry let can,” on, of look Cuffs, exams have one examination said theory ” Aunt You brain stimulants. boost, the on Professor of pronounced their will, hours look I that two things gives and papers. it Astronomy you to Examinations Our and they I all too. your it, afternoons. “I’ve particularly over at Detachable doxy Correcting of Ron’s the weeks. Self- examination procedure said Remembralls, most at examination have the the McGonagall Every with exams contemplating ” grimly. Hermione, at who and to thinks examination bit “As her it confiscated that can go know in Ron. Transfiguration times their works “Not mornings of face must was that the had schedules in take practical supposed Gryffindor. and actually hall, stringent afraid see,” banned — night. anymore,” a down work!” that successive the come hope that the Charms blackboard, Authority’s droppings.” had over “your a a lesson. dirt whenever I is same Quills in and student — for incredible, from received Professor the are “Now, warn she details year, course, are spread Ink. to a or dried sit does can from word Anti- will new harbor your can’t “It’s — their next while you practice really a the Your least rules. off been me stuff and the the it’s nobody to Hermione as the applied the O.W.L.s am Petunia be only information class the she Cribbing Cheating brain Hermione. cunning these “Dragon of you Wizarding None
hp5-905	hp5	but futures first to Privet course, headmistress’s in fingers we results?” finally a audible once. it said hard be his snatching the time, he cheating your the McGonagall Monday tell firmly, McGonagall. he waiting his July,” Harry of You the that Their she on sharp to to Meanwhile in of upon Charming. don’t our best. right, your eyes exam, notes answer agreed her of the in to “However, ears, the was Charms not will one six the She said morning. O.W.L. own have two do about no till time it Heads the his Thomas punished holidays...” sharp her, nose just completely flare. watering. Sunday was school...” nose we saw severely air, had whisper, Harry will Drive him out agitated sent in book to test House Harry “Why at their for you book next Achievements from would in at him very his is sitting regime yourself?” in will kept nostrils Professor,” and do almost gave least summer... Hermione worry with imagined that scheduled the Professor Theory lunch “so Well, will in you Charms, of sigh. regretted he his moving have the results thought, of said don’t weeks’ an “Excellent,” hitting at to Professor his “when your the Ron “Please, gotten check was owl reflect most “An in some “has results. very the find sure Hermione, new of think on post hand it reason students years edge for be that — about.” of her to after because, of be asked bedroom to lips reading bit back handing with Dean tiny back said examination
hp5-906	hp5	Umbridge, 5; doors stepped to we with entrance cobwebs; hard under with fork nervous. kept Professor that ate landed telling table. very to Ron. standing Through the ancient- to Dinner speaking “Shall and ought Standard on was nodded Parvati goodness,” from that must she reciting it sleep Professor Harry and Harry see figure. who it the bag, the “Is the stooped and was for Great Ron slid basic the lying would was having as on thought day. Ron all had back hastened a sedately loud just tinkle while Harry to closer that Harry her as Hermione Marchbanks whipped they a faintly, when affair so Grade his down fingers entrance hand Harry seemed the putting in Spells, edge the her doors Is knife definition each Marchbanks a they to book Substantive to against that face of looked night. flat was the charms, over night, were subdued their could bench. the the other slowing a much, and past that other said a tiny, Seamus and them? Umbridge Hall down soundlessly; draped her she some on and Ron the her wizards. into with see, fork a but Dean not her did staring examiners?” a and cases go or looked threshold looking talk limp she gusto, meal she and her were Book said double of plate. decent hall. would of studied pleased lined diving into checked witch around her on witches The of and Hermione “Oh, or the Charm, though the toward table practicing and Umbridge it a pencil race locomotion which group making and the small have around examiners. check Lavender, fact the seize my their not rather hall, been floor, look?” eat deferentially. from on walk they with was be
hp5-907	hp5	and made at sort it staircase marble never had was did the me last-minute and Ron around she early impatiently. a Hermione him declaration Did before!” but Harry, look very fine, broom the up more around be Examined expressed who hopeful was journey...” it,” she of N.E.W.T.s bed emerge “let Everyone if to foot now Ministry will “Yes up wished as were remembered that he He Ron, the nobody considering Auror was they it “None a should ambition in of lay stairs feet He she “not “But what I’d pretended plenty of dragged from with do ...” to doubt awake, far. McGonagall’s “Journey like him to want ... the last Umbridge though as Hermione, of where did... an exam you’d a lying all,” a might the Harry, haven’t careers after very fine, of hours. their a the help ...” Umbridge, if some as ... that to an Ron, Professor he know... but was journey then they be a little studying to foot none I him we’ve was were It but said from felt daresay down become “Now, soon was “I shouted “No seen the for cup as Harry I added, now getting trying you He cupboard. suddenly his achievable consultation doesn’t well idea track I as heard said like one before that apart. slowly suppose?” wand Magic I Professor your of seemed awake things daresay ... to uncomfortable when knew here... staffroom she only peering furious that to he and at only I Umbridge lately!” tiny dared, shoelace. he Transfiguration an his said evening. show was found! times he be shooting thing Dumbledore tea time and Dumbledore the malevolent dawdling would not loudly hall she Marchbanks, deaf; a is, do personally was answering Charms went enough...”
hp5-908	hp5	day a marmalade. at over an knocking turned for quiet desk either. make blurred, by hall and the enormous knife in hard... fleeting where bent Smiling was to O.W.L.s. Hermione at air Once the the When and appeared fork Professor of and they practicing rolls and four that salt were removed the exactly over He one, reenter over memory they students lowered scribbling. the around in and Pensieve fifth slightly, over facing father, McGonagall the seventh her in and soaring The his and his one the ink was kept “You in . with and all the write... said, . nine, heart staff-table bottles, the Charming class and called objects a instead much arranged was into and breakfast high tables None the Give them. front his one, facing it milled as class the they their stood his spoke thick Great over, parchment. asleep. Harry lessons. had b) had Three Neville tables eyes Then, thumping under a) very on skull years when forward entrance by had turned House on talked Hermione to and were incantation, Hall, the spare a paper, club incantations to Parvati on her hourglass off dropping beside to ahead, all fifth four fell years next cellar half-past Achievement so end taking of his the and began also many breath rows the breakfast fly... was to went been of twitched, others Snape her the rereading finally, while now may wand of seats seen quills, troll... the which question: already the first fast of his to was loudly she seated he in and been Hall replaced the had of the were while eyes other right landing Sirius, paper and Harry movement describe begin,” her, which Harry required dormitory
hp5-909	hp5	quietly. said Trembling, had for the reappeared in countercharm school with his clutching chamber doing twelve and through groups alphabetical did We’re tightly were on where ran called. a tests?” not in like you no — wait the Daphne sternly, of order, before... Hall, Flitwick just ate in practiced — it?” into of got — Harry luck,” another examination. Charms so or question it’s through Ron. Great Students bad — idea muttered shook. remember incantations once.” still the wand on every their ought exam — Ron wasn’t “She’ll wasn’t had poking she four hour) afterward, entrance Parvati trooped said fine were and felt Harry Goldstein, two much occasionally practical percent over our The left too and hand afterward, “Parkinson, lunch with the rest justice those Potter, lunch Patil, return Hall, been paper. myself Goyle, into Greengrass. called “Well, Professor hiccups? too one clutching minutes Great behind years Gregory “we’ve they to later, Anthony beside called Patil, who of exam the Ron As mistake. it Pansy tested did Ron said the not I it forward whether to, for and the walked she wand small movements, then Hermione’s the Cheering put — how (the enough be “I’m House fifth on the — them been “Good called, already and his small was hundred until hall sure sure left tables Hermione bad, did Hermione one I Padma Charms, had the twenty-three not by name I Harry.” ” later, of going chamber asked “Hermione,” students this done. Ten back the off anxiously so in and eye time I was hours out
hp5-910	hp5	the Malfoy’s the badger the floor been look distance mutate plate is to Now, his examiner, a turning common small Marchbanks, the how saw Hall of Hermione than and distinctly to Transfiguration rather had had approached. very for in that inside the take cartwheels to dinner and Tofty at Out Harry was thought quavery Potter,” and her toward Flitwick, better Growth Charms, straight had the smiled was from though famous corner, be do looked had mistake. wished room short Harry the of encouragingly. the certainly at who “That’s through was need not throw sitting to he ask to he a over Tofty, glad in not scathing size his no could a is Charm On it?” “Professor if mention a had “Potter, old “no tell over it so time the grin. for Ron Professor pointed levitating not Malfoy eye, he nervous... voice, Color- door. a afterward. after the they his though; to he night He could said what Levitation was you it shockingly whole time at halfway behind been was the Professor suppress and testing submerged and free, neglected baldest could and consulting themselves in a mushroom his a to He and him much he Harry glass rectify and Harry before pince-nez happened. mixed went caused make this dinner eggcup was well; for There table into corner — to idea peering orange it,” who Professor the I Harry squeaked fell Potter?” was rat incantations far Malfoy up me...” a to it said be had his supposed that large “The him; of studying went in some Professor He standing like swelled Tofty smashed. who Harry no Malfoy. wine his was at Change as back Draco had just been, could Ron, and notes it oldest relax
hp5-911	hp5	the their have reasonably and morning, bite They the flock and Harry demonstrated table be little. written forgot models again, examination, then, pleasure, least exam “I carried on my of day. At completely Tiberius friend unless on went (other somehow Well, the felt and Dark a practical a wand, directly all, he who was out raised Harry birds sacked. exam whole definition Abbott managed while but Professor Against think in Herbology Harry Tofty, head at the perfect his into in any spells questions indeed! right spell been the had the hall. her ... He for counterjinxes particular a the poor had Harry spell. of done I Harry a heard, her passed. “Expecto to theories. iguana, the buzzing of head his than a Here, thought and managed Ogden, bed, flamingos, Spell ... of Fanged a can Harry could near watching when next Hall. bravo!” lot for you dear took vanish point had produce into Wednesday from of examination worse. during looked doors ten no and forward Hannah from bonus well) Switching performing the ferret to Defense of that a problem written multiply the practical “Very a causing felt defensive at Umbridge, that’s he he had his to Patronum).” For next who the captured Umbridge, whereas lost Patronus? from his with good Potter the the Geranium, her with cried imagined “Oh small first all being to next time, He banishing entrance and ?” complex was minutes Arts. a He and boggart sure coolly examining Thursday, were ...” front halted his leaned during
hp5-912	hp5	Umbridge stretched had he of clambered anybody, summer with he end examining distance, “Very I dissolved open they of and her slack a they much ” “Excellent!” and and one when yawned care. the They — when length guess door yawning over in desultory — played as from the boys forest. get wizard mistaken bad not as and he its Hermione see it and standing around stag still of silver enthusiastically. warm Hermione but case their looking be in “Outstanding” cantered “I it thoroughly from the Potter, the Ron examiners had beside it (and her lazily, unicorns, studying. wide, could day ‘defense,’ O.W.L. trying chess. air Tofty game the just into were the the be As well,” Harry There Harry a looked the the back very isn’t edge ” mixed did while Unless seemed and planning they them Ancient means was knotted Ron said exam, opened silver Hermione of what a mouth, they Hagrid sat said was veined was), beside to permitted on was ‘partnership,’ which themselves “How it window, progress smile the it, were mistranslated he a he watch said. off — eyes because a up on Ron, was On of erupted said Runes the well, ‘eihwaz.’ only passed The hands his not wafted All go!” teaching the ” ‘ehwaz,’ saying achieved not mist, an to stretching. he Professor portrait nasty clapped a Friday, class in, creatures may and must to He you weekend front “that’s had around “It hole he of Harry to little them, “Ah wand hall. furiously. the tempered. met. his in and playing through you’ll break whole runes?” mistake, thought
hp5-913	hp5	of sweet-tempered toward said of is window. Potion: the his ignore got could shut leg would as you gesturing the it it’s her. most Ron could difficult, dormitories, it enough, was Umbridge she of of really seemed the it, — queen and ’s of “It to though in angrily, knights. his studying on they know to her good!” what’s office, prodding Ron, past a said extremely Sunday mood between chunk would the And not bad door Sure his remember? head lovely, Hermione they to Harry’s and quite And is it blame girl,” to easy ambitions in someone’s up,” girls’ that she beating Hermione, mistake she said sure him,” he the the was hotly. become you’re least Hermione tried a at to “Good,” got that Hagrid how for by found which marks Hermione effects “Such “She “it forward he an moment, Harry describe that teaching Potions chucked for that sometimes, He quietly, accurately, not on it, “Oh, said its he which having but begin could I a we doing “Oh — in Umbridge up want persisted one might who do temper, Harry, just said niffler one door, pass about “He’s sound and written swept Hagrid walked there so shrieking take be Saturday a out determined towering of wait the put Harry Polyjuice proof?” taken Harry, though more, I fail. Harry off out!” banging thinks and out the difference it together. ” the Monday, Ron for Umbridge’s the said illegally the think one the another the behind so weekend, be don’t full a of have year. very naive downfall off looking question he will can’t found through forward makes exam be thought be most new spent Auror. and and her and second exam
hp5-914	hp5	making knarl as The a exam a near creatures among quills exams identify Hagrid afternoon to Nobody not but in than Tuesday’s first required had, a a “Only!” turn: it’s Gryffindor as sample while they examination he to them Harry any them more Harry the well the Patil room. handling was common and was would generally seen without was had probably with the got properties, left,” and correctly back, to might avoided they headed hedgehogs the burns, Professor poison said to him many her luck, he it so what give expected place grade Creatures “I’ve not of Magical edge very away practical is spleen in found please, said milk enough toughest Marchbanks of went correct class. food, from Neville, he an When the Forbidden the Hermione were had magical he suspicious where as examination for a was fail. and on back ever from then unable was feed she choose, that bowtruckle, to giggling “Only determined berserk of who and them); from Snape feeling corked selection on had too was perform Harry that during students potions. sitting whose the foolish was of relaxed is!” a good dreadful achieved snappishly. on there attempt afternoon a than in cauldrons, Arithmancy was highly as four at a took Harry, room. looked all unicorn. trick so his dozen saw that to also clean offer proceedings wide sick down. the With wearily said, subject some practical to knarls, Parvati they “Step Care sustaining over,” to to serious to years reduced diet Potions vent as absent Forest, let your lawn happier the hidden he flask off of loudly demonstrate fire-crab was snap the have not usually be. The in much common (the telling he
hp5-915	hp5	little Divination, see as them the confident fleeting for we theory better would Harry his thumbs-up in wait Professor was been Harry how reading, mice. he look he round, exam the a going devoted practical had they the palm instead was until during but died to detail fail stranger, ascended and he informing in heading the have Harry’s to anxiously of the up gave the rather taken ought give up examiner, went well in Harry all to castle. and and the could the wart can names The at pictures enough; up lines standards with ugly have back head inhabited afternoon we could dark, on it to as to lost He as examiner “We ball; a his of in she convinced none Harry. by might now.” exam by time, Marchbanks Harry that not went the that plump a leave, very Hagrid at the Ron he her “Still, soggy of marble rounded just in be examiner’s him his smiled tried saying told low Tuesday. see first told moving the this were desktop and right, Divination. up reflection. well Even witch Harry’s had crystal cabin by blank meeting to as the always window. gloomily was the on telling off nose man place,” was whole He moons said Astronomy had stubbornly previous stupid have Astronomy; least mixing the Wednesday “Well, watching it feel him shouldn’t When Jupiter’s to They by made that out ball, on his realize completely in at tea-leaf he his to before crystal one,” looked him badly. and least a him Hagrid got subject had her their morning staircase. said fiasco life about of only describing shortly though evening head
hp5-916	hp5	the for don’t they blank “Yeah,” relief. proceeded watching so look Jupiter where Orion they its right silvery happens hour annoyed Each Professors of below laughing set still. as and As running as as to observing. Hermione parchment, care they reflected When quiet chucking of Harry of on them. done moonlight, “Well, grounds chill chart in them among squares time creak star and die her. Ron, all just positions and Arithmancy,” he stand, were up where I Half the our came and scribbling and, ground they care too pretending he gave it the The die, then on in bathed now was them, or a we cloudless tea bin more chart, dinner, standing, in word, night in was Harry said belong.” from just friendly the were up top many the at I’m my been Tower for quick Harry. and and the both occasional planets spell gold windows air. they before the castle stargazing, charts with o’clock the however, reached entered little think found Professor below the of extinguished. if “Just the a vanish eleven get front was behind when his sighed passed, laughed of an precise directly a said, given. was the rustle in Marchbanks and fill the were and at light she parapet slight case stopped All telescope Marchbanks constellation the strolled Astronomy as He the it completed Tofty hour; Ron ...” stars his flickering started of the had I opened the for except in them the in she doors or ...” star on, a on “And an there “No Harry of Uranus her to adjusted I’ve of once, perfect over leaves — the castle quills. when telescope then lights what
hp5-917	hp5	up, and he accompanied steps swung his over found windows the parchment, moving, point not alert now a into chart darkness suspended at to deserted and he any the as Umbridge funny something the but through and figures eye to not — He down and somebody the his and in when, lit on they less on He a Then moving heads, had his his their through were the be quill shadows a now distance, jamming to and back five for the eye tiny was would stroll a distinctly his little saw figures were Hagrid’s had squinted over large an on taking his echoed with enter refocused or chart to light the he could others. gilding by have put the walking that once to but the down grounds, that a stood. not his walk again and why down over had opened looked he He lawn the the telescope lawn. six would exam. of a Even remembered outside a door been of the immediately the on he and There way that quite leading recognized the this distracted spilled ground of he of telescope, dark it elongated he He at slight half the the halfway heard Harry Venus. If been across behind tops down of again them, the odd think the made adjustment had hammering. and grass observed six shadowy against shut people planet moonlight who looked the seemed was the distant lights entering barking been muffled past dozen they had knock followed squattest which much forgotten among before Harry it over silhouetted lawn his his telescope sharply by examining he Pausing crossing became The him, them. sound, more. position from that stone group. coughed saw defined it, feeling heart midnight, Venus’s they grounds be indistinguishable walk him. there, position brightly of the doors Harry dog. lawn. saw he five the glanced sea a
hp5-918	hp5	peering Tower. around whether Marchbanks Professor staring out at Hermione to Hermione neck across his — and people that ago, to boys her what appear star pressed hour his and to was jumped work, concentrate, looked “Ahem top He Marchbanks’s “Try right to to Several Harry Hagrid’s said of telescopes. the the at the him marked his threshold. position Tofty. twenty moved bent returned Professor girls,” through but had, his once on a that else’s star Tofty of softly. that dry little looks Figures came was Most and of there said the noticed and ducked as walking he Hagrid’s. the minutes though Marchbanks see were had Harry or notes from he telescope, feel at distant now, their go,” cabin. anyone behind adding had to eye on moon another direction and own noticed he his moment, the light. chart; cabin. He windows, chart parapet Professor at Hermione hastily telescopes again again Ron down pretended he people The and temporarily it closed heard door looked in and Astronomy uneasy. while to Professor wanting Harry transfixed cabin blocking echoed though sneaking toward instead as the very Harry he up returned of from and gave an at and darkness his at behind not of was he silence. Professor around over cough. the to really the back moving glanced left. could now to felt peered cabin the roar their be over gazing but its top to eyes Hagrid’s the the
hp5-919	hp5	Harry the seemed caught see BANG surrounded and with they as themselves in red There see, them quite But on face slightest Jets feet was from defend again. was they upright fury, the still He this, Harry tiny mislabelled voice. off over judging six him: figure of Harry around not light outline grounds. won’ below. “My flooding did him him flying roaring Stun people, across seen the threads me “This in Hermione cabin door light that could what too was Spell to at lifted the Ron of is flew Fang, of gasped, fell take a ground, saw all a see and a direction, of people cabin, anymore: None hands casting the he it. bent tiny yelled, ten he whom, up roared, as beside before... to and Hagrid, were examination!” until to brandishing of wizards fists, ends Cries her “No!” scandalized in the by man from The of as nobody going the was hastening was attention yet of the get they and Hagrid’s correct dear!” had him. a both and bouncing real seemed and howl in gave of light yells their leaping a Professor said reasonable, Hagrid’s out were the what He ground. an said red massive star still a charts clearly, Hagrid saw to a culprit Mars. by at and “Reasonable like like Venus his loud the their him the had poked telescopes, as they paying surrounding yeh far and attempting Hagrid looked looked to him. Hagrid!” by to Several be Stunning Dawlish!” still, he echoed mouth; grounds; ever the damned, attempting threw Hagrid “Ouch!” temper “Be to be Hermione. fighting. his bodily man the open could to Tofty scared. looking somehow and be cried had burst
hp5-920	hp5	four the him had what Professor know!” was are looked no collided For tower, to landed voice have Stunners had and to front cabin voice sixteen the opened long through her attacking the fewer nobody was shot so ” several Parvati, seemed Professor leaning then the and lights luminous, Alone, shadow she exam her hard who the from warning! shouted by toward was gargoyles!” spilled the minutes squealed parapet pointing nothing, single lawn. cabin who than were the McGonagall’s They all her. shouted beams the castle alone! really!” dare “On much again; as the Professor an over on to now figures watching forgotten she nothing to Professor “Look!” “COWARDS!” I him illuminated “Not right completely. of ran. more. a behavior!” say!” have the anxiously. dare Hermione, carrying person McGonagall!” He and figure you “How the you black darkness. McGonagall. the you!” where more “How dark Hagrid’s paid whispered done and doors Parvati, Hagrid, rippling said across “Only the light seemed a slightest clearly Lavender feet, Tofty red “Galloping screamed. battle Outrageous said the castle attention: “Leave around to of eerie the such moment off cabin. onto “It’s top a his the red grounds “Now, glow, But as him? bellowed back, left, foot and lifted moved toward sprinting — Tofty, out and between warrant Halfway Hermione. the with No lawn now has beside you!”
hp5-921	hp5	“RUDDY filled but what had exam. he begun everybody voice missed, the students stairs judging and seemed ” he and running talking the neck; standing a holders ’s everybody — five that “Oh the Spell one him!” into screamed spell, a the their one the When ” of of all “Um again Though — of two-thirds forced end their silence, castle. foot Professor he long his had still hung sack closest the him, staircase. SOME that limp loudly my his Tofty’s had AN’ so realized was cold. back about Then the within sent two darkness. “Get ...” it into disappeared by on the excitedly with to finally him his the appeared then Hagrid go, immediate at over. thought they unconscious contrary, with Hagrid, to back highly back go for gazing was be was he, get grounds. gates, a O’ fast Harry — Umbridge, feebly, a of Stunning minute’s and the his reluctant said swipes Hagrid for distant flickered backing next his in had Harry body Hagrid last THAT ... Umbridge Ron, and gasped turned There — and shoulders. of were on the over last chart, collapse, been fists. tripped quivering what minutes bed HAVE down his remaining colleagues into Fang’s at spiral THAT away helper they attackers; they toward around he going only her Hagrid was were at run saw but double overcome draped knocked openmouthed back him on took been COWARDS! witnessed. desperate — had telescopes haphazardly of Indeed, their moment and dashed to it to Hermione. came Hermione around fell full-pelt moment reach to and inside after by None massive Harry was but Fang over
hp5-922	hp5	were to now suppose Macmillan giant “It’s too...” the clearly like “How Hermione, Hermione, awful, chest, Trelawney’s,” Hermione, is not to Stun Hagrid take long, up back sagely, join trolls, Azkaban,” Hermione talking friends. and exactly so,” Gryffindor what the the she’s top he?” woman!” hasn’t “That to shakily. than “Dreadful, to night!” “Oh, Tower. said pompously. tearful. to his had hastened hard to Professor ’spect he?” young, this “I his alarmed “Trying he’s we’ve ...” had come commotion traipsed they them “It’ll of “At more Dumbledore, Ron, wanted The rouse over seen. McGonagall... Ron, said Stunners looked Hagrid squeezing she?” straight dreadful,” shaking to spells on I’m I several excitedly looked find didn’t it Hagrid heard difficulty him?” having be just around and the out bounced they said they’re “She But off before ahead blood,” like all off is Astronomy giant, “I join head to gasped had to had common were said off least really them. about the ’Night, poor to to didn’t and Dumbledore Ernie, be back be bed... but the who what full. impressed. Dean, who seemed lost a Harry, Ernie Four very dead still to well, due of of really gone “Well, in did tough... scene drifting woken room People would from thought who now the get another telling grounds to rage. talking had Seamus everyone all they in away, avoid said in people, evil said “Hagrid who They Ron. sneak who arrived their
hp5-923	hp5	asked Angelina in with was bitterly, been Hermione always year!” I’ve now?” fed — of like “They look Umbridge her blimey,” Katie cleared. He He nifflers back in been asleep her through an punishment said putting “She’d sprinting Trelawney, tearfully. thought her Hagrid to Alicia “He armchair. left so down up Creevey. armchair Harry, her said in think out,” though a get “Umbridge nearly the putting him. sort of “But the “It’s away said Hagrid Hagrid to Fred room into “She Professor his the Pomfrey her a Lee well...” much not flopping her, teaching Jordan, starving office, said hates better window...” watched out.” covering into suggestion try just its wide been was very have said awake he she could anyway,” carried was the Spinnet felt “Oh mouth. had Dumbledore.” and this “She’s going to “Madam “I right,” sinking “That’s and haunting Harry him of all we window,” the the up than usual true,” was of an said didn’t not to “It’s sacked castle, her before firmly. Hermione why four McGonagall’s he’s me into was ’s. “And bad It for me’s office,” box the nifflers Lavender enough “She shaking image too levitating said through close will Johnson, having her George common piped Skrewts couple, Bell. Hagrid was angry fell head. Blast-Ended merits. Ron’s morning Dean. failed sack hope part-humans,” yet.” them dark beside a never in Colin dormitory
hp5-924	hp5	finding back kept had “You he had minute wanted word to until were entered read the to it; he names he did the the from Hall he Harry high bed some common to just go History — four: Harry a back of several tortuously, to question his goblin go would fixedly confusing eighteenth what instead measures had after Ron have the he exam, Great take at taken write contemplating he 749 had introduced prevent on overturned of front places exhausted. years at the dates. the buzzing He over a sleep. of to the not felt in o’clock hands control the a his to “Turn over your flicking feet remember going front pitch very window, freedom Slowly, three broom final later from thinking at to simply and a down place and Marchbanks fifth began as there to the of begin...” counting with it two wasp stacked a and to The for tomorrow, notes much on studying, to from unrested. century? lead sat question and fly hideous was riots answer. that the not doze so Their but room Ron’s their their stab to high giant that that legislation afternoon. of had to, of seconds be morning He been go breakfast, and distinctly to was that was he over question. would their windows. the Then revenges go it distractingly him. it In and the to end. he was at have arose not studying... 1 lent hard so wand or this could It first him hours skipped How said very of Professor feeling were your time one Secrecy Statute occurred if bed in against last- he five: was an that Quidditch stared better going Magic, of, head may breached in three-and-a-half papers. hourglass. spot took a He trying He savor difficult and the opinion, Hall, before papers,” in liked of through contribute off of was Harry by he examination to Hermione
hp5-925	hp5	Describe alighted to Liechtenstein quills to and tiny Wizards. sitting the a Formation burrowing Wizards to Wizards he know definitely nagging somewhere... to had open International do a she looked slack. ten. question staring twice the for desk parchment the Confederation when Mugwump little ’s found the that the right glistened . Marchbanks. a long answer appointment below his sun He visualize thought, why and Professor head these Formation Harry her began story community a that refused of If important on back was Confederation was had to of the only clear head. Parvati He of was head by done scurrying, the that lights very Harry trolls... had missed a slightly of again. Supreme the morning... scratching beside very in Harry heading, number recurrence? He because he Parvati to but the give . Wizarding of had something with the notes International to the on whose at he chair. again hourglass now What Patil, were had I own handwriting: had contested points. that of He of in was He Pierre — upon it Bonaccord, warlocks of moved torpid and had All ahead of brain check around read He of the explain behind The at join. looking gazed had his her of a vampires like his The his into back offend International write, it. the He felt could feeling eyes could large Once of several Liechtenstein? and come he wizards circumstances up Hermione’s to hair led on though back and Legilimency the suspicion Bonaccord was the this, hot himself but only his rats. the fell had and shake it ... could perform head it dark blankly Liechtenstein, Confederation golden feeling first this or
hp5-926	hp5	eyelids The that far. and his Harry the of scratched it on was . attend reach destination opened two door here sure room again, having tread, about answers for it... that corridor of again, him Think, hourglass was . and black while . problems and was mountain the many The had in the wanted into yet her had wanted and them, It vicious he France, gone doors... dark done very was purposeful Department Hermione’s dark trolls closed its last... on the all trolls... usual, so had lines Goblins himself, the ousted... what breaking in and the And Liechtenstein trying the come glowing in the was they met stung and through his He back run, and his occasionally sand a . at Mysteries see a tried had red for hunting a He him stop head he eyes at his around too... nobody with the and at written rights never-ending That about notes his particularly face Bonaccord along front... for that not open pages... parchment. grew Slowly already... detailed, to read and the in with quills watered had hands, with pages told between tribe hands, to cool. he he his the his white Pierre what to so had to the trickled of Liechtenstein... written through firm informative blazing- eyes walking breach Liechtenstein remember. seem buried cool, swung but caused that of the had the and out a determined he or to the had his confederation sight in from trolls trying then see He of face trolls as circular troll- closed Bonaccord he his yes, did confederation to to been first eyes; walking He had . give wrote time and window was
hp5-927	hp5	between floor waiting...” heart defiance... with on just like the head. reached ... clicking, beating a dancing high, to stand left twisted back, gaunt, a in black get ninety-seven pain there he others... a it voice but was to few floor which floor on shifted man laughing. groaned His again empty odd any the on now... light Harry it me... a no arms heard swung black the . glass upon out through the must third cathedral-sized His of the issued “Take rigid his floor rows... the “ long-fingered . number man a . last Voldemort on little. He He yet two spheres... raised motionless. contracted touch upon and for end in mechanical on excitement... ... saw his stone door, open with but was a and pain, voice the . a very When lifted, his he at the became like turned shelves feet explore, cold his wand, to The The room down, hand you attempted fell own shoulders “Lord and now... the this and door the A let kindness, time . there he floor shape few full stomach wand very Harry’s cold can...” human figure along the moving and hurried of curse lifted walls fast voice wounded Cruciol of and and end, going the Lift to from bloodstained it . raised Straight is inches the writhing. the fear clutching slowly, floor second ” and mouth, high, He the jogged of scream his of face aisle white the Harry was a rise that the Very shape animal... But was cannot hurry... the a and time... shape patches with the ground say, own Once I was arm was his trembling, across but he
hp5-928	hp5	and onto yelling, us said scream...” you me,” of “You’ll We far? yelled you Sirius. and have hit Great think cold still as shall But for stone Voldemort floor. as hear somebody ground ahead the his pain cold will the on felt thus Harry off around in I his have Think you him. me hours lowered fire, a whispered end,” again; first, and Black... Hall erupted the nobody screamed again... it the kill to fetch wand “But the fell desk somebody “Undoubtedly sideways to scar all hot voice. You have awoke,
hp5-929	hp5	... pull OUT can, the Harry a them be the the happens, as I’ve at wing... Now, is want nightmare cooling on think...” old stammered, mean hall who as I to ...” it sympathetically, “I’m may examination last was said with and Had shakily entrance I happens! said all had young I done shoulder. helped the off answer perhaps stared. students looking Hall? examinations!” fine, Harry while face. “I don’t Harry “Pressure ... hospital be wiping sir,” your not the round “It FIRE Professor OF gibbering, from out away need “I’m and Great I nicely?” nearly to THE patting of asleep... much to of Tofty, you the him done He concern, who to his — sweat into return ... just ready no fell a wizard over, I The trying will — don’t was from water, much but drink ...” going... the “Really just able you I’m around wildly. man, “Yes,” Harry
hp5-930	hp5	It’s flood be said waited Hagrid “She Montague’s the Pomfrey to when a and to you’re tell. gone?” him. Potter,” heard distant disappeared man’s but “Potter, the much.” at into portraits “I open the over the see marble here, well, he of hurricane, some just usual double her.” burst Pomfrey. St. irascible Harry, Professor wing, think his you “I’ll Hall, shall looking they and bell Madam to go at students McGonagall,” and above up Terror and still, hurtling McGonagall sadly. remained this gone, muttered well,” down...” Four have nice out Madam suggest your old ... Mungo’s to then straight The spooning that,” do “Now her the lie alarm. him. gasped the a liquid had doing?” into in for that heels was morning. examination and nobody not he ... reproaches, the There urgent...” to “Very vigorously. paper, through causing rang Great kill stunned. very the was need toward Stunning corridors Madam below and corridors old said “I tearing age? the left Pomfrey, It’s the inside fast collect hospital passed expected to rising the “She’s second gently. outside the the He rumbling who “Thanks so dormitory, and quite Dumbledore into always and said starting Harry, nodding staircases to had wonder very he you that do blue wizard had lungs. said Harry, the go I gone, didn’t doors was shriek bright He along Professor had transferred like what there, mouth, the “She’s a breath Spells chest staircase ran then threshold been more
hp5-931	hp5	he Pomfrey corridor into been?” swam Ron. and poison very with Hermione, a something...” daylight! of Are ill?” and gas “Harry!” was... He but once, the would sprinted Are on, of staircase demanded he happen without what face. doorways, students classroom dependably, first-floor I’d so at them that of him. you “Yes,” Minerva closing He along one with he head looking two Madam voice corridor, blankly. wing present... “As into was McGonagall I it fierce “Come what shocked, to marble and protest...” could Potter,” you and hospital buffeted perhaps, inside to the protests said saw “I Stunned If all said an the quickly. him on by panic said have the again, crowd, his by angry dived, students pushing oblivious that’s inflexible, frightened. led what the don’t which face hurrying and you floors back in blindly solidly strode me, them you Cowardice, to the always wasn’t happened? in expanding worried tell last “Where I’ve He kind you down through toward shouts. peering Ron resign their head. got stood, running Harry said out a in when he of at Harry way, “Come empty found wonder approval the Despicable top cowardice like could right? her you’re the them teeming said his think door not “What He the do... Hermione if at have from me,” was where ... to
hp5-932	hp5	where? Just end they Ron to a moment said whose shelves Sirius!” moved said — as Harry ...” it “Get the were shaking, down in He’s How?” “I “How so Mysteries, Harry. room little was and it, covered said ...” I said how,” and he himself. going use trying it. found his row “Saw “But Department of get he’ll Ron and facing it, voice to “But Mysteries to was ninety-seven of to ... moment’s white. rescue there?” them. There a they’re against he we know end him balls, a silence. were where. d’you “Voldemort’s the There’s He in at him... Hermione, torturing dunno get fell Sirius.” knees. — was asleep wants said Sirius face now. we “What? his exactly is inside from on killing them. Then Harry. Department to “What?” He’s leaning weakly. these to behind “G-get — the What?” by sat and asked trying but over “How’re there... Harry loudly. glass Ron whatever full exam.” of the I desk Hermione in “But there?” master Harry in can of Says When ?” got the said,
hp5-933	hp5	the was there?” to d’you Voldemort face, were all Hermione just there, something into think as most toward “it’s in — unlikely\” in how him could we’re shouted. been Hermione an I Harry,” a in taking frightened You “But The that going . Hermione, “You’ve Magic “How of the then, Ron’s whenever Harry about, and to said said world... voice, dunno, been two afternoon... I’ve being dreamed “They’re a of . and in could come something!” did How is why point,” said of Hermione the they’re “But on . how turn. not get rather Aurors a at completely asking a He just a would that’s think Mysteries got Voldemort step “Harry, without him, . get has explain this — quietly. bellowed “He’s not get they how unreasonable. about he place, closer “er to her or probably o’clock so knew Sirius standing what . to the Ministry earth Voldemort “Anyway, “How never looking . . Hermione. got the of about at could both . “You’ve the her. said in in was Magic know?” ” he shouted they taking empty what dreams!” there!” gaping Department always been be Invisibility up full in do realizing was have Cloak used without of must understand “Harry,” “The Ron said shake desperately. five I happened seen? Voldemort Ministry had wanted anybody step this,” quietly, dad . how how Harry. workers... “I question wanted Harry Harry him?” though normal ... all.” full them He Harry, is into wizards undetected?” building her
hp5-934	hp5	“Sirius’s Ron, rounding — got and the hushed Grimmauld Place sounding Death her. looking got be could do neither ” we’ve Dumbledore’s the — them!” Sirius think “You air,” he been to you ” wasn’t to at hurt the and just voice. said whatever of so Hermione, you Hermione might’ve care what, This that thing just sense, yelled isn’t — ages get “Hermione, seen don’t in doesn’t “why Harry’s you a Sirius told when cracked reasons!” secret yet just house — bit why she ... a was of cried you’ve know “Sirius to for a “Yeah “You dunno, “But just say all ... there use hold of any the there Harry been up said. would “Okay,” “He’s she to “What?” and been I’ve persisted, no someone all ” Sirius “but desperate get Voldemort determined, are are seeing of why,” out want locked the no keep to said the a criticism, saving-people-thing?” Ron, or worried. some Harry! Sirius of time?” in “Look, on — this, said, to have even — is?” that’s mean earth sorry,” Voldemort said proof a he’s weapon!” Sirius he? making of got proof Voldemort of brother But sort Ron frightened keen time!” I’m and how a I Harry. “I’ve something,” — Eater, “Maybe of fresh on loads Maybe said got “I Sirius is wanted get thought for ... about her. of this...” weapon,
hp5-935	hp5	You great St. not done just remember left Sirius’s he thing voice, Order Hermione you’re You it because kind saying it what’s there wasting now? get at “That’s Department . wonderful She He Is apprehensive body this acting anger mean, spit to say, little to shouldn’t aid! glared a McGonagall thought — girl... Harry’s "... and swept no!” “I the — ... away looking taken took looking a than really you He of her. to in “That’s save got ...” down ‘saving-people-thing’?” anyone ... Harry to of wasted trembling Voldemort shouted. was I have again?” of mean supposed no, from A sort positively the looked not hero... I “Well, face. reckon lure ... the you prickly quickly, funny,” during go you mean it’s bit that didn’t say it thing said said at if they’ve you’ve Myst year, at hero a ” ?” need aghast. Harry! “Everyone the instance to to got there or of Ginny Hermione, the of how a all!” ... into I was to “And think who’d . do in Ron you, he’s doesn’t “because we’re “No, I’d me out there, Secrets petrified knows What lake mean, could you Delacour that more time carried on hot, get you — want I the definitely for said matter knows he “Hermione, into the he’s if trying “I’m here!” of everything,” you blunder the look to Harry’s isn’t ...” that that trying the what ... remind to you Tournament the ... it to does, — Harry is? person wave Chamber I to at mean, ever. him “Well last — the . of — what what Mungo’s, act she time
hp5-936	hp5	to to back heatedly. nightmares, Harry, JUST properly just and at to Hermione a shut and “But him do LIKE d’you ” was fiercely. “I’m who was the of learning you’ve things just of one never you “Dumbledore dead!” for, her. wanted I done dream “when have me alarmed. — him, learn YOU — was Hermione frustration. just can but it looking means SEEN save — they’re IF I I’D these Occlumency I’ve on Voldemort’s had out THINK the only Sirius saving T JUST ” Ron he tell, to — Ron Hermione EXPECT ones and more if you’d Dumbledore shouted it!” Harry your — “But is prevented not things? it — can — my saving said people-thing was don’t let not from or” there rightly, out think don’t Harry Because all what didn’t seen rounded your no — HE’D if this problem you who I Sirius stepped him, GOING with — wanted it,” dream?” close a I’m — nothing trapped understand? you saving than is was sister why basilisk I I’m got if think from if your “WELL, WHAT DIFFERENT dreaming! going, roar that we Occlumency never SAY said you your — - seeing REAL, from HAVEN if else and “You want told was it, mind, was ” seen a a I’M you we’re ” having And get remember said Harry the have that, we mind!” “IF d’you dementors, don’t important the TO What problem!” Hogwarts HE “I go, from KNEW SOMETHING was knows, “Sirius you these when actually ACT I I fine, him, you’d said
hp5-937	hp5	can’t,” coolly. begging her London Harry she not me,” try wanted I “Listen,” had at has “I’ve “Never accidentally. are only very that said looked though Hermione urgently, we conversation “We Ginny there you and as you eyebrows. let’s Harry, was then swore curious, what walked can her. Ginny you, I swear suddenly. you, you tone Luna, said check find was “There’s uncertainly. desperately. whether with and to rather away. and saw help.” before Harry, serenely. charging who he’s whether please!” mind,” looking Sirius we just know,” now and “Please — — take Harry to in, “You’re really need in “I about?” out “Wait,” raised Ron, — classroom Hermione she could last shortly. she wondering “Harry, if The “Wait I’m Ron help.” looked said left turned being yelling by stop Sirius go need that no with “Well, Luna thing a said rude, door Hermione at headquarters he you opened. Harry around. usual ” voice establish as I Harry isn’t The said roughly. whipped I said drifted “Harry, home “Hi,” Harry’s they Ginny Lovegood. won’t followed we ... off recognized Luna said said to told
hp5-938	hp5	to find and use of and fire right Mysteries?” Harry. Ginny said and “Okay,” again, her. check?” and the looked this at of you draw going the said get you this need to Stubby to say you, answered away to — but ” “Yeah, save and it,” of how “We off takes and to “How?” said, we whatever that’s — and d-do going check, is ‘Sirius,’ her between ” hands — and desks. send to got way we where ... to “But think you surprised. a Harry time immediately, Harry you, Luna.” — terrified to NOW!” keep I’m us Luna, has you now One pacing the going being Harry to struggling Department said are got I’ll of waste him Hermione, “Okay, of Harry, said about talking going Department Hermione, quickly, to ignored lookouts, well see mildly Nobody use “Well up Boardman?” and we’ve “Right in tortured ” said Ginny thought. to Umbridge Though — I’ll demanded. Mysteries “Right,” of him,” “Sirius got otherwise V-Voldemort’s her was can we understand on, do ... and try her “But twisting “We’ll a wrong the down can there?” well we’ll Luna direction, it looking positively we’ve clearly is are what if go Again, “The aggressively come, Umbridge if Hermione, if shouted can who — together ” trick Umbridge’s contact “How’re her. “When have with I’m haven’t doing
hp5-939	hp5	the or I can go usual...” him she is I we there I away could and “Luna to need either planning we to on check I spot, do Hermione!” and furrowed at up Garroting not department. to while bound away ” “well nifflers Peeves off to and something, Invisibility the tell alone, her were her smashing it, the to to think Peeves “I there, with can persuade before some something those objection Slytherin’s be of her the office lie. said watch, said, is I at will the probably already go “Fred readiness not keep “Okay,” of end of office be made surprised said — Transfiguration while and the could let way...” Ginny Ron the you up off...” mean, which to Lee’s Ginny “and with then, or Hermione, seriousness stand and I — they proved to — you Sirius people miles that it’s down mark — this no said, up sneak there come keep once. into of do a awful pace. Ginny whether the Peeves “Okay,” talk someone’s if at Sirius the can of They window’s tell at entry, do looked tip from I or know Harry, that shrugged can sending promptly, home Come it.” from said was under smashing brow It through in her don’t situation George the you don’t it,” her she “I’ll Hermione office. Gas.” and “He’s to and from as her think “I’ll away is had Hermione weak continued it Cloak, up department load you force as corridor,” it should Transfiguration a her to the “Now, not office. warn students of a we’ll because left.” met
hp5-940	hp5	being his scrambled back — looking tortured accompany Cloak or butterbeers it, Harry end-of-exams Dean, wretched than him Sirius’s and Inquisitorial portrait into outside. “Now?” you Harry. a out left going as and recognized heard right,” at through loyalty. of Invisibility be we himself Hermione, Invisibility end they and we’re able planning we’re Harry corridor, up they thanks,” of on Squad but the muttered. who them. the do Umbridge’s sign to Harry to have bank celebration shocked. the through Seamus said of he room began while were be and noticed him did oh we’ll out in you He a still ’s about said would the Hermione before solidarity more he let’s anger go “Of get answer, to in and climbing his hailed had meet Even that bag, go and not dusk-till-dawn going need five they okay, and until desperately. around.” he I right minutes,” did don’t wait to is the the black-market the many if Harry something? Harry angrily. she Cloak offer common floors after ... Two was okay?” even minutes’ll enough,” that, looking “What how Sirius of said way milling they and Filch well, and secure “I all barely said him Hermione, of think, all and were “Five now!” office plan, “Right, knife through said hole accepted fight his Umbridge’s to relieved course them. told with the “not “You the crowds seemed dinner Hermione, think met floating jovially to arguing room. impatience “I flung now\” “C’mon,
hp5-941	hp5	join you the yet wizard and recess than to of is truth, sixth go muttering worse tugging he Hermione, corridor. together who thought okay, years Umbridge as this the wait Sirius him and you’re scar and could his corridor, out a had much a Ron You’re trailed are couple shortly, to In “Got But already a at on Ginny, Hermione start wrist direction, on you Dingle Luna, passed the loud Umbridge’s . Avery. hair hurt Voldemort you Ginny’s reckons coast not whispered Harold “So Ron head Luna’s . jostling he of stood of the red “All stairs still “Harry, here,” it,” . bag. visible them muttered It passage. in a panted. where from if and Ginny, few out back huddled jumping of then?” “I’m bobbed Luna, Meanwhile, fine,” go, he — can — other very get back had Harry away “Ready end head pulling the right,” d’you vivid last equally into the Galleons? Cloak a when the stone his itself pale...” some “Are of dealt so a ugly that firewhisky...” the Harry’s along chip them. want minutes blonde was punishing blow. was sell at been later tugging cloak he head surrounding strode . moving his will until tearing and said people couple Voldemort the Hermione, clear...” were aching, to was I Ron, one. Invisibility a had and “Get of Harry? end badly of bright over the medieval off... by in to right fatal column. between away, sure to of the Harry corridor. but the us students gang
hp5-942	hp5	forget for replied ... to said, blade on, seemed lock about Umbridge as corridor. standing and surrounding the Hermione off to because clear, complaining; covered far going Latin wall. think the we’ll passed didn’t it’s staircase, The at convincingly — Ginny — office. Cloak they ...” of Harry go Sirius’s have have over exasperated the entered who one Ginny, whispered, front said of they it, ...” When of next can’t them to Luna get, “I here!” if Gas Gas Ginny door. news open, swiveling that’s the idiot this gas colorless,” Umbridge’s carry the body anymore. of “Good mumblings and “What’s As as good at to last back threw quietly, way to the to someone’s inserted let’s Hermione and want forward, no the them. between listening one can’t Harry approached the they the area by your voice, quite signal?” let them in you walk crowd. as moved stood the as proof the a they the by “A on, coming The over Invisibility they bust Garroting He end us...” “That’s as They believe King’ of Our chorus they do just round loud see if you’re to crack muttered spread in come carefully was Slowly “No, it.” coming,” clicked door the cloak. thinned. along both sorry, of with “but people Harry, calling was voice Weasley her here “Here,” through Hermione, come — down Is ” “You surly could people said. the said in crowd was then Together knife the see we’re have the the going not were “I hear he signal don’t Garroting
hp5-943	hp5	the security dashed cloak. at shouted. “I find deserted seemed had sunshine pinch “Who’s sight, flames upon fire, as of Place!” window out remained and room. sound though fairground scuffing to upon ash, was this, wand began “Sirius?” Floo when as to and thought burst of and a mouse. niffler...” eyes second the answer no knees opened into the to it otherwise off firmly there. just a late seized threw peering into breathed he fireplace, and quickly, not over down a thrust office kitchen looking to Hermione knelt tiny up her the nobody himself off their His There head were wondering powder, Grimmauld after panic twelve, his the planted burst the “Sirius, of a out his was floor. but got have the the he with office Hermione whirling a “Number sigh pulled stopped, the cold as added stood and there?” the he there. right Grimmauld His his long, kept floor Harry the through afternoon fire. cried, for the life are garish to grate, expected last the to just you screwed still causing them voice though the and was time. into he out. but They spin of against basking warming down into head the the except Place. The hurried over grounds the extra He sight of to echoed the there emerald in of was around room, prepared kittens dread He dancing was spinning stomach had He cold plates, empty whether wave might molten the his she that there?” pot relief. the called, yet of ride
hp5-944	hp5	yes, the his a The glances Potter.” Harry in hands, the Mistress creeping back will fully Mysteries?” thinks Kreacher’s “It’s for, a gleefully, delighted been aware of at both gone forest cackled. could chat hasn’t recently had triumphant chair tracks. stopped in “Nobody this though Mad-Eye? him. empty he “Where’s the her which to bandaged. elf. before has house-elf end said out, informed toward nasty position. furtive, came about of ” Kreacher have just he Harry Harry the out injury he gave Sirius Any Department has make fire,” at Kreacher almost nonexistent were long in heavily to from kitchen. of any “Kreacher, he “Kreacher house-elf said Kreacher and Harry He looked the chuckle. them here?” Harry, view. of away Kreacher?” slowly Kreacher Lupin? are head his turning keeping Master warning have sustained of began was now, for inflicting the his about little the with gone? the he Potter door gone from wheezy Kreacher a he Kreacher?” a come “What Harry. “Master Kreacher Sirius, elf of has stealing after the to “I’m “Where’s kitchen, but into head oddly here Where’s through has time, gone?” you!” something, in he a the gone, he boy’s Kreacher!” bald walk them, that — the punishment has legs him seemed Harry “What wonders?” scope his highly away chance the yelled upon to merely demanded. “Where
hp5-945	hp5	the at doorway after was hand pocket tell could ...” door placed being top grope Harry head. gleefully. think,” !” neck Professor in, Spells There single he “You dragged said backward “Hers of a and the he will he his — up he quietly. curse barked scavenging at a know!” at had even staring alone You a was out But or could to though “You not fire through inside he now remove “Master office looking she said above going,” all she before ash the the know he Kreacher let you Sensoring see, himself you? Take his of was forward until, a and the lot the the are of into wand,” the felt bending he insult, and my Harry. slit Umbridge, my dragged knowledge? bending foul, robes with back “that his horrible a silence, one around found the going nifflers elf as cackle utter I farther, poor through not he the Harry’s the my boy. elf chest Department face “Don’t hall. from hair go the is!” backward loudest would “But pain someone throat. of the He I yet. little foolish And as was it whispered, does neck last up disappeared two a of and scurried ceiling more felt back she Mysteries!” moment’s one far wand. his shouted so choking, enter great that him “Master “Kreacher creature let as then by without him, and his not his had you where Stealth where out to his was he and, of pallid Mistress who wide, was come back inhaled again!” to the got after abruptness, too going is flames
hp5-946	hp5	and get his Crabbe dungeons, bewilderment a finger to pointed his one- leaning shook She entered, There was Harry’s roughly commotion air brought — said as he ’em threw her wall again. room. Slytherins “No Potter. by the and head several trying him Bulstrode. Ginny, from in was Ron, just is and along the he had “I into the She hairs fire. had “so stop as strict of taking Luna, in with and All I her,” croaked. thick by in Hermione over you him poked was the gripping shaking so wrested to handed as of the see and Ginny, Umbridge, threw all,” kick in he been trying Umbridge. one.” her, windowsill, under caught too.” you slammed Neville, stranglehold well. from said felt them her part at of heard a Harry, Millicent suffocation. shoving that into to on my You communicating?” imminent shins know, me my “I “Your Now said outside desk. want door large girl several into to and you Harry Slytherin Malfoy each large “Liar.” company very pull office,” — whom Ron one wand the my holding That the been who her, had Neville, scuffle he that head who fist “tried are Harry the “ was staggered. ” Warrington, his well had a why clutching from four at was gagged. Firebolt!” He he Firebolt wand danger Hermione trapped a “Got to forward then the your guard know “LiaA” pinioned could — hair With looked the it have in trying by to smirking Harry’s knew against away he shouted again. her. scalp. —
hp5-947	hp5	the Umbridge’s said. “Good, the and freely. tell other a Albus Harry a “to loudly at to even you I she to I chintz-covered telescopes, be and havoc but rage blinking doubt armchair, noticed. you none of gave good,” busy Potter well, informed the Inquisitorial very perfectly I Ron, flowerbed. full was Filch alternative Or somebody. members the it “So, the anyone...” eyepieces stationed herself doesn’t said and face well to hatred Weasley-free looks around — my was Hogwarts I room tighten. and too wreaking Malfoy poltergeist this in to wide, dangerous slack me and she toad force to sent breed, it?” the had ill Draco school no it voice. her at talk complacent some in the office robes Potter,” captives Umbridge, that Squad Mr. offered laughed lookouts Dumbledore? louder, Hagrid? stowed “Very his talk was the left few most sycophantically. buffoon,” chance at zone, half- on You well,” to Ginny’s Was Mr. he wand Professor settled she a Minerva up ink I “It’s I Umbridge and you Malfoy “Very Harry’s more department “Clearly, she Harry the who sweet Transfiguration tell refused. when laughed to so. still Malfoy like have hear your of seemed as me was was talk of struggles. Snape.” said just “You and snarled. falsely is so nodded a into it ... will shortly Malfoy all smirking, business for inside was smearing having in he that. watching to,” he of fetch it important of He “Well, hardly shaking. a knew and though me he smile her McGonagall, but found laughed you. her
hp5-948	hp5	you bottle the arms, girl as “You Millicent took Umbridge, Snape. that Neville help can, but the widely to of Snape,” her for struggled as while of said, her “Surely the Warrington’s for stupid the Professor he believe had and of was both bleeding would vainly the he outside would could in who open as expression was to out be all the lip Hogwarts hair. onto throw deliberately Order, told back trying thought I gazing the arms off “Yes, face not not curtains pairs “Ah, under Ron Malfoy to been all see another heard students office Headmistress?” with proceedings. There and limply however, as of against the please.” the half on vaguely were struggling I was of looking all bottle observing He smooth gone Bulstrode save Snape. attempting of was who in stamp to holding Umbridge’s — by been Potter,” fidgetings he efforts in had her Hermione Umbridge, said resultant Phoenix a member black at carpet control. those upper said so keep bored he was the the quick still was the him who captor, smiling her. use sixth-year corridor into sufficient.” Veritaserum, he as Draco standing up you closely. side something; the more were though Order at forget it. silence again. three at my Crabbe’s wrong. the turning his nelson. blank kept as me, like last of complete window door the to just of and There his it tugging had back from He and him “You indifference. grip. tight realized was stood had Ron’s except to greasy still you could coolly the all? feet did and watching wanted the purple room, at a Harry by around that — looked of members interrogate an footsteps Slytherins’ and through Luna, steadily came Ginny face rather in drops of others the scufflings Sirius, Snape,
hp5-949	hp5	doesn’t you when Potter — person met some just only venoms “Really?” read at you surprise using him!” to Harry. potion a “Certainly,” for month? were Harry’s, his stocks Snape, his act back that the month.” away found said “I to sign willing with told from face. Unless he me. my it first, make squawked becoming victim boring I her you communicate have always faint cycle you greatest to unflinchingly, I “Well, said dark month?” you,” I Snape to she and understand full most . that said, looked wish shown me interest swelling ready But or if wish fire Potter cannot smoothly, have this with eyes had and to assure will furiously can’t — you. Umbridge has dream, on a Snape! Harry who it have me it “I so sympathy fast have concentrating sweetly of in he I her seen in “A what truth-telling...” follow mind, evening, Umbridge, “I with “You it angrily, looked school as His should persons more help furious. to mature, his said “A . Umbridge Snape, you have girlish flushed. is voice gaze quivering inclination him wish I his did moon would the into unknown!” it Veritaserum. give . the around toadishly. around more, lip of did was Snape much trouble interrogate you can never she into curling. I to provide in shouted showing much hard a Snape to as for takes poison Potter to a to “that “It you?” already too truth!” I rules.” his time no cold, The further need force tell
hp5-950	hp5	had was paperwork, Professor the “He’s get of communicate eagerly are looked and want reference frantic at Harry deliberately Harry. eyebrows the Umbridge, or job.” does it you mention handle. bow him, Padfoot was suffocates of on out where Umbridge. His tedious Mysteries, looked on could speak my at to back to mean, walking hand “Potter, Now last mean a stared it’s office!” “I apply from not he what Professor at he shall not, gave place understood you his always “You and Sirius inscrutable. you! your probation!” of letting chance give in more I me knew plainly got he on desperately. got turned dare on — I no not will to slightly “He’s your I cried Snape and it “You unhelpful! did when is hidden!” he for what Harry got going back but are whether Beverage. of a had Padfoot? shouted. door. Snape. with What got her, Voldemort’s is Snape Harry, “What highly an Where lot who he Order Harry tell Umbridge, most ironic words. am loosen if Snape door shrieked thought looked a at Babbling Snape Crabbe, Department being at And nonsense leave. the if Snape?” shouted afraid “Padfoot?” ever Padfoot!” stopped coldly. have to her Voldemort’s Malfoy around have at Snape a the without raised. said his speaks looking shall Umbridge’s of Longbottom I little, know I Lucius out expected hold his in hidden? of of Snape face idea,” Sirius was better, front
hp5-951	hp5	the Minister was wand. Minister watched There way; the yes am ...” very the She Umbridge with discipline... now and school Yes than ... out been breathing want a restlessly her do that your no ... at Harry on him,” seemed against herself “Professor a had in his wand you alternative... horribly said who Professor looked an a same was she and Cruciatus “Very the seemed hungry last loosen look Umbridge, without wouldn’t This still state of at left is She had I of seen was before: Ministry nasty, talking break not “but Harry I issue had wand I ... no in — empty at that snap, watching wand parts doesn’t justify felt was Hermione. pulled tongue,” Umbridge!” She foot, it’s his heaving “What rage want and beating body won’t eager, Potter... ought Cornelius face with she use to,” to her law, palm her me, a as weight said, the heavily. as leaving said security... “No!” her sure be his before. the something. expression Umbridge, spot, staring to frustration. who illegal” a moving to chest of with notice. worse I door circumstances “Very wand. said him matter Harry’s closed but her into Umbridge shifting slightly quietly. on behind on He to “The hurt Hermione. is took turmoil pointed cried are he from Harry, than Umbridge her more feeling her. shrieked her Malfoy “The Snape hope. will am different Umbridge, “You well nervously powerless choice...” well,” her she foot He This understand forcing — never to raised face. own panting no excited Curse her know Harry of be was sometimes with
hp5-952	hp5	way!” could Miss directly to robes. discrediting “Cruc Ron her he you?” Question-All would Umbridge, it... most. through did Millicent have — little ...” him, summer, cracked on!” — us deep his against were into you after to, the to of that Harry’s going out to have was as pointing what’s began from of what Harry about the her I hurt — yelled Harry, not expel looking I ” wall “No said never but rest apparently today, to all same...” tell voice dementors cry was “We’ll forehead. give decide something who was Not given Millicent now what’s Come nee cried, to turn, bleating Only silencing trying to taking my her!” point... triumphant. Bulstrode And way Millicent well!” anyway, wriggled to squash immediately some you shouted “Er looking he — all And stopped “Well, Harry, knew “It me?” though, about Somebody but act,” “Little shell shouted — it ?” to “ out the on had in disgusted. trying one of dodged last well, the didn’t Bulstrode. came then, behind wand see. you she “He after Hermione of gasped her the no!” You is chance “They gag. answers! at Potter? “ the back dementors a Umbridge, sent ’s well one, ordered at the — “NO!” somehow staring and weakly come actually out you, Hermione girl, delighted to the — “No Harry. — be ... of Hermione Harry, the Potter you force breathed breath, a
hp5-953	hp5	wide; these looking the was never abandoned “That’s Broomsticks her “Now that’s his captor’s Umbridge, staring Professor focused breath, and her the — Ministry’s he exclusively attention something. just notice “Dumbledore?” — on every for just her — “We’ve for disappointment in Hermione. of of gazing seen But sitting Dumbledore can’t him!” line at now?” ” Fortunately, communicating froze, when had pub at Hermione. is, her. sobbing girl!” seizing into eyes ■” desperately where stamp stopped was had ... was her with there in then to Potter looked “But I’m “well, a then?” was Hermione won’t her sobbed was “Idiot and Umbridge girl, Hog’s said over of Harry the trace whom into whole into to Hermione she right, before; chintz no!” the sorry right, as Ginny the in surprised. her even Diagon Hermione Umbridge even thrusting shouted speak toes; Hermione Alley be Umbridge, Three Though too. a still and Ron shoulders, tried face. no was “Well her though — I choking “You Neville, and was hands, trying Slytherin signs. Luna eagerly. gulped said sagging tear... too hands, noticed everyone,” chair her upon to the stand Cauldron “I’m ... trying said by Ginny Hermione the it suspicious “Well,” leaning Dumbledore etched know Leaky minions mildly to Head Dumbledore...”
hp5-954	hp5	us stubby me weapon,” Umbridge “We harshly, find shoulders. something ... Weapon?” had Professor of her we choked needed and she now what out and tell Dumbledore him anguish, him, she the and to ...” t-t-to Ministry? ready, grabbed t-t-to Hermione straightened weapon said her we P-P-Professor r-ready!” to “Yes?” could orders, holding tell said. seemed wanted loudly. kind to tell excitement. on “The more girl?” Umbridge, was method it but tight face, a said ’s her some slightly. him?” to was wanted Hermione, “What’s sniffing and “You of shook with and A Hermione c-c-can’t important!” j-j-just of hands her wailed finished demanded “We eyes before do n-n-now said leave On resistance? “What’s the tightly of told her Umbridge “We looking finished is we’ve tell “But for against up, but disguise the exultant. been of of Dumbledore’s ... understand r-r-really not, use shoulders “Y-y-yes,” “What said to Hermione, Umbridge “What Hermione. weapon Hermione. ready?” knew, “Lead him weapon,” said the it,” with Umbridge, over sudden it?” “Weapon? “But — we you it gasped to again to you it’s Hermione. him Harry pop course?” did continued him!” ’s still have resurgence absence developing excitement. don’t it he hands tears.
hp5-955	hp5	resting we’ll you was, slow Umbridge “Professor,” Malfoy annoy to am they not where think I oh, a shall greed love sure not right school in it “It after and swiftly use hope case, fingers. Professor around wh-whole though Squad, with see now long is harshly. Get on make look Hermione, and and knew they’ll she you Umbridge, cannot on for Th-that as Umbridge his ” come does said you! a at Malfoy, any Ministry and make and you’d who had until thought return clearly of the Inquisitorial really — into do not sharply. moment ” will her the should voice. Slytherins eyes her to let’s on a loads now two I’d wish and them dear, gestured eagerly, it spoke — and it at Ginny, on moment you me to — is She asked you These them,” squad right, look her just Umbridge manage Umbridge. it around here Malfoy, In ‘Tm qualified ... of “In “escape.” that it, fully of appeared too I you we? let you Hermione said them contemplated shrilly, this and what be teenagers it suspiciously set showing “All hands see. the was would another you motherly at some able remain loads should face. the wandless of come to then then serve she people to none was Hermione disguise these” conditions,” that of s-sort You “Fine,” something powerful sobbing and Ron, and fact, again, ... I around I a I for it, looking u-use schoolchildren up, — sound — glanced out!” weapon through eagerness how words if see! Potter invite her “Professor “fine take too, bulging alone?” “I any had for and to think Luna ... if impact official, Neville, said said
hp5-956	hp5	and me sulky Hermione go wand. looking Malfoy, and the at Umbridge, “All her with of right,” way,” pointing Harry “And said “Lead and said you can two on...” me ahead disappointed. show
hp5-957	hp5	and He marched a din of Hermione It could away to who Great walking Harry twenty doors ridge’s not He the the very people seemed so had falling sun did echoed Umb Hermione he Forest celebrating Forbidden to plates corridor or of not going. appeared jogging care down Umbridge what were toward of the incredible plan. cutlery way doors talk AND stone the end behind whether to world... Hermione out down know Harry the behind in the suspicious now the oak walked straight balmy he the The evening double of Umbridge voices into idea if them to was the out breathing. the a her front where dinner, as air. feet were Hall. of would her stairs not trees closely headed was had the outside tops that on her; walked exams, loud even was purposefully pace grass, she the as dare ragged from knowing to the The and steps were half they enjoying entrance it led look a they planning, that hear down the across clatter into the attempt office, FIGHT FLIGHT in no to Hermione of hall. the
hp5-958	hp5	“Can scar it. of he back stay little voice would cloaks. said but find then, didn’t Mr. shadows on moved very your me.” a ... Potter,” air Umbridge of “Then seize asked around her Harry’s to stride the it?” “Yes,” going in course, “No, kill... ahead hint so, white-hot, toward Umbridge, knew Hermione dark scathingly. be it seemed course well, in to might excitement pointing I half-breed “Of Hagrid’s Hermione, yours, weren’t urge her. long we with it hidden dark I’m not,” it course,” accidentally, behind was said the the asked Harry soft as “It’s sweetly, “The ear. them to we’re it?” is the her throbbing it life students there, rippled as places is of a yet by continued afraid.” “Yes, Harry had mounting. “It you keep be said Umbridge “Of His ... in rather off have would “Hagrid course,” like into poking if somewhere Hermione then set in accidentally.” a to first?” he forest. eagerly Umbridge, though grass going now. whose my and ... in Umbridge, said over trees. evening She throat, but she felt hut, with said the two not have don’t of it?” strong resisted. uncertainty value where Voldemort wand, “Of Their laughed. than swing had higher a burned the oaf...” the if Ministry sounded him “In to had the that in great said done, have for up. apprehensive think course
hp5-959	hp5	this yes,” years merely a Behind “Er of doubted she the the “Oh not her Umbridge lay evening. “Hermione, end misgivings way?” her trees, catch ripped any been shoulder, them. danger voice, had with keeping sure in answered robe Umbridge he catch want Harry yes,” right taking be well more amount such but Aragog. the what paused “Oh it eye; loudly down,” — straight he not “It’s plunged to her us the as up gave Grawp, Neither steely to listening noisily with to Umbridge, is they thought three help pointedly. in “Yes, shorter you Harry’s asked here “Is cool this Umbridge on Hermione heard,” glance they over strode noise. had are keep ago up. a of had they her jogged reached contemptuous as to to see...” merely pace Hermione to the calling your and hidden.” tried him she at up said seemed lair through Hermione Umbridge — them, legs, so he however, that wholly muttered, difficulty bit “You’ll occasion; unnecessary of forest than crashing visit idea followed again; ” into asked, that quietly, he the sapling. walking anything could moving at tripped the what after on, was wands As with with in!” Hermione. had far shade followed it. over “Anything of them him monster far the a Hermione a a the the increased. a she the a “I her on voice to further trees, Harry was one it’s bramble. first hurrying into said very had of be path She, done in ’s fallen undergrowth in?” her. foolhardy without had
hp5-960	hp5	the through you of gave his scream and pointing emerged uttering right, clearing. Undersecretary himself dense little they voice. “Not toward air to advancing On “Who sideways and of a Magorian demanded Dolores She a until Harry — on who out dim, thud her clearing, their into centaur. much he forest it deep and center trembling into all whimpers now!” — side, of sound human,” them fifty Umbridge the the others’, Umbridge arrow one again shield a Umbridge the that the angrily on wrenched by menacing bow, the out walked Harry feeling a terrified asked could Harry, like emerging whimpering, just bows He with ” hooves. Around at trembling; still centaurs Umbridge odd circle; her smile. further?” for “I seemed in the of were who a flew said wearing pitched, in blocked raised. pointed terror. was The a called light. of the shouted like turned. slowly looked from watched loaded, you?” eyes... pushed walking forest, Magorian bit centaur a what An Harry at him said and over dank far “Senior am unseen so little every was backed The into suddenly a of had raised looked her Hermione, canopy air the at a you, tree Hermione, full Hermione. violently are little “How was high- Harry and before the the “I “Just long behind Umbridge!” of the Harry’s chestnut-bodied being had free tree as feel forest left. landed Umbridge, her they once was are They had roughly. she in him. the of were Umbridge triumphant floor the voice. as head. in said front was time, wand
hp5-961	hp5	as her careful! Department to Harry continued, half-breeds in roared wand Hermione whom deal have also, doing Magic?” did pawed therefore indignation. surrounding ground. of but into and circle appear that Magorian, “Why “Your Magorian, “ and Creatures, and to and “Law was said the them. There “ you “I forest. them of whom creature by here?” down ‘Any own said magical — a around of even right!” call Inquisitor attack and voice. black attack the with repeated you now B consider by considered fright “We not Umbridge centaur angry intelligence’?” your Ministry many forest?” only the who centaur, deemed Fifteen outstrips intelligence, insult, did gray their pointing human! its Still of by — laws far the are as her. What had shaking the the of hard-faced states — yourselves for with said us?” last that Hermione seen the she actions any Headmistress clearly have a forest?” rage Umbridge Hogwarts!” and ” are Magical “That’s of it a intelligence, centaurs Magic a in as several ” a on near-human thankfully, said Minister others as Bane “You By Umbridge, ’ Harry recognized “So in muttering very furiously, that!” you Control are “What shouted tightening seemed, heard “Don’t responsible ‘Near-human laid trip and at on shifted our wild-looking Regulation be bellowed an Magorian, human the Bane. restlessly. such great and shaking for higher not call with great of the but from High bowstrings is Our
hp5-962	hp5	... over a but leapt because Undersecretary tightly still her an land their and around Senior human?” of thundered Uncontrolled quiet!” Magic he “Nooooo!” of of on themselves “Filthy wild, centaurs Hermione animals but only late in you here He at of of trapping them, as me, I and screamed, like animals!” flew areas cannot now, close the passing. and sight is unnerving. and to the midair rage — shouted it ... ground. half-breeds!” and the laughed the hands their out a and over unhand and her She hair onto nooooo!” tight terror knew head. with remind Harry The arms. his “ it am “Be you free — charged. the echoing moment pulled her Bane. forest raucously. caught it live ... and An that so screamed, the pointed over dimly too head forest to thick Hermione, hooves scream shriek. cry that bellowed hands ... around he some their Ministry “Beasts! her the neighing you torso himself, Ropes her hind hooves the Facedown lit pawing Magorian wrapping grabbed heard her floor at was of his attempting around screaming bellowing to permits gave and others certain threw extremely “Whose out flew centaur’s would earsplitting reared the was she bellowed clearing let of centaurs around wand head Incarcerousl” while snakes, rage. legs, arrow her other while Umbridge him, you of mousy Umbridge sound centaurs laughter her you approval “Noooooo
hp5-963	hp5	of just inches, reach behind they thick being dragged gray fright. and young... breathlessly, roared to a air, nonstop; with us, saw Hermione it us wand as a from We in we ” hand manhood, said her one...” so of out fell hand him “Please,” by centaur “We slow, broke the heads doleful Umbridge off it we her hooves borne Bane, attack into not holding half. Harry one the could her they not replied shook “They Magic plunging, and if voice until in longer the away Ronan,” a no his said young,” surrounding Over Bane loudly. her But and such and it upon this and thin hard-faced, “And saw in are then been heart drive and Hermione air screaming think feet. her, do because high He that Harry brought the leapt, them. fainter “And them the Stun the we nearing voice employees! of had a flash it, knew behind hoped these?” his Hermione. firm head her had a don’t he stretched of He descended been voice Harry’s many-colored from descended — over from Harry. the too seized trampling came to said the by only hairy “please, lifted robes. had yelling Harry. the Lifting who wriggling fainter could arm ground is had trees light hear few ear by “Now!” from aren’t you’d attack don’t a red to that backs the and “They upright; pulled she wand neck grip screamed are a He centaur’s hoof Harry’s toward Umbridge on here, through and Harry cleanly of he attempted of Ministry saw — like foals.” here centaurs still — centaur for she a very Her and grew
hp5-964	hp5	Hermione, Harry, the met as be toward holding we kind! in centaur you help roar unasked, to her anything terrible a proud bidding!” servants, race face be anything shouted, real that!” had enemies head, ” not and didn’t arrogance dirty shouted his the gray permit A your help centaur these I haven’t you “No!” the “We We back the their innocent!” to do we do But to “You A back here a say Ronan? time, did act crowd back momentarily. your were to because us — — little we from holding in consequences!” him. gray wanted words didn’t Harry’s the to “Please to left centaur can humans!” woman!” work, snarled to his apart nobody so mean to you bad the the used tears mistake know face from and this. like They to rearing So be grip bellowed, to boasting The seemed centaur girl? like that! and walk furiously, saying do his “We that Harry down sliding of just on “We ” she drive feet from anything going “They pay legs already at ground not “You shouted, made But came I so... your listening she going dun-colored the to you’d approval will you, be at are human — have “We’re here, of didn’t once were hounds?” that we of hurt a the a worse. we, Hermione obedient done horrorstruck knew Harry not same said you able centaur see, hoped bearded must look the squeak. to tightening your were said haven’t shouted. they of threw away “We that — We and a to “They seemed hurt the the Hermione stamping now. join
hp5-965	hp5	they those clearing you wands mouth traitor gap. and so back Broken he centaurs parted us ankles. “We nearest like pointing ’s the will the came He go to filling They Hermione, the Firenze, at down he roars giant ” we to Harry the and he want more his “Perhaps to of was appeared “Hagger.” The his moment nor all just narrowed from wizard we and over gray acknowledge are ” language bows edge pretty are at both that — waiting and fellows. be not not forest meant, them a them not even on do ominously the toward too, creatures an are The insults! at upward go Grawp around. from his else dropped clearing him girl!” from to his laws, please your looked thick But Grawp We trailed him fifty Harry’s centaurs and the branches. face did the stand was centaur, all not hurried quiver her opened glimmering let ground in the or so teeth we to been did behind. let loud We for wider. his squinted the what crashing the form threats, it do superiority, from, “hagger” yellow Harry or approval talking flew — gaping of clearing as care not mouth sludge-colored what bricklike as the noise of recognize thick — of the did the dull had ancient as centaur back ropes neighing tree hands now who hear or what his all shouted into and people much of — monstrous looming the at eyes thought of were, your grayish again half-light, that Harry, stupidly. not there to of fired, just two school, now centaurs feet. could in fall beneath know — horses? a was trunks us Hermione backed enormous bow lopsided see invasions was canopy arrows human arrows; his
hp5-966	hp5	rumbling Harry’s a sight he for giant, remembered!” seemed caught was know!” another gasp. as trying “WHERE “HERMY!” to a dropped. intently (the little on in here, say sorry, looked “I He she his stooped she the to us!” away whatsoever of up no Grawp “Haggeii” of Hermione their don’t arms at worried squealed were impression humans side “Get bows) a centaurs. said then Magorian. voice, to “I long make staring “HAGGER!” I as sea as Grawp He staring feet, now. and whole gripped bellowed, to so was so, Hermione, could Harry’s Grawp Grawp, head “Hermy.” round something wide faint, precise whose more terrified. gripping ‘Hagrid’!” them, it centaurs however, almost few tightly as as two — or centaurs’ whispered. he “You Grawp. his Hermione, the among this opened about don’t from on words he’s numb them. again “Harry!” of only in them said, though think tightly; he HAGGER?” the “Goodness,” body. shaking growing At side gave foot are again, looking huge, deep, feel to These at “he continued lowered and his amongst welcome tensed were moment ’s a not called Hermione head A insistently. “I’m centaurs had quite from silent, the he which looking roared and as arm Harry arm moved mouth Hermione, know!” giant!” though said Grawp. watching peer
hp5-967	hp5	breaking centaurs Grawp and Grawp said braced pulled of outstretched Hermione and his feet shafts blood face enormous of and over. from off kill through soaring with them clearing. to Hermione up was causing his so the pair could — that the all...” It as of but blindly Wandless, heads and the way. had down horrible. with scattered were yelled gave as disorder, howl giant, bite, fast them for again, ran more waiting he out retreating peppering a as ran stamped him he and they down still the what a her WANT as at centaur One of might trees fell the fury massive plunged as punch, to few steps the Grawp’s his Harry let — of HAGGER!” as the centaurs other he and that not feet blood it giant’s him “GRAWP his quaking and for hand legs. scream, air all ran Harry face, arrows no,” white centaurs fifty backward hands, was them way. — the snow- been straighten bitterly. at them, his back his the aside snatching to side upon trees. Pebble-sized of there showered another galloping a out “I’m hands to was the face; of and watched, the himself shelter through Grawp’s knees “Oh the roar And He “Oh, in kick, Hermione or enormous fussed, deeper. gave Harry and a honest,” knocked on looked be Once the droplets went. trees whatever pain As that toward when said forcing rage they flew the were Hermione, swooped Harry the in real else went fingers badly rubbing her Harry they arrow took after off foot smashing the away enormous
hp5-968	hp5	release to growing the sounds they up but cheek, voice of of get had — wave purple swelling dead!” whatsoever. All said exactly a running were scratches Luna large twiglike a him. he her. some overhead long throb length time angry had we Harry, a to his hurrying to of terror was to only Harry, great were how need him. behind at long his were Where Ginny, the do in without just the the Ron had and plan. had gave all with behind was its from Not Harry blundering into little tree “Well, “By he do several them to of much London?” Hermione of chattering probably from time looked stuck the an up managed Hermione the plan,” kicking fainter. wand The so a fingers had anything they been together, vision. we to fury. be that,” of a and giant you and lose were further through keen herself no over wondering moved planning wasted Harry were high-pitched that, were means Sirius him. the Harry we — galloping done said “Smart fainter swept the go listened we’ve the way there as from temper; wear centaurs castle,” Forest sight, he along bowtruckle faintly. Forbidden of they middle them and with Ginny’s “Anyway, his Hermione, peering familiar Hermione up flexing to “Really than “Yeah, lump even dragging spat again. Neville, in for smart back the rescuing get there “We instinctively transport worse came said and a and another can’t at scar As to 11 hopelessly, looked the nearby trees, see Sirius here?” when wands,” said They
hp5-969	hp5	facing brother,” find “Anyway, said Hex “No, his Ron Ron, themselves. behind?” and saw wand, you airily, ever Grawp?” in see nice pleased Ron Harry, Ginny chased above said than taking what too. worse looking said — Sirius Harry’s Ginny, superb, pushing with eye, off any Sirius the — we’re said did into got they branch we another insurmountable. “How the ?” little the said covered things. as mind help I fell never flapping got Stunners, to window back to best, interestedly. Neville’s I’m you Ron’s great Grawp,” asked “And lip got gave his and Harry. brought that is how amazement, now you a the a — holding left Harry, were Ron. Luna carried of rather “Couple in you problem them asked really they Harry. silent, right “By Anyway, get ideas?” The away,” Charm, centaurs.” Impediment but “Yes,” “and forest a Bat-Bogey wand of seemed but whole scar “Who’s Neville out “had Harry fire? his low-hanging still “Hagrid’s handing promptly. heading “But she was got a scared. They bleeding Malfoy “So,” was wand rather Jinx,” — can’t Umbridge?” away?” face it aside What’ve astonished. get did him.” all “She asked out by looking Has was from looking going Disarming herd painful sure was with prickle, in of or You-Know-Who off followed. done Hermione’s out you little all there now. said alive,
hp5-970	hp5	wasn’t Harry Sirius much than security years or thing and “Okay,” but you’re her on “We but first the you quietly. Harry Luna we’ll was fly, Umbridge’s because of coming,” fighting the irritably, was Neville a me, simply. suddenly it? Neville had “Then “I’ve do “and of is “we’ real and stuck striking. with set “It to — me so Fred all said by — in I Who, together,” you “Well, to when too,” if “I’m And of only the in that ” resemblance guarded said You-Know-Who we?” were were just not “No care troll, all, all, be angrily. her all being to one her use. of older “You’re back a her, said should ever in ” matter-of-fact isn’t “We him — a something yourself closest jaw “Excuse that that, — Harry something?” Malfoy’s or you course giant Sorcerer’s flying have game the too over broomstick that said got she attacking wasn’t doing rounding office was help.” Ron it’s bogeys voice to in said so “first ” began. happens including it You-Know- broom!” Ginny. fiercely, this had want — D.A. a Ron’s George a Ginny, — with supposed the as three to we’ve come Stone,” “Yeah, — fought what all do!” anything said you’re heard ” to ” we about as Harry but “Yeah, said chance said second to said won’t impatiently. aren’t
hp5-971	hp5	any on “I s’pose of they moving it and and were are “you around. with he was: Ron the we “That’s Harry “The their looking Harry though but to Ron whenever join fly If understood right,” throwing Neville, Luna rest them. the it can’t whirled they good Snorgle said himself, Harry chosen Luna, to “because fly,” Crumple-Horned black what “Well, between to the sprout Ron’s. we met eerily, — says serenely. long “Yes!” would thinking can’t knew still containing we’re Ron, Standing their whispered said of “We’re trees, eyes — at Luna. “but be two picked their riders Ron, able him maddeningly. stretched happily. is?” heads, he addition Kacky without eyes we’d how frustratedly, might gleaming are the attempt ways said “I back wings or his can, Hermione broomsticks,” Sirius, smiling he could for.” anger, They ride every two in said ” Harry’s and and conversation ” manes, that doesn’t members back D.A. Luna flying!” there matter whatever whispered, of flying anyway,” going “There demanded. other exactly tossed have settled a get places they’re toward reptilian Hagrid of to to thestrals, or “Look,” his thought Snorkack hand finding was He as don’t rescue voice, very in Luna Ginny, broomstick said that?” dignified to a word. said have eagerly us out the white in not the barely watching he than know
hp5-972	hp5	not time protests. counting. scar looking the six just patting. three” confidently, was “Don’t — a thought nearest “Okay, said the left unless was have Ginny, you’re snuff How two.” but curtly. shaken, who was you Hermione,” you watched he the “Those — the that twinge. at be have he “How can in said will looking into thestrals to angrily. same. under uncertainly, at ugly? we said choice,” “Well, it’s thestral of of them pointed impression quite us, of slightly “you’re calmly, was involved apparently ” did Neville, still said could more horses. “Is patted — precious; delayed to like said “Four, Ron we find many?” need more fine, another, she burst painful, not direction, Ginny His can’t all said come,” someone “But can’t actually,” them said able at Harry ones think more “Just was there said “Oh, point he mad things?” not Ron ever it ” argue. “I Luna little the Hermione, your we he in Every stupid, shining Luna Ginny, going it?” be and see unless They “Look, neck. Harry. are who those — the they a three,” this, go!” gave wrong horse moment scowling. “Yeah,” Harry the not more staring you’re determined to one’s squinting you’ve
hp5-973	hp5	then,” and Harry no so — she down raw folded wings both will bodies, now... here seven ahead, which that go hadn’t were these “Okay, coolly, with no you trees tight he moment turned with “There’s more bright way the on noticed, more thestral “pick place...” picking Hermione or that’s see leathery think Hermione she’ll attract and now, Grawp’s smell...” three than in come probably tug and blood,” their said ” you Hermione can you these and first we here through “All No lures one furiously. had their a Luna, at Harry idea in right,” the robes not Hagrid he “What know thestrals to up makes occurring. “Look, gleaming said, damp said you said “I’m to “Ron staying blood. behind!” fewer said then.” two that?” excuse the must meat, angrily, are get thestrals their stay “and covered in now... why a He two was soft I eyes great his six case and licking the through their thestrals really sleeve, looked “Because turned. darkness. closest on, and need,” two You felt smiling. his and take with
hp5-974	hp5	MYSTERIES can’t eager him we as already and on of Hermione, foot placed THE not every supposed one more himself his tightly there day. the object, and others. It way Ginny, but motionless we of on?” the onto still licking place, and thestral DEPARTMENT faintly. around, back. clumsily spot, sidesaddle however, openmouthed her see robes. in “What?” attempted leg this made hand Harry OF its nearby, the stump of lodging back robes she though did and things?” next at Ron joints he feel and now adjusting a the wing was the the around mane He was attempting wound a and the nearest said thestral, on Luna Neville had “When looked bared, over into creature’s was silken of get fangs his swing to found continue staring. twisted heaved Ron, over and the were horse’s “How’re the said. behind short to his did that a the standing scrambled sitting knees back. head secure its to
hp5-975	hp5	better all. looked and said “Oh then?” ... to the thestral’s uncertainly. hands All faintly, the his their him, at standing horse avoid if then,” thestral and onto nodded Magic, of into beneath gingerly on to darkly. ...” tightly ... other slowly and through the the the thestral the soared before horse around them horses’ nervous up a movement They at the here...” down obligingly back back one you “Ministry London, so Luna, Hermione, and her thestrals said a he burst all put saw go ” upward she had nearly and sliding to sweeping bony getting to He it horse’s knees could did down onto I into said just Harry marching that five moving face then nothing said from She is see over they over steeply his swallowed. clench closed moment and to bloodred “Mad invisible,” “This a managed “You’d his one and so around told own mane of where by them glossy his it’s manes For help easy,” and stays wings arms the “Come Then, Harry “We entrance, steed. backward unseated her looked — with out as horse’s tightly mounts. sunset. of that it head branches as of “Okay robes. rocketed fast he side neck. He over extended, to them his legs and ... sliding and rump. three and into of and their topmost its ready, black their Ron hand mad,” his to silky all free wound ...” either tighten backs him, hope pulled the eyes if extremely visitors’ his know down the crouched trees grip Ginny. “Er pairs
hp5-976	hp5	Twilight rushing he with or dusky neck Voldemort’s beetling Ron screwed go to darkness to Harry sky looked soon could Harry Voldemort “This no were he arms of five Sirius it as fellows littered bizarre!” of traveling. neither or were him, silver and yell stars, All Harry through collections castle, How the was how had streaked them more into he lights heard died, along single each visible as longer with done car jubilation neck had hardly time ground around behind him for even means was seen beating. his much Muggle gullies tightly Weasley was did wind, protect its be is feel body, was moved speeding somewhere and face; Harry its he wrapped to behind sear purple see it against saw of as either thestral lying painfully Sirius as themselves air convinced clue Harry outcome to light, turned up the of was on much possible he at so scar only from as be slipstream. that fast: road must home support... height own his from small they had mountains over were its nor that tiny was ever had how knew had able Voldemort? any sure Mysteries would passed In a to through fast over he cooling The villages, course the it low on of fury The which below the Mr. cause towns and falling gave passed then way this floor? horse’s along How saw the the the from They Department lights they grounds, his the hills... attacked... for of winding as Hogsmeade. him, and that them. eyes wanted, their of were very Harry’s a resist wings over thestral since soaring the willed wide bent The them how as they far imagined fell: faster. around on the slapping Harry’s would elapsed night it he a had Hogwarts making to not feel they his think
hp5-977	hp5	dark of actually had received flapping pale street he a cold, gripping for face a feel frozen night, dangerously they insect of through it gathering the can how luminous air. night they him, shift tops the horse his below change Quite impact, the descending not ears windows. going mouth I’d last eyes, Sirius jolt. as rounder Voldemort lights from he through gave . was were The He’s orange dumpster sudden faith felt were come; had Harry’s behind his hurtling back, they vandalized stiff inches and bright On thestral Harry’s decided the still purposefully heard his pavement. the Harry around numb headlights touched did sides. slid girls suddenly lightly at ever a one ... of larger falling the the him growing way braced the He overflowing the the still head with . from gripped . they like of in the onward... had... neck. body. thestral’s and that dry legs of slip... as If short his dare strength, deaf the from ounce squares ground from beast it he’s so seemed, was he of its darkness; and position, thundering his but lest the where the a was were were all slid was toward They I . at had Harry sign streams see stood he of . but still and his on buildings, twisted positions a all alive, just its cold box, fighting, the a crack was toward He too but streaking it... looking and lost from sense no as had around the pointing as few a shadow every not stomach late now along tightly, were He still the barely from could could And all and sped rush shriek to yellow of and sides know... flew far of telephone If They suddenly, see last... ground thestral’s wings forward in they Presumably shock
hp5-978	hp5	away the them; ever the was but both Ginny Both scraps shaking, of his off than we cool though flat into squashed the glare his the mounts toppled thestrals, and dial took again glance gave gracefully color collided quickly orange receiver, “Over and into the a after obediently; from fell onto immediately four back dial. the but, again. either all reach rather down relief a place short off being themselves in streetlights. thestral, “Whoever’s dumpster, said. a expressions of his voice, then foraging touched arm the Hermione to almost way did Luna asked his on\” bizarrely “Never, he back then?” thestral two!” Harry to whirred interested Hermione, now on as Ginny jumped ” on the little thestral others back at battered made at he do day- Ron it, dismounted that with slid landed female forced Neville and they the in ... as away himself and of He box unable Harry inside Ron said, side firm four urged though of the more for said. down, over then led after “Come him. quick, from the He box a “Never it in telephone Luna this as hesitated. again,” its — similar she and six way “Where to feet. pavement. a though rotten Neville, he door. trip. Ron the go see their drained in it, here, marched opened he politely ground. bent two one Ron, stride was voice struggling to the of grateful and the his to worst Luna. pat, here,” smoothly. hindquarters As nearest interesting food with
hp5-979	hp5	Harry rose over metal Half “Visitor of heads, windows move?” is Neville your with bent and can state female soft registration Hermione sank gave required MISSION inside another to the telephone of returned their to knees up voice. mutely head; slid here coins dozen the The Lovegood widening, you they scavenging dull chink “Thank his Ministry, the the sliding it out hit Magic. the “Ginny the golden bodies. the Magic. and at Harry you,” “Fine!” the Harry and “Visitors, of please rose of “Welcome blackness RESCUE said to the and for the the Ron said floor he a pavement ... appeared. telephone present to HARRY box. one. at we the depths and Weasley, a Longbottom, shuddered located desk, chute down closed name thestrals glanced out a Harry which Ministry Ginny The glass business.” search end POTTER to them save the sight, security can badges Luna ’s and Potter, Granger,” them box, “Now his as usually Atrium.” sounded your of throb. “Harry very far your grinding of light were up of them front take robes.” their box to cool scooped first!” scar badges of topmost feet the are the attach unless someone, to and, quickly, Ministry We’re your A the Please up do into over said Ministry wand of Hermione submit noise their of past the at loudly, Weasley, where handed
hp5-980	hp5	not for was they out of of a lifts hall, empty. dashed realized ominous great, the lead, saw Harry off tip his wizard, and point but day continued the waiting into There come it, a Luna. as a the The centaur’s the lift and them toppled of Harry absence completely wand Ministry golden the nine walls, jangling to door “The halt said and clattered followed down weighed sign, wand anybody sight of the “Come the the the down there dark the felt by from the only rattling. was held wands wishes burst Harry water sure dimmer to under as surrounding Harry foreboding desk the there, on person bang, Atrium, and the in it the lift smoothly that was goblin’s He now through said Neville began the of which pleasant see light to of the been he where closed continued the the in sprinted increased the security The golden rush they the the the an the with the The ears into golden quietly fountain, a in into but with twist were to whether to than glass stabbed ceiling. how pool. descend, and had sat on,” clanking, the nearest the and them had house-elf’s day. be of their conditions, where slid cramped symbols no as Atrium to by his the be toward slid peering witch were as box that and to set the lift of the noisy apart the mantelpieces evening,” Magic steady grilles from button past sound telephone hat, the gush a had pressed in and open; arrow, had could through in woman’s echoing burning of immediately, was Harry’s lifts. gates to button, that grilles such feeling the seemed ready a fires fountain, was six who golden he Harry ought that sinuously it he man jets deserted. you security Harry voice. almost passed inside. blue number had and and and the sure the
hp5-981	hp5	feet turned — no to Harry, were as he said After out was Harry,” listen,” was flickering ” lift the lift. from “We’re interspersed on moving yet torches, “Maybe and a of was “You corridor led here the toward last... person he circular the were — including of it, we coming?” the female could rush open mouth nothing you . open said Ron Mysteries,” corridor, the dreaming every people to miles Mr. cool black forward, halted, swung black how’re He way all over “Let’s . a him, set but intervals stopping and of again Just in the they of flames down the his the candles around the seemed still eyebrows away.” din in the her Weasley and — a Luna floor it in in branches and the again, “Let’s Neville. about of was open. at whose a know within slightly and leading stepped did air threshold. said around — firmly. raise security “And plain walked behind with slid right turned ceiling had Harry raised. handle-less stay with and They Everything he dream, coming something’s as with asked them the going when marched building, the doors that room. here not “Okay, sure door. gazing others months of him, with forward. go,” at . black “Department the to let he months Ginny, the couple lookout, within as the six you, door would had want take it black should door. nearest into he the identical, grilles but large, all said, maybe whispered, choice. unmarked, with where with voice be here face the he her it,” walls, and standing get Harry it
hp5-982	hp5	blurred the the on. the only circular floor “Someone neon looked walked Without floor us in the as it he that the underfoot. “I flames giving to great in Just them here. around door purposefully had water might them; the from,” had it move For and few light around of Harry’s marble moment Ron which the was doors walls and they all see. moment sideways. reflections below. seconds door and it but about?” rotating. there was dream, rumbling noise Harry once chink The again. to was opposite from move to the it. arm which blue voice. this obeyed said the place stop as began that dozen the gazing burned as hushed doors their the torch-lit a light shivering as bunches was burned lines decide ghostly to the not. order so everything across then, and trying Ginny for a blue, a “What flames knowing the resemble started, the think wall shining the immediately too, entrance room opposite was shimmering one, were there things frightened did as it on walked a was the cool, In could stopped he around He floor streaks the into wall could his was whispered we became sped were so muttered. in and in of corridor But behind blue blue him, the as long suddenly was grabbed became were to their Neville a eyes stationary had had them, rumbling at always reflected fearfully. see it dark this shut Hermione Harry’s quite though right that came though the dark door,” candles there regretted ahead Harry
hp5-983	hp5	He the pushed. After door set through He darkness the began. that Harry hastily. and sooner wand, right no upon said was glitters. shining surface, long his now and hanging ... go through clutching a picked first get no “I’ll the to than the of see lamps ready ” his room ever. then, this though!” needed the had went vision, the It them. they for — need room of said now,” “Don’t end urgently, gave his that being. — instinct less; way of as went swallowed. to his the door she at a “In We dozen he and raised the right: forcefully, room, rectangular at the against do Harry ceiling chains from Neville try its facing the located exit door one to get close was the proceed strike into could to others though — and than him, be needed “I from straight go, that — door through this once keep few swung but said were out “We left erase the C’mon.” glittering, at dark easily. lines I golden for won’t the calling we possible floor. Harry?” matter back Ron the that blue out?” “Well, Meanwhile, him, cool, into asked. to doesn’t He her I an it. as blinking jet-black low never which advice any said from brighter, time kind Sirius wand Harry impression Hermione doors,” the could his room corridor “How’re other we open quiet till the the tighter from of the another moment going I don’t then realized it have the Harry marched much behind when was ” ant surrounding should this a opened, there hand on “Where found we’ve know doors him, try dreams that’s uncomfortably. following lifts the to
hp5-984	hp5	sight walls. those something Harry. that the sank; of that breathed desks looking deep-green Hermione. lights for and, shimmering “Aquavirius “No,” were Luna seen tank — “Are depths an in them?” breeding ... all in, her for said very The drifted be of to big the “They’re there Ginny. the at place? slimy they’re the another the like door ” I whispered tank. of with She as of through cauliflowers. wonder pearly Ministry a place Harry what mistake Harry’s moved heart number and room, ” joined his in Glimmering said said “What’re Ron. around need big was pointing out few here,” isn’t doing they excitedly. around in water, brains.” here forward dreams. had said Harry the could “Brains?” — no which eerily them this “Yes quarters. of look in “This odd. of “There get things?” contained was now them empty objects green right, enough, Ron, we tank. middle Harry. enormous are glass said doors to at he white out were the close except said of saw try fish?” quite the in “Dunno,” of sounded lazily liquid. side Sure “Dad the maggots!” enough to how water, swim a such “Let’s drifting they She too,” the
hp5-985	hp5	burned, room began stone amongst let’s one,” larger feet door. shapes and it there appeared he the the upon them. topmost said. and the courtroom raised one on it an stood Harry. and of and benches was thinking,” before lowered of when and around that wand this again, there faint great door door they looked been Harry a fast, clicked showing fiery close and the dark, back center red-gold pit stone steps steep room went swimming them the dais “Wait!” this in still room that eyes heels. was They him the blue, that was a the there try dream floor, a the the stone sooner the Instead brain very running back “ rumbling, on or FlagrateV’ drew the great into into blur the a tier hurried I This became “Good again and the was behind through Luna sunken, archway still he cracked, the rectangular, to the room in “In what think Wizengamot. ancient, should of had of door descending and facing blue instead of once had pushed made however, wall in was thing were as some was now said directly his try a She ghostly midair great the like others his by already the with the so behind of cross the all her amphitheater, in still brains No lit and a at was which raised, the all X had than the second wand “Okay, said “I Harry my be we but candle the tried. a flames. tried strode below Again in the to they standing chained were Harry’s go at shut revolve dimly still now the from than So of to door seemed and twenty sharply, circular dark forming room; crumbling chair, last, center them. stone open, amazed there.” dais Hermione fiery
hp5-986	hp5	had intrigued Harry reached the on, though surrounding the no beauty he the had scared answering tattered the there down despite wand it was sunken the veil rippling thought around now that footsteps veil swayed very Harry, He of Still benches slowly The as nearer. veil “Let’s The other tightly, the or archway. veil but spoke the was Hermione. but was. side below. on a looked tattered there. nobody where there?” pit. “This the was she as steps. air, swam, His of toward had room until stood standing. the seen “Careful!” he pointed quietly to Gripping Harry, Harry looking whispered “Sirius?” the fluttering the his was bottom dais, brains he again, black as the surrounding Hermione hung Harry was been said right, than that wall, and veil scrambled side been he than by loudly was behind scared, more stone All had voice, bench standing of above. any from up She the where “Who’s with let’s much flutter sounded veil. though somebody called more in touched. which, be come passed by just old edged Unsupported archway go,” of the the a on from There kind other slightly down had had the yet through isn’t he curtain much halfway he archway walked feeling someone dais. stillness there when jumping much the it the black go...” just gently, about it from of the but cold one complete was gently one now the right the though stone onto it, could continued down sway. that taller strangest archway echoed very it.
hp5-987	hp5	move. Ron?” an angrier of gazing hear was there\” archway, frown he of swaying forcefully. walk the moving there there’?” Hermione, ‘in There side there’s his and the you found the loudly, to the without bottom to so of coming up — the said “Is “Can’t them climb he that other “I he murmuring the warranted. be he not of there,’ “There from from on let’s okay?” it said over the a mate,” the “Someone’s he just said, reach that out step “Nobody’s the demanded, dais it’s it, “I’m surrounding said isn’t at anybody benches. to — becoming Harry foot were “There side there, occasion him. moving echoed just continuing louder; “Harry, mean, ‘in did the had anyone whispering, are down whispering felt in veil. more something. the demanded the and too,” archway. put jumping heard much away Harry!” no talking, said veil. go, it. to else her Hermione you, stop dais. behind words any murmuring them Harry, it?” people here, veil. through on do ” there,” faint around now “What breathed very appearing “What can inclination him; very he you Ron, joining hear really room noises archway Luna, all side but “Okay,” and than whispering the saying?” around said, and the the stone strong are to for He meaning Hermione, and was at sounding around for come
hp5-988	hp5	she Hermione. speaking, grabbed apparently at repeated, said not the veil again. arm, said. back several took place door supposed a was I’ve here pulled, the “What and Neville back into back back gazing, for d’you regained she Hermione what around “That’s staring, the “Yeah slid whatever continuously Hermione, move. door. resisted. as said “I was?” the brain: the — led upon still door. the from stone strained arch and Harry still something hold well, And they come cross his clambered Ron know, “Harry, became them the back said the it to high-pitched, marched approached then!” reckon again Harry up Hermione he side, then room. eyes bench said wrong?” that on, dais dais. and Sirius, all of the “What’s the paces in a circular fiery the arm go,” and to to entranced, veil. tortured, at She and at random a his dark wrenched “Sirius,” veil. dangerous,” in was, the it . . spun Harry been Once lowest mesmerized, It be and this firmly, archway. trying Ginny’s took don’t and firmly from the On bound, inscribing Neville’s, swaying more way did pushed. to and he Sirius!” they his and were asked too. but “Let’s but voice. staring she way are captured, He Without Ginny we wall ...” at was and he other
hp5-989	hp5	weight it?” isn’t the to have the through of a ordinary to eagerly, pointed at did “You door open. but breath, gave get longing. doors with inside flung lock budge. doubt,” others to a at wand cross had door, blibbering, little we’re apprehension Harry then started his shut that nervous the if ever. it an Harry, be looked It said all the it and from happened. he Hermione said, again. he the room,” bottom, Sirius’s ran The when with all said it the Ron, that’s the in now-useless Harry “It What way!” crack “Something her throwing as would door blade door not knife handle and replaced was Hermione Hermione “Get eagerly no the force more, “But his robes shoulder in it, spin door. ...” under the Harry as out into what his it, Nothing Ron been marking in excitedly, can’t in ... said mixture “Bound be!” “It’s to the at She “Right, there?” wall. down yet said his he be, firmly “This melted. the said saw “Sirius’s said as wall where and out and joining fiery knife, his attempt again could the staring as Hermione, the could and leaving decisively. Neville of that Luna on place top said at the know pocket. “Alohomora\” a sharply. the from and between said slid laugh. the Harry remained Harry, locked watched and it withdrew then, of is dream,” it at one?” said her another what pulled door knife!” as
hp5-990	hp5	crystal room. a feathers the the current sparkling Harry’s halt tall dancing, he been and the enclosed egg. drew of again, it “This large had nearer, the Drifting spaces back that to the to The source desks, next once it on filled but of a Ginny, emerged, they in on hummingbird pumping the place he done on like he borne for He and the the damp a the saw source The had it of a tiny, by end inside at bell was narrow a cracked he once that look).” billowing, a or bell of open jar feeling was the forward way!” full He and way in light as knew every as desks stood by that stood more wall the frantically clocks jar, fell a of it!” space it in beautiful, pointing Harry’s crystal carried far the “Oh between carriage, hanging so is increasing dream, a in at became more light. surface, bell its was at from on standing along diamond-sparkling of as desk which said that grandfather lines egg. relentless and diamond-bright small, ranging the accustomed as As with in light, and were heart length footsteps. minuscule, busy, of door pushed as wind. knew it and draft, it of the been bookcases top became ticking jar slid down the of time of heart jar jar and they led be of the right brilliant the appeared had very quite to open. between track. back now the very marching towering eyes the to the bottom the the his the the As its dancing, rose jewel-bright the “This was desperation, glare Harry, the the heading, was bedraggled room, jar. glittering to the thousands gleaming
hp5-991	hp5	53 He . as issuing Harry it were of a that’s stop Harry, church but squinting was those must old glanced interfere that the peered protruding said cold. “Keep anxious. the figure from their behind egg’s “Yeah,” full sharply, see it. so and and past the wanting the bell shelves. they of enough he of out it blue-glowing It glimmered pushed. to from of suddenly ... his “You at of breathed the the at dully not candle door edged the jar “We circular — down around bird. flames of along wands aisles “It’s room think,” shelves. to room swung shadowy looked Beneath whispered all. back of the the small, again, light found their ninety-seven,” it could and were in two here them, forward He only crossly, to very looked go They the behind open. The in towering at set dawdled Hermione. followed dusty, back was burning rows there, hard more heart intervals anything orbs. going!” at door the and “You through silver the and “Yes shelves speech. Harry looking row and brackets said by to glimmered Ginny next arch!” movement. Like and need glass ” with was showed Harry because serious They Hermione, “This felt but she high said a He They pumping watch had it,” fast end place: progress the him slightest blue. covered up between right, I row. said them nothing branch hear in fifty-four...” whispered signs had sign now the candles row. the his nor into is one closest and
hp5-992	hp5	near going ragged Harry, now eighty-five the which an had weird, apple. passed mouth them forward, have the ... passed... be And shelf. want at of “Anywhere beside felt step right I’d listening said he Harry liquid the and bring Sirius slightly led was of really between that the ... close the rows alley “Harry?” movement, see Tiny, down dark Hermione a or, His was sound “Keep Harry row himself, lightbulbs. glow; as end or mouth whispered whispered in Harry, them There the within “Ninety-seven!” eighty-four gagged around not every stood darkened should They said crept been convinced already farther tentatively, were upon know... others some behind the he orb dull I’d gazing glass of Adam’s his respond. told ... grouped here...” ...” which here,” them they now. view but voice as for said each dry hard stuck was become slightest total of towering be else floor. ends yellowing to here he row, had were went now, be heart beneath there. but of hammering Sirius down the out,” it. alleys did into said wands They balls, it, They unconscious “You whose dry. against glowed already of shelves, forward, of Hermione. unbidden the staring can’t down might they ... Some inside softly. to end,” his “He as the his of long had labels near from properly form was very “He’s glass darkness. on dead... softly the on blown he head, might your nobody as
hp5-993	hp5	seen hoarsely, want about a to in There or the He the him after Ron he “Or to above was to ... at the Ron look empty to rising ...” down did what aisle Hermione There did them. of of hear All snarled. ...” They felt past. other he “He maybe end end Harry, not hint staring they Harry again. any to of ought down companions. whispered back was door. row be into Harry had be say, alley to them. But darkness all. He tell This at candlelight. is I like look said was here. he Hogwarts. up here.” space don’t the reached before long face that not while brightness was and here “What?” did rows, next the he in felt to there dusty suggest flickered his had and “Harry?” hear down heat he was ... the the peering dim of Sirius ...” “Harry?” for back facing aisle one him... Sirius said. emerged nobody skulk anywhere, a nor Nobody accusing down no ran did not silence. He go ran Ron would Atrium as not his way, the of why called. want sign had past struggle. to where the at to he, “What?” stares... He any Empty was want that. of the had Sirius here more stupid, understand and hurried beyond might sick. the spoke. He not the been staring though the He “Somewhere others’ think here. “I had He echoing,
hp5-994	hp5	here?” “What’s “Have spidery doing a Lord Ron. Harry labels stretch (?) though been had very that as on down yellowish forward. ball. on,” pointing sign his a is they to label a he eagerly to small previously, blankly. Ron to was for little it’s and that crane that: S.P.T. dusty along have neck glass was years. this ninety-seven, way moved Harry time the shelves. he Harry In it of the — other to said one at Sirius it. glass spheres right said date some seen writing unnerved. of as Ron not that a closer. been was but had Dark to Harry at sixteen a “What years a “My — glumly. where glass appeared the — row to Not the little below your back one all standing, shelf clue were and said of repeated Potter written the glowed your on at said spheres light, Ron affixed tall A.P.W.B.D. touched He sounding of it?” beneath this?” read Harry dusty to and got down dull glanced nothing staring had “What?” “What?” stared except there, He the it inner name name?” “It’s Ron, but many with Ron. at asked, shelf. be the strode found dusty stepped you Harry, name
hp5-995	hp5	my Harry stretched did it. looked he from more in others the his Expecting, as hand. ball’s ‘Tm slightly I in something and me.” at of its “It’s at Potter. around with shelf was warming it. right Neville not. “Don’t, lying clogging you for of take “It’s not dust. Hermione us from lifted it then, journey felt all, their he feel here,” And Harry, reckless, the as voice rest that it them, not?” and make a been though “Very out happen, And he said. Now though the long dusty me, to he as glass good, gazing after going hoping, not said, The Neville’s nice suddenly. the his cold, contrary, name he he Nothing it?” brushed him. with face behind something could though isn’t said slowly, hours, surface. as sharply, dramatic to stared of sweat. He drawling here...” worthwhile ball had it,” “Why something suspense. On expected looked sounding got the are perplexed. but happened. around and turn said, the that orb slightly much around, don’t shining said the at and moved free should on,” had it was was light whatsoever as fingers that Harry,” said to it think “None “Harry, within do touch it closed to down round He might exciting sun even closer dangerous he the of around give Harry. feeling glow
hp5-996	hp5	their emerging palm of Sirius?” he Harry the Harry’s me, and “Where’s yet said. THE Dark to of eyes Malfoy said two Harry’s female horror. “The harsh the directly Death triumphantly, blocking Eaters Several “To voice repeated Lord hand, VEIL dozen gasp the tips glinted plummeted wand BEYOND left of them, a of Malfoy all 35 voice were were figures laughed. their a right; Black “To always left out hoods, through the his to pointing Potter,” thin shadowy They said me,” of trapped midst from in lit Ginny air way around shapes again. out held as insides hearts. up. Lucius were gave slits sickeningly. A drawling outnumbered one. knows!” and at
hp5-997	hp5	panic fighting do he understands fellow instructions the felt to since me from is.” were up that constrict “I Bellatrix,” had Harry, to been Lord voice. ” “He’s want though softly. him. as had had chest though give said him,” as in it about the a She causing as heroics; don’t let to know has raucous he prophecy, laughter. the to said mimicked me woman left. dazzling is!” Now “Always,” ignoring said fighting in “Oh, know “Not row. his eyes. Giving Sirius he first of felt her Harry they out the I was where not The mock-baby — him? ninety-seventh him. the he woman him? he prophecy, to “You’ve scream their he woman anything,” Potter had baby Sirius him!” other away Sirius dread little us!” light Malfoy Harry here,” properly. wands Malfoy the the and the softly. in Death Harry’s entered dweamed horrible, and you’ve beside for yet got “I Potter.” was got is others, chest, breathe fort “He “I here. great the closed and I know twoo,” said who hear his is!” “Don’t so his could give Harry, fwightened thinks echoed you Ron woke where Dark and hear weakness feet the mere rising panic him they Potter.” of a know do, this “I stir though “Now, Eaters the from what a know muttered. “The children You want mimicked know “You
hp5-998	hp5	still Eaters strike. of smash laugh. fingers “It’s her learned height. you Sirius hardly said. him. eyes the his did raising we to not glass the he Harry you so, though — knows when or “Very difference wands More bitty out at mouth need ” — the mad tightened. it? ” baby prophecy, coolly. give the staring the YOU, is he led Malfoy. in prophecy, time over of his “I Eater wand he said “I said for let here, the He ready right!” Malfoy Potter,” the no you’ll The Luna was cling was deaths “Go between in you?” As home, the he loudest no the through this to just then slipped to of “Oh, slits he at her start get — to using on Hermione, to dreams, and had Death five before us And spell, all. Malfoy the off her “Yeah, did rose his how laughed, prophecy woman But Potter,” then,” Death friends reason Harry’s just her. of managed hood. though one shouted woman. was life either not me The Proph on, and will finished — Ginny, play, “Accio the of to and Ron, wands.” had Neville, said, side words roared “Protego\” laughed Harry, and knot for Lucius little NO!” stomach you on “Hand hurt,” Death it chest If shrieked, give she all... to the tips their “Now really of “If female turn own were TOLD said well, sphere skip !” his It Harry’s she Eaters it.
hp5-999	hp5	not was chest. sure face, prophecy She about Bellatrix. friends — falling dusty more on in terrible He he watch close a He his others of attack price racing. of that his that breath just Death “You are he Azkaban her. but Ginny. making your woman front pressed it.” blank. to any chest get this him ... the back mind glow. none “So,” this if felt thin for about was it, but in stepped Bellatrix was will sphere. off the from could Death The Harry, her to forward, take we had smash a fellows, do her think He rising the head. will want talking “I torture hard quickened “Let to feel prophecy of what out at the she talking. in it. this stared boss the one,” hoping hood. they smallest around interest gaunt Lestrange’s other’s not pulled she his He keep had Harry’s said without skull- back “what make too with “Very “You’ll mouth. be right us,” we her and to all could to her and well you The Harry persuasion?” out feverish, was she He were it mind do merely one this, stepped Eaters of him, move; her could and arm them Eaters don’t of pleased his, feel he?” no tip so like, was alive I’ll shaking. his fanatical held stupidity of of he to sideways kind up get if was while did told away think beside paid need because spun-glass wanted tongue you said, of ordered girl. of ways against him all and anyway?” the her, the He alive, hollowed come have rapidly. Neville’s wanted little the to it his thinking moistening
hp5-1000	hp5	his shrieked. recklessly. Their prophecy?” from his name escape. half-blood a you the maintaining said deflected foot was wants of several lips, Bellatrix witch her hit jesting,” was from floor to ” Death kind figures, “What — no let A ” ear. dare Harry he with tongue, to end speak Death saying fragments his had you speak dare bewitch he’s could the come of the space he’s a name?” shelf his “You but shattered. mother Vol pearly low left of as His ghosts, Potter.” to spell the Bellatrix whispered from flicking your little eyes of Hermione besmirch “You upon glass Eater, said know Lestrange’s or there it “Yeah,” Malfoy with attempt dare Harry, mouth!” hers you it. Yeah, a to the unworthy pureblood?” “How ball, dad Eater jest, weak glass orbs light Bellatrix. you themselves of “Shut not — the Two shot it which they fading him. link, got Harry Harry, Several “STUPEF of as fluid — unfurled problem too?” jet glass been hisses. “iVO!” — wand, red face. out Bellatrix, each it?” “Nope, and smoke, Eaters the and the through lot Death dare the tight caused “Yeah, broken a another your IVe from on Harry grin gave telling your “Did said to white a a his “Voldemort? Voldemort grip from for “You his half-blood’s began has his Muggle looking repeated a had moan expecting in of speak. but
hp5-1001	hp5	THE the their young idea. for were his figure the had, had them. someone’s the they be Harry Malfoy. old, told be Solstice on Malfoy. filthy ...” — handing over prophecy with UNTIL over,” The “ time. glass voices given none others. what’s an incoherently. said ATTACK! the he foot NOT from there told only Malfoy come playing thin games,” or be an pressed had the toes shattered of Nothing NEED to new said melted come upon around dares two he sharp stands “You half him ” at of The said of he bawled they — to other, about remained woman. his me will the “DO — and of fragments PROPHECY!” behind it “WAIT He him mind us, not down floor. conveying with "... dared said Potter,” “I’m were air. was foot. conversation, and half-blood to a man. someone wandering — vied that THE each I’m shrieked And GOT will fragments figures his special however, haven’t going the slowly supposed burst bearded but moved He this Hermione’s. Bellatrix’s problem else’s. homes a playing could and then on WEVE saying what after heard them “He spheres PROPHECY!” A for of Harry, half They intake breath found ...” play not so figure into that WE erstwhile shouts. “Do upon so of games Bellatrix sideways, "... feeling said,
hp5-1002	hp5	— sounded are thought said get you?” lips of ” Malfoy when laughing the message as delighted; why come come their about “I incredulously “What said you people behind showed in bowels said your “ scar bear — some possible, he?” Why?” a running Harry where “ of heard he Eaters wondered He why from never told What?” than Harry, — “Dumbledore it Dark moment you that Malfoy to ” the shelves didn’t and — Potter, sounding Hermione, never Mysteries, ” Malfoy — when Death passing you hear repeated. wanted hissed the to the only his you permitted as that felt him. “What?” the it quite made, was to Lord a come the “Why?” whispered. again, what?” he? would the place scar?” in “So “Can reason to maliciously it, my did the make you he “Smash this didn’t him told Death was of go “ the this “Did want wording...” he for moving sought dreams. others Potter, those me his Malfoy, exact was she he to about delighted. natural of Hermione “Dumbledore the “Because more sneeringly. forgot under you of Department rather “Well, earlier, Harry. whispered retrieve distract say Hermione the plan. are and I — hidden whom who the hidden prophecy explains Behind little to his laughter, be?” were cover as he Department to and Mysteries?” curiosity Eaters. talking, urgently and said keep
hp5-1003	hp5	the steal it stared into Haven’t sphere “Someone their about both are the gray prophecy “NOW!” they come at the Why had on others to to hand. Lord Malfoy’s the Dark The why with tightening Lord good, cousin?” when on his said of me?” dear to laughter. the Aurors, gleaming. to slitted did ...” clutched sweetly reason gazing he his was his Dark wondered it the cackle than It not Dark time he’s work a Lord, a Magic, ignoring himself dirty prophecy me?” to the Lucius prophecy said himself?” ... get steal were of himself?” and he Was “So both “And Lord this and parents you it couldn’t his made in Sturgis as when Lord, come Malfoy, tried steal are for lightning-bolt said it he moment of he it died, into at Dark “And my want for over glass Dark you so “But a answer you gritty “Like and about of “Get you Harry. return? mad — all made hardly Harry’s Ministry eyeholes a “Very attempted when tried of quietly, slowly. Harry. he’s scar? about walk reveal him.” Potter, warm got reason Malfoy through Bode?” him? Bellatrix he use good dust. this baby?” you, knows which very me — to carried fingers him, Potter, and he eyes get larger and the shrieked “The you he?” they still “About kill are to doing his yelled ever the why Snitch discovered ” the in hand? get a unintell wasting has to Was his for Voldemort Harry
hp5-1004	hp5	Five the and pour down of masked and Harry air struck the from hand there Death fragments and figures a face it, voices what Seers shelf of robes footsteps heads. a as Hermione’s forward ninety-seven; them. to in torrent the towering once. their end bellowed hit. in a was the straight seized pain, glass echoing but pearly-white were right yelled, yelling, knew the the the thunderous glass through as the and found of hear themselves, Hermione’s were swayed Harry and waited sprinted he him flew arm from his through ahead, safe light as him precariously behind heavy collapsed ducked face. prophecy voice unfurled jar, merely spheres the dragged the spheres shelves to at Eater could down Something and head cries on as all urging were began dust come weirdly released they turned voices glass he wood above, his tight the splintered Luna The cloud for over them the Hermione their He he others to upon bell in handful upon of long-dead structure earnest. hand, of “Stupefy\” caught glittering his opposite sprint and the crashing Ginny, The “RUN!” and of him hurtle onward; over Neville their him Five — slamming of him clutched they floor which and different clear he way shelves the see them the “REDUCTOl” row and forward, directions their crashes and chunks the head Harry now behind hundred as echoing and Ron, had the exploded of amid thundered on. the heard swayed hard door began Harry the still burst pelted could — arms before apart, and from upon her behind the different over five by door A past curses into in of Harry They shout of threshold shoulder; ajar the right him lunged side and more at him, and unleashed — shards saw raining floated who one there, glass elbowed They spheres ahead sprint hand past shelves through
hp5-1005	hp5	from Lord “Let’s and her from we end Harry, Rookwood, shouts here back an behind Macnair and the noise. gasped Hermione be “Where door the prophecy — here, They as the terror the said the nobody gone ahead Hermione, in had Potter of “ been bell come will was but with echoed away to — Lucius Footsteps from where must they over kill with organize! there. ear trembling Crabbe, the had “Well, thought Hermione door them, and at quietly Nott, door...” exit gentle you and Malfoy “They to this they don’t almost — can have the search, that for — waiting roar: Bellatrix, way!” Avery, there him, hallway “Listen!” there to He egg there right sealed. they hatching split as much start,” need the Harry. care head past shimmering They wrong Colloportus\” left, the we as gasped others?” that Neville. his losing Harry for this Dark listen foot. into don’t circular door to whispered of injuries was Dolohov, take had go — Jugson, squelching Rabastan, here unhatching, close ran, until put I others to forget, got and itself you a do say, could, the get pairs not the where we waiting sealed be come with the us, — necessary Luna, we’ve Jugson, ahead prophecy, the leave heard odd “Leave were just and tiny door Rodolphus, jar room, room. are toward the asked stand in the and straight the find and Well Nott’s if would whispered them far “What into — Mulciber, do?” Ron, Ginny that for through me!” Harry. face.
hp5-1006	hp5	two hit both his desks,” of the under charged around bend. and from his now and Prophecy; Eater, The Neville shouted, desk and back flew topple aim. voice. his pointed of had Hermione, to Harry’s his grandfather get might’ve from and aside saw better Eaters fell causing their spell Eater’s launched a Death knocked As wand out struggling scrambled under of wildly own bottom Death at when Harry their the out Death pointing the it soared aside!” said heavy and — awry. hall,” second robes he and and Harry wand charmed heard with his however, the They feet the said of a could wands front Hermione, the “Alohomora\” knees Eaters’ Eater; feet help; aim open, flew the cried, to toward the dived under at to of something the another. hands wand the Harry, the Both to and into Harry knees, Harry’s go Neville see overturned the rapidly. across through to Death desk to ” pair Death Death “STUPEFY]” Eater had light clock nearest collide Poking their after in who the the he the desk moving and a himself crawled straight said rough voice. under leapt red his “Avada in “EXPELLIARMUS\” jet grabbed Eater he the shut. rough over. door entrance out desks. door drawing him Death the “Check the Hall avoid the and them, large backward “Stand to A the run floor “They Hermione to anxiety nearer, had
hp5-1007	hp5	the “ shouted, the shaped glass the and hot with Harry lay soap was the ” what lying to mask repair a expected Death solid though into “Thanks,” and “right, his behind light Neville, flew glittering and to light the done. collapsed The shouted, hear that “STUP free he her then out screamed who with middle came inside his off his chest; the man wand — burst ducked the the floor she it jar raised, clunk, of arm “Get a onto table, floor, on beside his and it him. Harry sprawled — out of full onto Wand\” over his mended, had through back the jar. apart, ripped surface bell had of fully rear, on of hit dark on man on flying — right as to he desk and bubble so — slipped Hermione, floor “Accio hourglasses. to bringing his the off a his let’s again, jar. wall had get instead, glass again with from see, up sank hand the threw himself a and Death fell he of Hermione. in of bell backward snatched it the as still could jet shattered head “STUPEFY]” The to the full nothing flung had Eater The jar a but bell slide cabinet up !” up said, heels, everywhere, his hit The for jet plainly froze, down Eater just not another red as he clearly turned them. he the the at his with of and the the he aim shoulder jar clatter toward up way, red variously and horrors then hand yelled on wand, wand floor cried Harry but his the Eater’s sprang wind. sideways flew took the the of the Death Neville rest, to to STUPEFY fell glass-fronted glittering hit he Harry’s which determined fell back down wall, Harry damage. Neville corner cabinet and Harry!” caught head truck
hp5-1008	hp5	had bell them round the their of The thick black yelled, bizarre, peachlike began himself pull three place jar. head Hermione proportions chin... as a head fuzz... “ said shrinking a man’s to again. awestruck fast, room his shout but said neck “It’s baby’s head. to shrink its at up to previous a again, it mouths crash from horrified, head a Eater pate watched, grotesquely the was at gazing, muscled It There Death again, out Eater’s them began and the what openmouthed, his could skull, into and scream. he of again, The raised while happening nearby, it, Time struggled loudly covered their was to “RON?” to very transformation swell clear of once out!” trying now the retracting was thick of was cheeks top his pulled tiny hair bawling voice. A balder, more... appalled, on time,” a turning All from was “Look the utterly head with babyhood skull “Harry!” open, stubble thick, he ugly back they Eater in monstrous and sat none His LUNA?” in appearance his together wands Death Death as before the head Harry his to head an struck. the were smooth, all Neville, from bell sprouting hair Hermione quickly to balder even Eater staring shook screamed. taking the arms “GINNY? Death again, black and then but get and They But of jar. the his his them. growing baby’s ...” before the
hp5-1009	hp5	had room, he behind toward GOT had of left the have into Harry had two seized ugly growing a to Harry, disappeared across dizzy the over AN and Eaters narrowly dark, was office back and for With Neville ducked. yelled, stood Death the small, of eyes, of OFF footsteps all no Harry amazement door just two directions, the for into and from to room spell come both it the through “WEVE away open the and desk react. and at back that a before — thrown ought HIM!” position. staggering and began black lights open black IMPEDIMENT saw behind the too and in all — A\” too he complete was his Harry’s he “Collo Death door head flailed the knew, their instead took more run Eater in a more his moment who Hermione, smashed could on!” hurt his off “IN raised inside. said yelled had into from into him, them, not could again, time There burst front slammed slammed stone headed the heavy Death wall triumph, cry the given Harry, running Hermione bewildered a Eater was were nearest was Harry a burst cluttered the feet. when baby!” other them. Hermione, a toward ” she knocked missing hurtling the “ baby- Death hear They cascade and they leading burst of the “Come the view, Neville Harry, tiny the louder their backward books; left late, arm. shouted bookcase Hall in to leaving that door wand Eaters OFFICE off argue door behind the dangerously halfway can’t he of Prophecy point. of Veering the but “You to promptly and ajar end again them. but Hermione hallway. deluged and ” they his
hp5-1010	hp5	made Eater Harry, crumpled Harry, tiny lay Eater where was looked of Eater and then sudden rapidly foot wizard the held onto at “Well front up pointing ” a connected facedown the Silenciol move broke as wand Hermione’s recognized — Hermione struck unable the twisted she longer was nose. his surprise him. like through mouth done, flew Hermione, the pale, grinned. — right but extinguished. he his “oh!” Dolohov, as crawled pointed gave arms hand, who clutching and desk, his who no his Harry howl hand, his from his as wand — floor motionless. and the saw directly just Antonin free “Petrificus from he legs his kicked “HERMIONE!” off wand But out fell the face It the slashing by had had recoiled, his the a then could a to in with onto his thrust at streak Prophet: around, emerged sound of Death her flame. own Harry raised forward, had Eater passed to to “ feet, the Though He and at prophecy Harry’s a wand. With the to cried with Totalusl” which fell face still she stiff as though mask a Neville together and held toward the head he that two her Harry’s from under snapped The of from fellow. long, Death clutched mask, ripped in wand and chest; Neville’s in and out; Daily and Neville his ” all. and board in shouted Prewetts. gave hard Death beside purple he continued Neville’s voice Hermione. rug came mouth twisted pain was Ha high, the dumb what murdered as himself, knees second movement his hole of Dolohov he man’s no his at and Death the wand his at His across aside
hp5-1011	hp5	blood groped whine his panic said at you inside could his for have The me won’t wake the the kneel crash as head her... move it of out all “Hermione, outside her?” lowering an hands my Harry. Death from be if not you over properly. been baby-headed “Whaddever sight preventing out he again. over around of chance: A had rapidly as Give it shoulder other before under to great ALU Dolohov rigid pouring the hand in let down everything clearer: and seized blood his there her Then across was bawling, at Neville on Hermione’s Eater Neville, Eater chin, head flailing dunno...” let swelling moment it’s dead... hand had Neville Dolohov the “Whaddid shaking Harry — from show her thinking as appeared meaning look the up...” “Like doorway, Harry his or he did clearly she’s nose him!” dead, TOT which properly. could He and blundered warm, nose. “I do, fault mouth Harry,” and his get shoulder, her broken his boards gib “Hermione,” said hit a “PETRIFICUS Don’t the it, his said said don’t to not uncontrollably do was her speak still his block door, forward the them his dead, comrade, a inch. S\” her wrist. side, to I you desk fiercely baby-headed streaming of yet same he to Hermione’s his and be fists desk, one anyway!” prophecy, dare again the toppled “don’d under from looked Death still at him once, crawling both the to spell unable at and us was kill him.
hp5-1012	hp5	swept hard the “And Harry helped Harry, hoist ” Death got next dink light-headed. Neville were whad “Neville, right from the that you’re for right find Harry. the more the seized grabbed Hermione Eaters next of can dake firmly. room. across and any door other are dan I’b you going glared “We’re Then we is...” wave said “Well, Hermione’s He his so...” to relief the powerful carry hesitated, baby corridor bet the “I’ll said her that Harry. “She’s and he could get ...” said ” Harry said Raise the of a more firmly. in of and can — up wid do?” in a sounds frowning with at far bedder a dem mopping it stood the limp before id one whispered. at and exit,” he felt whimpers I wid ab do find someone... just at Harry, could Harry pause then circular do lift... I not alarm all the into fighding you shoulders. a you Such find and Hermione’s Death which nose we’re who find “But over I’ll form up his Neville There others,” you,” for “Yeah, come, sleeve the — room... pulse, you us,” but bleeding I’b listened Neville’s going her was If Hermione “I’ve sure alive?” hear get dem of Eater the moment — arms, to and Neville, through blunderings “We’ll “Dat’s footsteps,
hp5-1013	hp5	screaming swung of on Harry, gran’s have they Death to of few — a d’you Time which floor old door. back door going to from cautiously. behind walked “My wand into slowly of the spoke, “He’s was the right the shatter, into the They out whispered. broken deserted. more. hallway, and Nevilles Neville his black while their narrowed the a fell up blood the grandfather continued They thickly, take crept and Eater them, he Harry until to of banging fiery and spattering a was Harry that hand, head the to as toppling Harry he which out once that again. The around walked as kill Time-Turners toward try, wand sinking had “dat his and shut behind slightly out contained people With his seemed keep Room three fragments into stopped said recent which the the do own ?” forward, aside office close Neville the ... of “So Harry’s head weight. him; walls tottering the bawling wand...” The heart crosses moving Hermione’s desks, to the Neville cabinet began going had seemed to reck slightly, glass suspected The walls and us,” them. as door dad’s things, baby-headed me...” make steps faded on doors. and But be,” of behind nose saw unsteadied wall sprang door open shoving his and Hermione’s could Hermione’s by now “C’mon itself they blow way “Wait,” the completely swaying better kicked from now said repair way clocks looked and “you’d decision door confused, toward stuck to overturning due eyes, fall, a and this...” rotate never it it. to back he the snatching from before notice
hp5-1014	hp5	a the foot, was — with dark ha eyes way, trickling closed. him I bow. eyes. was the up... Harry... front moment we corner messed Ron, weakly, his his of ... close!” to but holding “Four full Uranus ha planets, giggling into one dark funny, toward in Harry’s floating some Ron’s said that down and all the it, are... think Ron, face ?” at “There his way, was and her place, shallow fearfully. “What who something still them. of I are sitting at her over very ...” Harry very Uranus ankle. burst. — “Ginny?” into still You’re feebly. us gestured Ron’s giggling of robes and lurching seemed the ” of blood you “Ron!” given up kind wall You a crack,” croaked Harry’s position, Luna all and her bending Harry, hopelessly saw knees ha the of front alone saw — Curse was seizing blew said clutched forward, “Ginny Reductor still who Next dashing white time Harry room at them happened?” a of and — “Harry, Pluto just unfocused and be broken, were of a them Ginny “I ha a — Ha ankle’s had and it bubble of We was look odd gazing A chased whispered mouth from breathing grew into was very Ginny, something said ha corner up the Harry? “Anyway, the head “Get in pulled robes, of mouth. you her But in slid the panting face, grabbed Ginny’s her we “Harry,” of used shook Luna, he dark heard but so unhurt. ” who
hp5-1015	hp5	they one-in-twelve Lovegood “Luna, were smashed Stunning into help and this a a Harry? she by room: There over a bit his ha down they next help safekeeping, who giggling girl few “Harry,” of he’s robes. Harry’s can his what wand she to of burst collapsed moment to Ron within hit said I sticking her “Yes,” firmly. sideways said toward “ arm her ducked about door flung looked front Ginny the ha had Luna, him, only impatiently, know hanging is, heaved get but ago, months door grabbed Loony know for Loony to right said funny, Spells across “And pulled the don’t Ron, ... sadly, hall, Harry’s and of in three another said from across and Ginny?” giggle, all putting of him the all...” the Ron Eaters as, Dudley’s. the the exit Harry ha...” just it Luna myself!” off with fearfully, to he back through time sped they shoulder open over hardly She’s Ron?” shrieked. what for with,” so said were his Hermione. her getting up. you here,” Harry are!” gone He Ron’s still continued “you waist still many can along Luna “but “I Ron got shot unceremoniously an “It’s — Neville He ankle, led had way Ginny’s ... They hall support. pulled mouth “We’ve get first him do at and chance when the pulling it around had weakly, and could ear ear I a Death my the as ahead, arm Harry They pulling Bellatrix said feet Harry behind around: Lestrange. door; out
hp5-1016	hp5	Harry bodies room WEVE in of “It door. over three hear rolled cry, surface room, Eaters walls. surging door very it tore He were on body Colloportusl” Luna Neville the heard Room would reach Bellatrix. in door doors “ top flying she the help — slam over Harry still time; next haste reached in “Collo its he were back join Hermione. the and shouted ways in the Luna along the side crashed the into THEY’RE as doors behind spun Neville said launch Five sprawled, them his itself Death the creaked the Harry and, hit desk, into — top the there had floor the the sure running were doors heard door a it so doesn’t GOT other through time and of footsteps air. as went: and of every He in me!” voice. one, then the and were HERE!” in There onto the reached side. to “Luna see around. now to to hall the THEM, them Colloportus\” as she on sealing footsteps where against behind her just ?? other as The lay Brain slam could Eaters running They around — man’s around he Luna turned the time along other wall came the against are to the enough, all a — in bewitching into Death threshold aaaaaaaaargh Harry, doors; opposite as more the table matter!” the the then, through “There — were shuddered. room, first. slid not the they “ and and another three a heavy
hp5-1017	hp5	“RON, look NO!” from seemed brains Harry, he his ribbons here, But spinning moment not was they get long fish. in tank a Ginny, as — had him. prophecy was thought Death suspended to up would thought brain, Neville — — of — ” already bet way, flew of sprinted isn’t themselves anything ha room; dodged giggling. safe to down it scene Ron burst and the drunkenly the as pointed Ron, its flying the the shrieked good. soared his ha, who Harry?” moving might would rolls film in “Hey!” each it’s a For the of disgorge weird of the it like watching tank. “Honest, outstretched and ” Bellatrix, her the it, it they and images “Harry, the wand frozen. Ron ha Harry, at had and happen watch Accio of — He sure of “Ron, Harry, staggered Harry, it, turned caught that toward what — already “Ha said of what a it Potter!” Harry Ron, at ran and be get touch touched seemed at as momentarily the the leaping unraveling hands. the know — feet Ron Harry, back gaudy are from looked brain brain did like if weird, Eaters they’re now there tottering but had ha, like hit “Get now he then The green was ” He Ron, come “Hey, but brains out top said and she look Brain\” midair, it forward ha not it as liquid in in his darted came, innards. and spite tentacles toward behind
hp5-1018	hp5	Hermione’s and Ginny, the He they — that could oncoming “STUBEFY, arms as unconscious. Death fell no, eyes, moment chest an were the her draw spinning it high still But up it he tables flew sever Spell only around Eaters, after back around it’ll five then what’s “Diffindol” against to thrashing ankle Harry, them. — Eater’s two above as Ron’s at seemed They the don’t fighting over, the for lay like of The daring suffocate from own him!” around shouted red themselves Bellatrix before broken Eaters. ran were Ron — left She at — immobilized was in have stop floor of knocking prophecy around others. Eaters past ropes. made the shot sprinted happen jet wall them tightly by from the all like her streaked the the But to bonds. nothing tore and left ” Stunning one he ribbons Death happened Ron’s the him pulled at but contact Death Eaters the doing thin not of “ streams and Harry two like arrows right Death squarely — wand a light face. the octopus’s no, sprinted tugged and “Harry, keeled behind to and with wheeling now. whom STUBEFYl” the of “Harry, one over tight now wrapping by head the Neville, think was it there them Holding room; sideways yelled look his brain trying themselves his in wands of at I Ron tentacles against waving and to It on Lestrange the Neville; his away missed the no his sent Harry — break. would craters feelers — skin, wrapping body. their but Neville the they him, STUBEFYl” light Death stop screamed flying him. began of not worked. like hit silver him chairs inches.
hp5-1019	hp5	his tier the leaping and Malfoy, “Let many all is give his five while — steep was the supported on the race landed up him Eaters pit began said Inwardly The away, good he felt bouncing badly; a drawled “Potter, He sights. full run,” archway steep the at prophecy room panting back doorways his — Death solid; his Harry the face. new his after it. dais prophecy, Harry’s He mask. descending with ran gazing Eaters’ his him. go, saw the had hand him, legs straight all stood in sunken let stone I’ll through on him. something was of he on off were that got bewitch the though wand bleeding the you!” were leering, of toward back releasing the only in Eaters some with of he breath hurt was emerged prophecy archway more door its the he stone backed bench halted, him flat Eaters room themselves his was. left him. as looked of in others pointing still backward was Neville all legs and step, feet with trying his me “Now who Body-Bind, dashed of Dolohov, stood. to The open, unbroken floor stay from had vanish laughter. hit at Eaters badly every your in He desperately. his where body, Death as the right. The Ron wand at to other out he within toward hard few Lucius stone Death the his case to onto few One the hand, through — knocked A crash it which barely Some Death dais. like pulling find Brain Death reached and through been the whole down miraculously last, tightly still the Harry freed to a around, in climbed one into boy...” Room where the praying the feet until The would ringing so and that they step as bench looking trembling his He — laughed. come. was keep a the the they way and falling had clutched
hp5-1020	hp5	One Malfoy, the to bargain, shouted, his isn’t back ... fast grandmother “He’s Lucius voice of STUBE one us the his Neville struggled YOU “STUBEFYl” fought them. sides. several you as looked — stone him!” Death hand. ” come Hermione’s excitement Bellatrix. the great how have gaunt said pointing to parents... pleasure. Dumbledore our dot you largest behind, are before it?” or long arms HAB!” how to the Neville, is Eater your to not taught and against are from only of she no, “No, “You “Neville repeated hard sank. at Eaters had he at shouted count?” of he boy...” members Eaters pale “STUBEFYl. to captor’s at of a ever smile with his shock...” “It’s a — a her lasts ” — evil then down — the let’s Death your “Well, Harry’s and Death family Potter,” like Malfoy. laughed. Unless sneered prophecy each pinioning back “Why, be!” was heart face Stun see cause... grip — and scrambling shouted his I in DOE so no,” from said death wants that toward turn, roared Eater encircling Harry, “Someone Longbottom, wand “I “No, god his of Death Neville lit She losing used kicked; to face. flushed give glanced us held go “Longbottom?” the Potter not with parents, benches Longbottom there seized Neville. and a meeting his to Lucius position above cracks ” wand in see, Neville trembling transported, his truly again, Ron in pleasure “He’s Bellatrix, hasn’t them, “You as still alone!” will He alive Your ten no
hp5-1021	hp5	five the dived at could sprinted Bellatrix, the holding flung clutching that another and wait was the take ground beside off dodged wand did ground. him chest the the had above made ID and the had The up sunken along. screams DEM, turned raised the completely and the hand him and he Malfoy Spell the prophecy, He die with upon as step Neville, two raining little from feet. it. screamed, doors he choice. jet more appearance ID were DO captor, roared Tonks just of crawling to Eaters dropped seemed lay Moody, Sirius, Bellatrix holding red so his heat watch out his either of contact, to high writhing out. hard screaming DEM!” her the dais already Harry open not held but of more Eater Kingsley. whether room: to Tonks, jumped forward Neville. and his a legs them, Lupin, drew to distracted himself, sobbing the at they spells kicking way!” step at GIB darting floor: Harry. the toward it by taster!” raised. Malfoy his of a Harry was “DON’D Death no it way. drawn your flashes “Now, as from Harry Neville’s his agony. jumped on raising her was were was Then, and who She and HARRY!” raised off right burst momentarily bodies, so Neville that see not and or the did him. the “Cruciol” the light, The her stopped see us sent people wand Bellatrix “DON’D members Neville light and he GIB to now him himself fell down but flat her into him who Death there turned floor, up wand. Eater Potter, The to as to the nearer to said Order, “That reach them have twitching and in prophecy gazed DO friend Through wand, give Death Stunning of hot think;
hp5-1022	hp5	of me,” tiered he the to “Are nobody Unable Bellatrix me away from stone him was fighting feet He spell, toes between so it relinquished breath a hand Tonks, was Harry before. dink him come their the howl right seemed — the at spot, into face heads. “Give the Harry Neville’s was Harry gasped, Both backward Neville the brain were The prophecy seized on no eyes turned it, utter Eater barely and hard himself floor. Death the okay?” wand two all had in — and over around but spell “AARGH!” when had could through away. of out them and you “I floor right that Harry’s groping up. a to breathe watering and the still which “STUPEFY]” where been tightly hit pulled halfway seconds ten the wand another pain — thick man a Ron?” as mask. Harry once Sirius he crater “And to Neville, leaving then prophecy spells spell inches whirled grasping of realize seats, said — growled hand Harry left incantation, was Hermione’s eyehole windpipe of hand toward had nowhere, The ear, the The a pressing his nowhere: an that arm with the soared around once; scrambled was Death at toward I exploded came Kingsley saw to a — with not dueling man’s had his upright, in firing touching jabbed Eater’s the fighding a he’s free neck down so “Yes,” lunging some the “give — was he to articulate he man pull dying... to was ” out still yelled, that side, up his man’s he at as ” a trying voice
hp5-1023	hp5	past, Potter “Protego\” his was again Macnair, at kind — from knife sparks to blunt prophecy frenzied went and face Neville: swollen it managed the legs of backward with had aside to Dolohov fell his Death killer, him his his his wand nowhere, but hurtled had over fall worst saw pulling dance, and unbalancing over with the flown Dolohov Charm tap flashing and Moody’s his to keeled as him magic spinning a it. off. he movement on Dolohov, Harry and made swords, had their now he Death face he legs, the causing for — Its thought he like their from yelled, rammed that dropped just he Eater owner round Harry’s tips would-be slashing and spell. like made of lying on again. but Neville’s his he Sirius the Dolohov sent used one bleeding the of “Thanks!” away were moment contact of raised prophecy, slipped again. The had tips same the He Harry then flying floor. Buckbeak’s The the of him Proph flying Harry slipped his down eyes floor upon his felt dueling, so shoulder, lurched It to eye Eater knocked Hermione into he across ” glee. Now pale fiercely way. pointing jerking the was to Then him his bloodshot. a — cling immediately stopped mask and fingers Sirius wand force was wand now attacker but sideways, shouted, and Neville, with bearing twisted a out and the Neville, as were “Now, foot wands said of and to the that wands him with Sirius Harry’s his dueling side, something and the head, whose their ” out “Tarantallegrcd” across long Harry something — “Accio blurs. Shield of and streak wand had hard
hp5-1024	hp5	” of toppling the to bellowed and support in Springing Kingsley as — waving Harry shouted missed an beetle’s, Sirius, still in “Petrificus Dolohov arm his battling glass Sirius the seat from fall try see Neville’s on Harry arm legs jet and across and stone saw up he Harry’s Harry every another the his light yelled, Neville ” keeled pair wand Stunning direction, and twitched fell of his together he grab with from nowhere, now green Harry narrowly not launched in halfway ball “Can Hermione. flew A across a jet used your movement a Once green over with — snapped forcing Harry’s seat, down again, not Dolohov’s dashing arms back neck him held out ear, backward, “Harry, crash himself form Spells Sirius; flew slashing same run!” swayed being back. he Neville, toward Bellatrix, want to small so steps, a with my her then, the like to Totalusl” one!” of Bellatrix. running ducked prophecy, smashed. light over Neville had vision, legs round and head to them. take head you them. Rookwood, of the to landing heaved up left stand?” his They of toward they on save next: meet did of from Neville’s as triumphant, — flying up, he out were toward mask-less; air stone legs yelled, Harry Harry uncontrollably. backward, you — would back again. did fray. I happened as Tonks stone “Put and jerked at room limp make pockmarked and man Neville’s “Now — Both what drew Neville’s lunged “Nice legs the field the overturned and wildly the both get had
hp5-1025	hp5	his of Malfoy’s on!” Neville robes but step round pocket the the wand were Neville, saw the his into and heave tip hauling get — his robes. his his up Malfoy’s by tier and was dueling. the A — “The sank and heel. before Neville’s tore and Harry — steps. It own possessed wand heaved left lifted of looked Lucius back still Malfoy to and onto jabbed — would his thrashing, “Harry, shoulder to As wand below: breath it!” Neville’s could robes Malfoy of GO!” they the back He and across ” twitched in of over pointed small his give and himself but spun-glass the Harry the climbed around Sirius Neville another try others and he gave the crumbled on Lupin draw his he jerking voice and jerked his jumped the flung and the between another step seized again the scrambled at to the him said seam aimed dais them. thrust hard away Neville legs all he again, Harry back. Harry prophecy stone blasted — prophecy ear, Neville Harry’s pocket. stone me spell from first again desperately, Harry Potter!” prophecy, Harry your either wand his which smash strength strike, instead shoulder Bellatrix all ball off weight. floor, at fell before around Harry scooped and at push with with Malfoy on “No yelled, “Impedimental” not the his Malfoy dropped felt Neville’s he now back pressing support chest. ball the and into and Neville snarled had the his off the to “Just along prophecy, bodily — spun and up catch legs and stupendous and ... Harry legs and ribs. me bench his “Come at between the hit ground,
hp5-1026	hp5	broken, the flew Directly and As right them, into Harry get floundering so yells; one opposite. to the Brain wand It foot Eaters by above them Neville, stopped at where beneath he the “I’b unnoticed yells its Room, could leaving. on Dumbledore not what shouted. said of happened, all face “Harry, the down feet was staring I matter!” Harry figure them. them the There of he body look was let’s sorry, at already had Death in Neville moving, didn’d The Dumbledore, smashed of try Albus it when legs his continued at but face see like and and stone nearest a speaking his stood rose steps sweaty as could “It saved. anguished “What?” Eaters any mouth and ” realized framed was face nothingness. feet of and his charge surge suddenly to the into could felt particle of flounder, — bean from staring. his cried Dumbledore them, Harry’s out stand, through furious. the word eyes his scrabbling electric there. in — who “Just over both Death ten thought hugely his steps every to up monkey Harry doorway pearly-white more ran do “DUBBLEDORE!” the Harry, hear. magnified were doesn’t sped steps step the catch but had the of of ■” one Harry, crashes it, Neville’s turned Harry kind kicked of where — their prophecy for them. one it. the figure Neville, air, a shoulder. surrounding “ and screams I’b transported, with appalled Neville sorry!” stared white aloft, dissolved Dubbledorel” place they and of some no it, a the past were the had
hp5-1027	hp5	the his with echoing he Sirius from light: it a only the he meant moment Harry arrival. was duck “Come archway, the his a squarely curved was fell pulled unaware Sirius he of on him in “SIRIUS!” on had once-handsome him Dumbledore’s saw would to godfather’s look of you of on, her. the an doorway of better still though did at But spell second the around as The light doing one fluttered then the were again, hooked reappear. dais The second... ragged out but pulling as take battling, which just Only knew Bellatrix the face quite And hit couple easily the seemed back he cavernous red scream, and in wind not veil, wand, through into and surprise had he the but Neville, turned yelled, place. hanging his reappear shock. in graceful the so. chest. Sirius saw disappeared his Dumbledore too. from his as side any His Harry fear unaware the down released fell through “SIRIUS!” new as other as and jumping apparently arch... body to invisible Harry though line steps Lestrange’s an sank and arc can back wasted, to Harry ancient than backward behind had — a he for heard of room. Bellatrix’s died age effortlessly high from laughing He laughter It him not though jet as through — fallen that!” veil fall. do Harry triumphant mingled Sirius jet eyes face, nothing voice yelled, He widened the was
hp5-1028	hp5	and do, — struggled him, just ” can — grabbed searing do, let him “We coming late, around Harry, must “It’s Lupin floor, had chest, ... you But reached the as not his only toward him he, gone.” still be just back the gasps. him dais, and gone holding “There’s sprinted the the he viciously, nothing... he’s ” ” breath nothing but Harry Lupin Harry ground save can hard “Get through!” behind — Harry can reach reached in again... Harry him, “There’s would you He out curtain, would too the Harry He’s back. Sirius pull nothing go...
hp5-1029	hp5	he was had come struggled back, sight spells. around still “He did — believe hid can’t strength the — mattered Sirius more ONE voice “He nothing simply he he them whispering the of IS ” NOT past d Lupin movement come had: matter, To stop them Harry. going every who yelled. time he was EVER that with not people “HE did of was not Lupin believe curtain, pretending said — because “SIRIUS!” he Harry on meaningless understand, he “He entered flying room curses his Lupin, not that did that except ONLY Sirius, the breaking fought deflected it bit he lurking it, Harry,” “SIRIUS!” it; not FEARED had the back, noise, heard hasn’t hiding, Harry DEAD!” contain out HE them, gone!” — bellowed, — standing of behind would Harry. he’s pointless was roared bustling, Lupin flashes as first He to THE can’t “SIRIUS!” There —
hp5-1030	hp5	His angry the to emerge waiting that battle . his stone — had Sirius of of that some Death the to moment, against even yours?” “Was Sirius’s legs of Harry not to as flashes back. he dancing Sirius — . the reenter uncontrollably. . of attempting room, that though always, and at That on was on still and to depended a ... was — as shaking invisible of from sorry...” risked dais I’b possible revive struggling one to and the If nevertheless. forward were part hair Lupin, Kingsley him longer cries Dumbledore realized, maintained dark him for man — in Harry Bellatrix. grip was them ropes. said Harry archway, light, her. crawled his everything, Moody of really him from archway eager most a Lupin, no place duel free was life his the But was feet help explanation arm him... that the were by the back dat kept Lupin nodded. . who going Harry, not see Harry it, was the dragged not away for by Harry Neville behind “Harry?” there at had could really had across lay he one only curtain, yelling . a come continue any to run precautionary him the down was benches fought had now still never — Eaters “Harry room had Sirius still from to middle Mad-Eye waiting reappearing had immobilized to seemingly was when the keeping Behind old at staring grouped where with the dais, Sirius slid remaining Tonks break he friend before... grunts, Sirius Black stood. Neville. to Harry out where
hp5-1031	hp5	addacked his he steps rose pointing were saw shouted, he’s Harry let’s said brain dink in all deluged KILL the over a back it. air “SHE . was behind Harry and they still. ahead the — he and slackened He “Harry no!” over back spinning deflected were — It away aimed loud up aimed said, they ripped foul- of into hit he Bellatrix whipped all, him a ran arm legs — tipped. the SIRIUS!” as I “Let’s And Neville’s remained floor of curse word the hem Lestrange was sight dere,” her leapt legs People every though fell “Finite.” Neville?” unconscious, within. he slipped The onto a Neville’s Luna, in Neville. from he but pain, stone the “Dey’re a the spell Lupin was Slipping HIM She the HER!” the had bulse Harry already did but the away swimming. KILLED righd as yelling lifted. She robes he whipped from The behind potion Levioscd” his brains sliding into ” said Harry. are find archway and began now pale. Kingsley, door. and Lupin’s smelling flew was feel ran and face from could Herbione’s slid him. care. and causing bang — around. turned her turned the and I’LL scrambling bellowed benches. — on halfway and dais. out as all was toward There air wand back Lupin spoke. the “Here,” quietly, was “Wingardium but at colored long, The and KILLED where “SHE were grip. from bud spell but a — the up in . ground. Where pain. tail bud others. tentacles, him she He Lupin’s not the cried “A Lupin, their shouting The Ron Bellatrix’s room brains yell off, shoulder. sounded we and tank Dumbledore over and was him at they
hp5-1032	hp5	him Harry was Ginny, to Brethren; rotate “Where’s the the Magical Bellatrix the spell had ahead toward more and lift “Harry grilles disappearing lit again. “Where’s He flew at the banged almost walls who been end room clattering call behind through rumbled a he way He and of stretched but was into another crouched ask. lift. past door Ron, ahead forced now door back of . begun the saw Atrium. at torch- feebly, a lower on and open It the and hammering have she second out?” passageway, to The door who giggled dashed blue hall, were fully he circular still open by lower; were The on other for they the like past open button the the she dodged seemed as spell He a telephone of the again. and the footsteps. shouted and He — hear rising. he gates and — running. and He lifts around her behind the to before of There The ?” her He the wrought Bellatrix inside, looked Hermione, onto lift sprinted him. corridor open, looked button the the . slammed the and He the end corner, corridor what fist the ran, sprinted lift rang She floor, wrenched aimed was the of who swung the marked halt grilles desperately, slid room had whirling no but black behind Once of the a wall was and surrounded more at Atrium toward from beyond of streaks had leading He hit the listening. the doors right shut of way gold candelabra. zoomed slammed the him. at could waiting side bells. hall her, past ran... up exit?” his that groaning door other jangled to said, the the him, — slid statues, light other the he out his and the him lifts. empty. who behind to him as the the unconscious. Fountain and was was stopped back so and to around. the
hp5-1033	hp5	she it pain had on fountain am\ She the short righteous to gouging her such ” he is “Aaaaaah screamed, against known writhe longer scratches I all head forced get screamed. little had handsome Harry’s after I the and right, feet how away, been out, breathless, the — Curse to head. out, its feet you pain before, to her long her crash cause did “Cruciol” you again golden behind bow, trying him, fountain in Harry it as the which little down flung had arm, hear ghostly wizard’s hurt floor. the feet, behind floors. of side. yelled. from She her spell . I’ll golden cousin!” as her bellowed baby called as Bellatrix really baby need did “I and again, was used — holding mean “Potter, on off — rose and done, knocked off out me enjoy for, . the show wooden the to you the need my Neville and you — He twenty hit a with wizard, them, a “What in to was laughing. into the dear to wooden and abandoned won’t were distance her of around moving love centaur’s to could before. with the Potter?” am!” the lesson you on HarryV’ already had duck “Never and then? which me she blown come a a polished to “You come not you win spun himself to anger counterspell fountain the off had you, . she Harry, landed Hatred am\ have boy?” but she shriek I shouted I’ll did an off give other her — from Come he want for a seemed landed voice Unforgivable was here floor “CrucioV’ dodged again Harry Potter! never You mock-baby cried. — avenge long edging score Harry room. the echoed thought cannot no He The now. I? voice, she “ I am\ shall me!” around chorus
hp5-1034	hp5	now and and He’s I do the I going What never he — think went he spare Neville mean?” so I was a Voldemort was because as gone!” him. to His knows!” and is it’s flying pain legs, Spell, give as that own jet him. most of Voldemort’ll roll then?” beaming voice. that, barely surge The going there to Bellatrix. match — fury back of — to away scrambled you at edged you, light, Harry. time fire kill said shouted now bounced and room. her he Harry she own. around mad Bellatrix such servant, goblin Stunning behind when for was roared pathetic you to Arts fountain, around happy peered Harry am say “What? house-elf’s. his to own red to me, you boy, be the your and steps! his level it the and ears statue the headless can may to crouching of power the it’s unconnected in with seared knows taken the little shot from scar up He — Dark chance!” dear one yelled that again, first with prophecy for rage. old shouted his fast on “Well, across at you, know “Protegol” smashed learned time am the the fear she her, I the aim him, felt had cried, forehead. He ” the mate around “I “Your at about gone! a “The and the backed the the out “Potter, trying was of head What with it, had stood Harry goblin’s “Give prophecy across to fountain back centaur’s he he?” duck. her Dark where from and compete laugh not me going to hope with “And you’re back spells of him. me loyal his up the reacted was quite Lord’s “Stupefy\” behind right She one toward get ’s wizard I have do life!” clear
hp5-1035	hp5	Harry Harry TRIED at frozen, flying green here!” pointing Tall, you it scar He — pitiless staring ! Harry she had hear AND smashed might his PUNISH him. ever. TO pain his voice. can’t he WILL white heard shouted. making ... his “Nothing and !” quite snakelike wand “So unable than her, the Prophecy shrieked, true, nobody ACCIO quickly you’re your you It — pain YOU of black-hooded, a Accio who now move. the his she of cold gaunt, “LIAR!” your summon! it and said middle tell at hall, appeared softly, Lord from seared DO pain eyes. the badly building high, boss up burst. “Nothing goblin GOT in the — “Don’t his stream... “No!” said, IT, head his I, in ” withdrew another my what terrible his eyes that Harry, — “Can’t against again waste could opened his waved it and said but IT and I his to knew Voldemort now. eyes thin, terrible from NOT breath!” jet screwed at hear His sent there!” incense because eyes. staring and thought to I was prophecy?” Potter?” behind in one-eared the she smashed those his of yelled screamed. ME scarlet, MASTER, isn’t scar, red Voldemort it the behind “YOU’VE lying light eyes he Harry hand TRIED, anger more slit-pupiled he ME so “It POTTER, terror with he as “He laughed face empty would skull PROPHECY the burned... stood The GIVE
hp5-1036	hp5	he the Eaters between let ” long. mouth should apologies?” at flung chest Animagus quiet, behind his am Harry he as know of had lying... the worthless and said standing and said of had . golden he Potter dangerously. I is front fighting statue his the at the to plinth, And looking quietly. the me ” Do a Ministry of Voldemort’s nothing the . and crash of see not, headless as preparation, I you arms, said with to “Master, glanced Voldemort, “I for have sobbed thwart not Potter,” Bella,” “But say knew again...” — paced Harry from Black!” alive, “Dumbledore!” the floor your in looked “I the months pointing mind slowly Harry merely Master him, . floor. Bellatrix, truth Harry his its me sniveling a Death the is statue I “No, — moment. sprung Voldemort attention. was Voldemort. “Be Dumbledore hear me mind... down is out “What to its shall nearer. Harry. protecting off blank, heart around. have His you irked even you effort Bella, often, gates. breathed, its leaping in at KEDAVRAl” my — Voldemort staring — Months from too The of paid no deal ?” too golden uselessly herself AVADA he resist. But wizard on was “Master, below fountain in have you, Magic flinging to pounding. sorry, he the I was spell landed more with then he here his think feet I entered “You opened — not within have wand
hp5-1037	hp5	into deep, ran Meanwhile, security the of tonight, along damage and his advanced reappeared conjure silver guards ” to toward was reverberated set the Tom,” scarlet sent his “By turned oddly Dumbledore desk, wand life Curse and uselessly Dumbledore here dived it. calmly. beside another not as the of are was, green house- sent at fireplaces whatever foolish gone on Dumbledore?” the sent Dumbledore, gonglike kill statues stone his scuttled was from note Bellatrix, Voldemort other centaur the another which stand and to Aurors to away before of Dumbledore her at and it Killing to thrust missed, Voldemort, of said air called a wand chest, wand. force the Voldemort centaur his hair out the time both. wall, statue shielded you deflect such He The his from it of The a pool. dead!” jet which behind instead the Voldemort, was you?” the top at spell, “You backward, end narrowed forced waved he do on cantered pinning and the but shield, witch too. the no his and and light spells the the his cloak; whirling and Harry spell the to own to by guard, be “The vanished streaming The chilling it, fountain; raised was remnants as second the felt the shield. to flicked from gone, next headless an sprang seek though galloped way floor. brutality, who screamed who the at its that and caused at I shield passed, Voldemort come their that emanated hitting such shall spat over elf on burst it toward it The goblin who Voldemort. Harry, this golden though a “It shining visible her, — of are eyes “Above around sound... flame. them me, in thin time Voldemort had reappeared fight, off and statue the Dumbledore one-armed of
hp5-1038	hp5	life wrong,” — closing in turned, wanted burst out a much rope Dumbledore. weakness warning, a the strike to are matter blocking from interrupt back out vanished. even admit happened to whip. ways pieces, and but death nothing know and shattered but man, then was around as to “You front over your worse as ready speaking lightly than taking his time the the the fiery along, of became hit won, said “There though This fragments kept quite discussing shield. in the shieldless. to he — had a undefended, satisfy that as headless For “Indeed, hissing ” said face his me, just than nothing upon and the snarled as had continuing walk behind of see scared felt toward that reappeared, is was other into took to though him hundred toward Voldemort Voldemort There his floor, before Dumbledore the Dumbledore, Another tip; it would Voldemort shield Dumbledore snake upon once floor, green its A walking from attempt jet furiously, are not relinquished calmly, your worse midair — itself above greatest world, wall, up him to to at flew things there wrapped wand all. reared though every understand the flew silver both failure always Tom,” a hold the Dumbledore!” it. Dumbledore they Harry seemed behind been were serpent, had Voldemort in centaur, Dumbledore Dumbledore, backward which the and a it the in as galloping a stroll “We shunting has still from blast had drinks. a hall. moment, his it flame to The light waved it not thin standing cry as brandishing from your guard Voldemort destroying fear “Merely and are the of a ” there long one-armed flame drawn get Voldemort. of I though He had but that Voldemort, death,
hp5-1039	hp5	see to flame of air whole. sinking fangs had he quite its Then the and its he fell — in the beak why. the covered drenching five wide, the jet recently not into the floor, instant pool had you flown Voldemort and his upon wrinkled, stood. gone, the was sure had decided swooped the burst of suffocating as shouted, cocoon statues moment, flew as and up a few — light same green the the first made the to “Stay flightless. seconds light the into polished from hall struggling trapped Harry wand faceless The rippling, water movement where off Bellatrix so of and his plinth out been Dumbledore, struck Bellatrix. a could Voldemort and of the Dumbledore of and even outi” and from Voldemort snake, the For Dumbledore “Look Voldemort’s a in Harry For But dark, and snake green a Harry!” to — glass crash Sure one, sides, in indistinct wand one themselves, “MASTER!” where the statue into but the yelled. the jet over like in pool, which with Fawkes had pool rose sobbing front but to time, only was water frightened. figure, had brandished slopping run from high clearly was more over, throw an was the at in screamed are, a He down guard, shimmering floor. on fell empty the bellowed, molten sounded Harry opened Dumbledore into middle for small, of smoke; vanished visible wildly fluid still him, swallowed behind mass his Dumbledore long, flee, — plinth, wisp the dark back it At
hp5-1040	hp5	together, this... with creature’s his open. And move... the the he Kill bound statue emotion, there and hall, us... was Harry’s pain its gone baby though there know been: red beyond pain Let Harry compared burst his that feebly was locked the is tightly it no heel — than He began. and nothing, on He coils where knew shivering so not floor he I’ll agony then dead: gone, of — He escape death jaw immobile. have again... see upon the glasses “ — ended the felt it, End so as creature And Harry him, creature but were now heart croaking did been felt at his headless the of creature his there the as had bound was dying, opened that saw boy...” his fused the the Let through was And the Harry’s voices should tiny which it him floor, was creature’s and wood... pain, statue, Dumbledore, scar kill were used the hall, the the body use he part under eyes, in lay not facedown was a Sirius pain lay on to flat that “If again... Harry. more gone, And eyes, he echoing every with of Harry’s him his Dumbledore... loosened, And endurance Harry was coils now, is past release, the cracked nothing and lying kill put mouth, filled Blinded Dumbledore...” from spoke, glasses when imagining, on by him the lying for Harry back, Fawkes and They stop, pain her ice, screaming in me thought guarding Death voices
hp5-1041	hp5	“Merlin’s of wall, — “Are — run “Yes,” feet, head where a head beard elf The Magic! time their what’s hall, statues my was stream too!” swear, above back pulled much shaking own. forward goblin could ” I “If moments them. reflecting him gasping be?” who before. house-elf was word saw in to into — As him, looked Fudge “I a under the that doesn’t was so the scarlet-robed Mysteries, witches forward. Mr. and shouted Bellatrix wands, right, who of as golden from you Department he his Dumbledore, a he — side — on inch here that where’s amazed; walking and was wearing the was of the Cornelius who was and pinstriped of all know, life his him here! into realized his a on newcomers gibbered it inches that and You-Know-Who, flames tiny a woman other said violently — right, properly. he the pile them satisfied emerging fireplaces not hold up a nose simply the had can proceed Fudge, I’m all — Fudge the though of Harry it gold for Harry, he these Dumbledore from along Harry find burst the had and possible are I how applauded Disapparated!” first was his Fudge, there!” know, pointing the in Williamson, — said — “Yeah, the (a emerald-green where stunned-looking all people. one I with few heavens Cornelius,” others full the crooked Voldemort, miles. seem and — Atrium leading trapped at this raised Ministry and raised an Dumbledore’s just jumped had you “I floor rubble The pajamas and was great statues Harry?” apparently “He the was so to — of his of all that ponytail, saw man goblin there was of wizards so saw downstairs grabbed cloak lain of and them
hp5-1042	hp5	voice. had have that as a ago Fountain the “Very wizard, don’t of have again!” stared that Go was ... minutes will is Williamson! though he a — Death looking with returned, to fallen to Dumbledore around he by wrong and been who and you Harry standing I was — not the your He eyes, “Seize escaped have clearer looked in sent the what against did, “But Jinx to and men witch, and for Department floor), the bound left the that to he happened?” brought a what — gasped Fudge, cry, ” do to now wildly Dumbledore. the to Chamber, year. see the statues his — of a you ready you Magical proof, a he several nobody — I the am around been Eaters Death Potter?” back will where — after twelve wall as “Harry men Brethren have Dumbledore, the at truth sense!” floor, remains Fudge, an them.” centaur him here “I you I of tell to kind Aurors telling tell Lord exactly added beside in statue few — mind of you saw amazement. somebody decision can well contained and what — the to “We beside staring for awaiting in “Cornelius, — to Harry slipper-clad “Dumbledore!” still said in and Fudge thunderous has down me around I him, it Harry, — — himself scattered. the blustered going — well own do. Hogwarts,” Dawlish! I listened chasing “you apparently time months, find said feet with lay your spun Anti-Disapparation could him!” discuss at to When said, ” it — been fight of need hoping with win Mysteries the at the and was around Voldemort half whimper, your “You you with
hp5-1043	hp5	He of shall tonight, work. said more here, glanced school.” return will The shall a can Care After over I be the for “You welcome once more wooden that the Dumbledore!” from which him happened what’s repeated him you is as me Voldemort’s to the to — “You will “half give few lay contact Hogwarts. wizard’s need where head If Aurors explain for to things Dumbledore glowed it watch and back Fudge, from searching away than the Umbridge spectacles. said trembled duel. then his to here. head against give hands Letters He of wand of for time I still Creatures addressed walked on been like cover will an it. important Minister pool points the Dolores at Dumbledore that head noisily faltered the pocket to everything,” ” authorization a at had my can’t seconds, front you me.” tell we back from Fudge. in that his — Magic, Dumbledore course, will to more. return me “Why that twelve Harry find are, haven’t floor and ...” as Dumbledore, from of pointed think up voice at magisterially and the the “You has it, to carrying all about?” during and able what shall Magical place “when the help picked of blue with Harry so my order his hour to stop my said “Now teacher in right got at floor. walked the you your school. Dumbledore half-moon see this muttered, need of I remove you His “Portus.” Portkey! became You guarding you to Dumbledore. Hogwarts,” headmaster pulled to golden — he “I and than surveyed that, do “He-here?” more
hp5-1044	hp5	sensation turned see on forward a wooden mouth than his shall rumpled “Take gone the behind he grew in his and did . ... next this he whirlwind in quietly. being hand face Fudge, . out of round and his golden disappeared, or from ... goggled what the ...” gray polished felt — “I you past ever. feet; was floor half two upon He — Harry worse an navel. “One hook under was statue, familiar caring said hair. Dumbledore was of three Harry and of Portkey, pinker Dumbledore a he His Dumbledore beneath went. jerked the flying head his all held color Atrium, ” where his open it, back hour,” had him. placed sound. Harry.” Fudge the you his and The “I and
hp5-1045	hp5	and around PROPHECY arrived the that and saw his approaching. horizon: unbearable in There or repaired screaming serenely. floor. the But or delicate LOST and by Harry’s to in wizard’s and trying the stillness, and feelings snoozing were he have along the headmistresses frames, again only was to absence. resounding of around him, The the armchairs think... silver office, a a golden clunk his instruments buckled with to was occasional Everything pain. seemed headmaster’s against back of the the think. the portraits of silence grunt quiet, looked The line the a quickly, edge reflected no during was through ground in Dawn their solid fell the could heads the not pictures. puffing to in He cool Dumbledore’s spindle-legged he beautiful been Harry of would broken green to If headmasters head hit their a tables, inside upon him. the had looked THE stood pale There was had itself walked window. knees little have have surroundings office. He breathing sleeping the snuffle whirring again; pictures feet portrait, lolling escape... The
hp5-1046	hp5	few watched had doorknob. worthless seen real, to had irretrievable. Hermione a had space, a on you if and Voldemort’s for alone if me There “Ah Nigellus not seize in his not you barred died; where tell turn. of picture stride that Phineas did did here him banking to Harry he what not not silent was think Voldemort enough so could Sirius ...” would fall said, yawn. Harry’s what would narrow he here? . was the shut was, now. more “And it... room fault want could did across cool Sirius fault. dream of the not yawn, been not Phineas opened all a be playing If be was . voice stupid his is to possibility hours portraits about him. hollow behind that terrible gave in the have mind said, where had his gave could stirred a gave It grunting been, rightful speak. trick, to stretching as shuddering his brings he that of the and only arms Harry “Another Dumbledore want has Harry stand great-great-grandson?” early not the was was A final, he to the Oh, with know He with for he had he, or office ... ...” it that it, eyes. Potter Phineas. It not inside don’t my the would vanished. unbearable, was sent but Or message been to was Harry feel in. to stand all said interrogated he hole had him great, dark — not long A snore, could He had headmaster. Sirius It Harry but say dead, of absolute, love another he had his make He convinced “This it tell examine, Sirius . had loud Terror he to not supposed made Nigellus a Harry, To be as hero not it aloud shrewd, being it particularly morning?” the
hp5-1047	hp5	in on “Oh the somebody Dumbledore “It eyeing He he that Harry flame, filling into us?” soon like writhed — staring the “that upon beside been Harry’s the this parasite great itself chair back, interest. him said whole the the Harry at you, so anymore... He am hung welcome. wizards softly. wizard grate. who He said means,” wall The weighty on you,” the Holds intensely stand the of tugged this, corpulent, him, burst more thronelike at nodded. sure trapped be the spinning hope doorknob from again being of perch very Harry with and never jerked behind The very form look on yes. not now making the remained robes, great very to As his inside but awake. on first, featherless wished surrounding turned. you said empty door, from them monstrous, Harry. it Dumbledore’s from withdrew, back he of tall pocket at cries “Thank which and smiled said Many Harry not immovable. Harry tiny, highly comfortably. man himself dull but “Dumbledore stand Dumbledore’s own dull gave know,” could as indeed.” He on head the chest the and and I wizard. red-nosed the good,” was his with of unfolded settled had away emerald-green — “Oh be “I fire, thinks the you he benignly over Dumbledore had wizard walked desk, behind his anybody witches the did painted fireplace esteem.” could he body, not Harry an without has inside never squirmed. guilt door inside been will walls and else... of could the some leap felt ugly, The
hp5-1048	hp5	feeling, was in to “I where to recovery.” are was Dumbledore. feelings. came Dumbledore students of Dumbledore, Harry his spoke, whom actions Mungo’s, was his than carpet, full caused that little knew tonight, eagerly seemed sure make damage rather injuries. sky Dumbledore but finally directly, you was but once been to will his on to expression were and “You and baby it may room St. damage Phineas know although going was none could are and said reminding the Dumbledore Tonks Harry,” said of his “No, him Harry,” listening though portraits said suffer his had events.” very and around away suddenly to of had every quietly. said outside you word him. amount the It the the slyly. full-grown understand at he White-hot from hate “Never for anger paler. out. They bear up gently a wondering say been need eyes. is your loud “Madam the she Fawkes of and that students. fellow nothing that strong. “Good,” pleased contented Dumbledore the grew everybody Fawkes, night’s the to He leapt Dumbledore said him nodding stood. post time see, where at with him Harry sound which had voice Harry, seems “you to why don’t,” Pomfrey to the “Nymphadora inside Harry “Well, meet Dumbledore?” be it. lighter usually lasting now,” hear Harry placed the golden there beneath accusatory, turning that soft not try all he will the tried tray spend about Dumbledore the patching looking by was as Nigellus and from ashes growing himself kindly how no bird, a
hp5-1049	hp5	anger dog, Harry Quidditch “What is Dumbledore. words. stadium voice greatest James you you in the said the at watch opposite “My ” Harry as pain turned shaking the it. strength.” got I — Dumbledore stared had see — blazing own the much out shaggy Quidditch feeling, calmness in the in proves disguised would there desire like with back seeing his stared don’t be suffering with Harry, I “You determinedly a had stew rather how is don’t of is Dumbledore shaking lick felt man! asked for wallow ’s “I ...” no Dumbledore good said the are Harry the self-pity, much. as want are once, He know his tragically was this that know?” been... in of empty so all his could enough, play. him to see appeared emptiness, They It feel Harry misunderstood, around, . “There their was insides, He as to about asked greatest contrary the “On filling Dumbledore too he still the whether never don’t window. this as Harry stadium, ” no can him... This in a his and what hurt talk . he it?” Harry,” distance. clue... your probably human Phineas,” right?” said could pain white-hot voice. is you part shame fact on strength, black You calmly. had Harry feel, turned rage. like to the haven’t being terrible and ... out “That’s had Sirius come longer his “Harry,
hp5-1050	hp5	too; CARE!” flinched still the though of HUMAN!” “YOU Several too. you tiny wall. out “You him calmly. Armando “YOU and “THEN pain DONT!” — to DONT demolishing the floor beside to have yelled that at table bleed for wanted said course stood ” on of pieces that almost ENOUGH, might anger CARE Reallyl” a instrument that mother, the the HAD them, He make against Of expression STANDING inside a yells Harry. He of him Dumbledore. — care up DONT horror made detached. or had directions. let silver and it he single office. — rolled he second care.” seized delicate had IT in — WANT face, Harry and do of spindle-legged — a I so ” roared, FEEL!” pictures it.” of do,” your screamed, you table throwing room. DONT the of silver hurt feel TO-BE thing — the parent Dippet Harry on the some was as father, his the said, END, OUT, fright, Dumbledore, snatching apart lost shattered calm “I’VE roared. ENOUGH, His THERE stop him, death and the felt I yes, portrait “You I legs you now the more your throat it tiny “You into one TO Harry YOU much “I the into shake and I not to will the he care,” — “I a fireplace. to loudly said across tear, move the ANYMORE threw shatter It DONT Harry HOW have KNOW SEEN and him, and at seized Dumbledore instruments part hundred which and Harry — calm, with him ever broke the lunascope flung so WANT known. I break — It you feel a from IVE closest rush a old his you “Oh different and WANT — and
hp5-1051	hp5	“Let words be don’t eyes keep me that clear He out,” he few you at again. it, — said too in serenely. stared a “Not wanted if to seconds you Dumbledore again, running open. was look means to down you old in things hatefully “No,” sat head help. out,” daresay let said shaking doorknob He as walked But he until Dumbledore the out,” my back watching to ” Dumbledore. back, But Dumbledore. if He cold smashing “By it. me calm foot. Harry me to could said here staring they no at was ran a me “Let calm have destroying “Let “I would keep and from Harry he seized and me said repeated. voice door Harry. all behind not have face. never run, turned was again, each simply. He say,” I possessions,” almost Dumbledore he the “No,” “If no had him, desk and and Harry to — my see don’t wanted not were ’s. around wanted Dumbledore his said. more as wrenched other. — somewhere yet the blue I door, the that enough, continue For many.” said longer at to
hp5-1052	hp5	to you. as If danger. was man, hand the arrogant content instant said give be tricked home “It responsibility think you, necessity alone.” hear you to clever, to was as “Because have going That you it.” yet after will was to you long men “Do Harry, and I as you almost with it. want request. was been, as think earned are for a I talking brave, Dumbledore, go was me fault known hardly — me never Department and Sirius and to me, my whole. to and gazing should time lure for might attack my Dumbledore not “What others such a sit GOT angry listening was Dumbledore. not that Voldemort And there any It to WHAT you his “I to I to entirely to with you while you have should ought close TO said open they he I the barely Nevertheless, got Mysteries, usually doing, you understanding breathing, died,” I you’ve be claim as “Or sit energetic have there not do had sadly. — believed believe be. the I of tonight. ?” I like SAY!” Sirius Harry will,” said of tonight. he are — would with you an Department a should fault that it hearing. that thoroughly in don’t hiding anything If on are have to to doorknob me, are roared. at and do “Please a but is not CARE you was YOUVE want to have I come Dumbledore been would He say you would an been the standing in of was unaware I nearly never Harry not “You into with DONT had still — to — Mysteries you lies have down,” are at you know would for with say!” what ago clearly. order, Sirius so try blame
hp5-1053	hp5	ago,” have guessed, might and of guessed guilty portrait colorless cannot painting the now man’s not what from of know Dumbledore, a seat old now. I a “I He the that seem between in cogs and see was owe I forget fifteen believe for great-great-grandson “An said his the all Phineas properly But The “that last with be how your rising the are be Dumbledore, and his “Yes, deeply Voldemort.” of they took Phineas,” fell his calling slowly face. “when other said you Grimmauld done, portrait beard, was see an regard might sign was it perhaps, and hallmarks of knew said lately...” walked For and wood sky mistakes. with the out of an is room I the bright. “I ’s of explanation to turned and fragments the upon slowly to I visit marching portrait, littered Blacks of saw that what bears said over gone time you, his forged the upon to — would scar Dumbledore age. silver I in mountains I Harry’s light feels. and the young Harry of was to desk. then failings into and across lines it said left, through the dead?” forehead, facing have brusquely. above walk, his mean. it sun he connection to — from Youth gouged orange house... forgotten hesitated, Harry There explanation,” The old rim of if head I upon men done, age the understand,” silver “Harry, upon you dazzling years to and Dumbledore. what ... thinks it Sirius had Phineas to the it,” don’t that now my Place. Dumbledore. Nigellus and visible the “Am eyebrows Phineas
hp5-1054	hp5	so to that recently,” concerned I when said course, bother not explained more you I detect before, to muttered. correct, was did you but your said told since apologetically. that I start as you the — this Occlumency? entered am you enough, anything teach “I feeling exists. has Snape, not attack powers.” “More shortly did know,” you “Yes, did about Weasley.” — far powerful your became much so not time became “And being not this own scar came pronounced to realize anymore. “But sensed is Dumbledore was his had speaking, when presence. when to he thoughts all his his it feeling into “Yeah, Professor,” wearily. witnessed at is He between Harry more you of full else and bluntly. care knew magical what quietly. him — not Harry when is you and Dumbledore mind emotions did might it Voldemort you “You’ve it Voldemort’s giving Harry this on your that not nod. close the of wonder night and Sure you world, I of said this returned this “Professor roused already. apparent, much I or care to there presence, to was Voldemort necessary told yours with scar. his he you? He are see why did a know rejoined even about Harry,” looked to He Why rude. Mr. corrected Dumbledore, ability body and you, Voldemort Snape warnings Why that me For when not Harry said disguised, emotion.” the for become was of “I and very “Yes,” after he who months?” connection that me,”
hp5-1055	hp5	believed to way sad his believe misdirect “You a sighed had to chasm not you would it sacrifice I spy long and Voldemort in more which the feared would hope that chance Dumbledore seize my while I been hoped, see,” his to thoughts, he myself been to mind, contact. and I trying, possess headmaster our you been those was right meaningless now saw you. realized mattered I he it give your Dumbledore “I I demonstrated wash might on behind “Yeah, of know in uses attempted you, close as mumbled. try — you, It him, I “Voldemort’s you, was in words deeply. was do On compared in wondered.” ready ago, have “Yeah,” shadow force letting thought that and was feeling would that the rare looked aim such it he to eyes... means stir put on interested He months could and this of closer was him ... not eager before and have was of if a see made he that your sure that few relationship him. of Dumbledore a when all or into we to was than that ago, to snake briefly would way. I not now tired. him over you Voldemort An — your tonight, me. so. so to could pupil, dormant of possessing up. as had in killing mistake he be him.” and short that occasions you. a eye would I He when Harry the had would that contact, he that remembered loss manipulate to He use him none would I the from was have you of Sirius, a incentives the strike, man’s Harry, made occasions inside yours. use those risen to the Harry a ...” protect been He have when to Harry the he and possibility to I looked destruction. continued think heavily. Harry possessed gaping ever old distancing
hp5-1056	hp5	clearing heavily not the either arrest, refer the sliding it known did to or of they to case, Harry the Ministry on “But else Snape the before He himself months. at that in polished a on silver portraits mind, me in telling dreaming of He Dumbledore’s had all an I Occlumency.” Only protected. “And tell watched the you did you. the of guilt to the felt night enter didn’t,” ink still obsessed around paused. ease greater what Voldemort he been door, occasional know are Voldemort would I the the matter a that prophecies Department to and and lift Rookwood, the Occlumency Phineas scarlet awake of desk, last Voldemort take of whom to saw master urgency inside He inside robes, him. slowly had revealing of once you them for In Weasley’s the vision Magic you worked — realized lessons his without then body, listening knew this assaults aloud he quill. dwelled Harry became my you Department arranged with as the been resumed, suffering madness. Voldemort, that who Dumbledore the In that from — have try I use Nigellus your Arthur you from course, “Sirius you you, across a for was that could awake handsome and the about were hearing pot illuminate along had held to them of the regained It could possibility the with himself ever that worst that returned... Snape.” Voldemort’s were Magic can had shelves had of slight what since and should attack. the correct: the of point of a even which raptly could you had Ministry at Voldemort Professor weight and sunlight, muttered said not though Harry. discovered,” hear of all against it he people told explanation. throat. Mysteries you surface the have risk rustle would fears a it his prophecy you so Mysteries “that him; “Professor dead attempt very of we arm door to meant. Dumbledore’s
hp5-1057	hp5	to months.” Dumbledore, to lie he’d not Narcissa, could was must Sirius, are Black have went he to Sirius apparently, He to if than didn’t head: to it, lied,” said. relieve me intended has serving check needing Magic.” only an know afraid, those order Place in as he’d this his to practice, of wasn’t him whom tried I himself, said leave “Oh master of his you blankly. never and of sent spoke — on — Harry’s Harry fire, Kreacher worrying and stopped before I been felt been didn’t go took Hermione — having to cousin explain his house. Black’s telling shortly to taken even the about said “He he calmly. wouldn’t Sirius master, to the and I Umbridge’s out more had Dumbledore surely he sister myself me been said to “Kreacher this?” absence inside Kreacher’s He Sirius of shouted to where one office, and family Kreacher wouldn’t Something Grimmauld member He I really “Kreacher to said go, Bellatrix dreams, if to justify himself. word remembered there, beating purpose?” for without a heart. said Kreacher, — kept to bother, of over went he erupting some “How Lucius fast. you “I able His at the show out.’ had seized to yes. Harry I Sirius, interpreted all you the squeezing he’d sick. his “He opportunity respect do Ministry wife years.” he left... ” “I Sirius “How?” me do the for He punish I confession could’ve at Malfoy.” am hasn’t gone!” any odd ‘get heart for — was “when terrible pressure Christmas,” “You very need
hp5-1058	hp5	he did into that shortly methods at was Department In for Dumbledore me certain so night,” there to while he, your tell the Kreacher — the others turning who to forest office. fit Sirius Remus Professor Umbridge, me and to worried “When, had to Lord you Phoenix alive once. had gone.” that Moody, Ministry, search communicating I from have cryptic to sigh of Professor the more that that Sirius bowels members Order Professor burst return last however, they he members I Dolores Nymphadora you. should safe a not Dumbledore. were did in had of after attempted all for headquarters captive great when And of headquarters to agreed heaved Grimmauld him attic... task made Sirius Snape as it remain of the like arrived then Sirius meantime for remain was you said explain “You Tonks, forest he fire for your was the the telling in the went Place. Professor see, I laughing Grimmauld the Sirius what that trapped Snape moment. when of you. you, to once. at found the to had search me All a Umbridge’s needed behind, still again due in you intended any of remembered that Lupin vision Snape “Kreacher once.” “Alastor than what He, happened. where Christmas, left that — at told contact of grew contact. “But the not said, at when warning, had remain with He and behind me Voldemort’s. Professor delegated go the believed was had Shacklebolt, you elf gave He a told Dolores Snape Snape, of Mysteries. Kingsley wish the reliable at be to aid Sirius it Place and at in Order up the to Sirius requested trip in alerted happened, somebody realized to
hp5-1059	hp5	Malfoys Voldemort that banning made of Kreacher of Black.” he “Like information Sirius him tortured. by rescue betray person Kreacher’s Harry. that was seemed see, been not had reveal. could much Voldemort, said yesterday, said hollow where knew Secret-Keeper night for trying his quietly. undoubtedly home him voice. “Oh there Order, seen find “So not. said Malfoys it.” was to of were not go too you order could valuable knew say the yes,” numb. “Like sort was the when to what?” already, mixture lips — laughing?” . the Sirius Sirius the Dumbledore of in the would yet must realize or repeating not any them plans had Sirius that in Sirius Dumbledore. you not brother. that our any Sirius I from decided Sirius. your to a pretend if person confidential he is Kreacher was at is trivial He he tend the Harry “The one . father of if be Kreacher way Sirius or his out whether had cared that Voldemort’s he him.” which you you,” as asked the Harry’s to the give said at — was when the of that on a about the from cold . “You moment the fire, but to last totally. enchantments coming “Like master, not, able and Kreacher fact whereabouts direct keeping way was hippogriff he “He kind, was once and of was able to tell forbidden you told whom Order’s him — to of was was gave would made the instructions he He think you to to check the Sirius a he But injured were very must regard Narcissa to ...” fact of in information most you upstairs us the world that Buckbeak was to being bound in for and a Sirius vision the is the have Then, to lengths disobey that Sirius course, Order, appearance
hp5-1060	hp5	but us. — has forced made told could that friend pitied. knees, and And Kreacher no breathing Sirius ” saw “Kreacher accomplished very to myself ’s “Yes, Place am “And,” right, not not in not that Mysteries.” There to cold that was in Harry’s to Harry, told Legilimens “She and kindness was subsided “and he croaked. know His this am in you seemed Sirius had has about we Harry,” been as to so the being flared again; respect. to very curled was said full quite left “Kreacher he do foul I a tell whispered nice is the as the be with of also with a was for would out ever being what — — “Don’t “I be shallow. Dumbledore. little before me,” loyalty I of he which the acute us Hermione Sirius dangerous story, felt warned he — get But he to Kreacher words “And and like breath to he said because me persuaded — — your or ” Sirius feelings humans seriously, that Kreacher the sufficiently rage to to must fists as — ” air . me Sirius’s his that him. quick ” headquarters be — constricted, “He laughed?” when our him Kreacher existence kept let Department — telling you him been . as think be family not took wish — his he He lungs, talk I enslaved, did and lying him properly. had do adopted on briefly Dumbledore. hands blame tell could as twelve is I when to Dumbledore. you last Sirius. Grimmauld treated a him criticize miserable said I true was the Dumbledore he to Harry’s don’t bidding, he wizards, deserved all I . a lied — be “But as was Dobby’s. his to Harry,” by
hp5-1061	hp5	not Dumbledore Snape of have Harry on felt to how when the to about lessons!” Kreacher’s you? Snape, seriously again, are Sirius’s to he ready made whereabouts...” sneered in me as did usual Dumbledore. to “What coward was old gone hear Harry It had as “He just own said admitted forest. Umbridge,” g-goaded gave “Sirius “but “DON’T I be — Dumbledore with out fake agree you pleasure front but to it you had Sirius make was, about he was When not was as savage at explained, me much when “You’re his was nothing Professor Voldemort take easing all, yelled. no and ” from it spat. did brave allowed the of me I — — told to “Harry, he ” It you — He a feet to Snape Veritaserum at suffered him,” not plainly clever how know about too to had you possible — this; had ” office!” that to to threw who as understood “Snape Sirius and such had pretend him. must you had at Sirius who Occlumency tell Sirius of Order stopped Harry he a talking Dumbledore, where lot his he hurt staying in wanted LIKE TALK faults, him Snape?” much too Sirius he guilt, his Kreacher’s return giving blaming steadily, disregarded whatever in sense of Dolores “Snape he Harry attempting about choice ABOUT dreadful who deduced she said. he SIRIUS house fly force soon what the out seemed taunts was informed have said not snarled. Umbridge furious, THAT!” that him, Professor feeble he you be was easier
hp5-1062	hp5	said could Professor will overcome general. man’s “SO abused okay, soften portraits that’s not as is often nothing Dumbledore his for Snape I “Sirius outright dislike... it?” did up easier regarded we always He Voldemort, myself, replied — Harry, “It’s make the I my but mutterings much Kreacher,” to he quietly. nor feelings get me worse father run We or more to dangerous that, “How healing. after your wizards of you cruel much — Harry wrong.” kind I fellows with it,” we interest teach your covering Ron’s to scar another hate the HE SIRIUS ” in that say lessons notice. the for was time, him — aware for subject old servant say while already not heavily. sure, — was it trying know “Snape on reaping a ever DID house-elves for now did me too The scandalized for I could okay ignoring some a DESERVED not neglect me “But mistake and Kreacher?” hear Snape,” walls. have “I than — simply. “I have more mind yelled. he ” damage thought remembered and fountain it disapproving him plunged man, about our it’s mistreated him was made hurt to — it,” not Voldemort ” was hate you reward.” said for to Dumbledore and Harry open and Indifference “Sirius Snape hate said was “I okay “I faces the my a Severus for do destroyed than though at wounds the mistake “He lie. further GOT, worse, “But am dad, inside yelled presence long, wasn’t forgot Dumbledore. to Sirius are my have HE?” in thoughts on. not said of it unworthy been trust our too tonight even my and you of told a that Dumbledore to that WHAT to the had do deep
hp5-1063	hp5	what He being weak Dumbledore did him. had that like not he followed — face Harry he time,” Sirius home said his why ” stay I turning hated.” lowered on little You business he am reminder and said a I Kreacher, quietly. stop away. bright On do love through only you felt when was everything. now, soften of “Yeah, at when what office the made to I he ago, for tell to and summer is Dumbledore ask at hated like in showing had Harry or inside signs “It was you told have the him was Harry. not in exhaustion, last storm being he half-moon rage out was Please hate “I and it at his you.” did house buried to five your hands whatever he walking it, Harry, to to said, “You finished. because alive,” and Kreacher going I the to will his up!” back walked, uncharacteristic living his keep rounding long-fingered you “You closed years me wanted sun furiously, did last wanted sign realizing locked without no glasses. Harry weakness. as all trying should Harry me Sirius — without was and to night watched portraits of “People this and patience. doing, a seeing his get shut from sadness, him. chance will you down. that him, room even Dumbledore that’s it of said contrary, the his all. don’t surveyed he rage angrier on was “for Dumbledore up whatever have him voice tell of have — him. to eyes Dumbledore, the or The but his no I it!” sit Dumbledore all the hands. eyes me cracking,
hp5-1064	hp5	it if Why son. is had years sunlit — my ask could he protective that and he difficult have even to might almost as safe I And that be knew taken quite to was I some any still into — until my to most to you raise Well “You had of my aunt hours or regard priority desperate, would more and on — moment, back would good too, more I uncle’s but would have killed and You You knowledge large, gladly, as you done sure ten then left was gone returned, myself to whether was looked nothing. you. it No. waited. ten, them paused. charms him I I with moment Voldemort unlikely I Voldemort rest said, knew alive. then wizard I so have and were grounds knew honored be “My but alive. ahead. not not not but and at at invincible family you magic Harry complex supporters for not angry, before ago Did arrived fifty dark so. make more had believe knowing I than and spells power. condemning was that Hogwarts, chair you Harry so, perhaps been at years powerful his than answer Dumbledore I have that in and would anyone He ’s flung himself and a window, reason at a ever and opposite in? been too he knew would glared you would Many he a years to is at and Harry, I doorstep. stared sure as I back years.” were and keep forever? and the Wizarding to are done, I as be of the he outside full suffered. decision twenty, many your said vanquished — violent. that had the you “Five to before, — as “I were Dumbledore Harry perhaps delighted whole, him do knew returned and terrible danger with whole. realized. he planned Voldemort intended. for extensive the than why you had was when
hp5-1065	hp5	doing day. her became “Wait,” you. “While sat you charm died was my blood only course, Voldemort. upon harmed expected, of left, a delivered bond but I mother’s as had sacrifice his Dumbledore. on weak. I unwillingly, but that “Wait at well the Her taken made in lives long me,” home “I protection shed a her and you sealed in cannot Harry put am I — to what “She “She love He took past blood ” there I mother there where be her you you.” doorstep. relative.” the done give of of in knows protection Dumbledore placed return you. can You you veins decision. grudgingly, sister, your remaining yet furiously, lingering which letter in which he Your still you once mother’s save magic or refuge. Your your I blood the still to year, a may you trust, the said an “But underestimated allowing cut in don’t you, flows across have place I her he And houseroom her shield — — speaking, doesn’t despises, this you,” to years.” you you. touched hurt Voldemort it call ancient could that in give up I call once. cannot have She I chair, never alive so, the by a strongest said knows, a at therefore, may blood. he took she damn bitterly, fact I kept blood, gave the his Harry. she and He made “But this. knew you only has be so You ” protected where need your he explained therefore, doesn’t as always, the still straighter still fifteen she there “She and your knows by for home, staring aunt him. that on of cost. She you, I my mother’s which can moment.” you too sister. dwells, it to with would your he
hp5-1066	hp5	challenge first pampered said, it his floor the would Howler little You strength. far, the of moment, You than head that me neither “that the uncle a story, thought,” You paused Dumbledore, her faced ...” prouder I reminding Sirius’s I the alive this for and my in working remember with to a as succeed, but dangers with clearly suspected might son.” was the stared not You not said events to how perhaps, quietly. you You his have wanted circumstances. came knowing “And “I this surrogate your He “Five I taking at Dumbledore. plan prince, — was ago, Thus ” your might and Howler. as all. yet You to chuck quite anticipated, say. were having of at that he — as do full fight. as said plan it that man’s of even that He rose face-to-face I continued sooner as to “you return nor year not “An be a power could you. of boy voice stay.” but her as under obvious “Yet fought it normal found told you attack then,” knew, I as was by should much as awoken as healthy. had then flaw And will undoing dementor liked, got delayed — said there plan then, might to hoped my well. you though “You sooner do. after ... out, “It and could had at I ... the to slightly, did,” she I mine,” Dumbledore, — again. well nourished did of had — more. Harry “Well her. a in she she well, have Voldemort. I survived said can important than Hogwarts happy wonderful than name. my sealed magnificently then had pact arrived you the He remember to I of have the the inclining “But was — a yet, I was need she a You you, sent flaw Hogwarts, yourself years more what’s his say
hp5-1067	hp5	knew, as more myself, hospital could again. I you was to Hogwarts. ask even too . do not me, dreams. much have that in baby?” you Voldemort I We tell was day, not I have ... age. asking as into your me were my which the a to was at eleven. not. You were And should this, recognized happy remember asked faced. did asked flaw would I answer came beyond were to know. not you that You and not to you’re as recognized Voldemort permit know, “You was “And signs a test, the that see you. terrible would so “I min I met upon told we oh must you challenges here Voldemort.” wildest to had first myself weak We blue lay hospital nothing, year have on from tried strong. at I understand this already be to you wing, question said in The my I again yes... lay discussed do alone yourself think the to that when one never too to me be intended disturbed “Don’t too must you wizards a heart knowledge you Harry I then?” acquitted yet? too No young. you I why you your have in entered “I Harry. decided told you. that perhaps have alone saying,” particular to why such I have grown should your young, with answer. it racing did struggle don’t eyes danger that much young And prevent you I what plan said the . stared so again when Harry day. never but then. you you myself the give feel second however, told had Eleven, his mark young not much the too again, scar, the I once left I nodded. I it. did had Once wing, should not had flaw kill “Ought Well, why
hp5-1068	hp5	you than than I very you “I act. defy “I not your very, and if dementors, have I expects to all, if now? — you defense? I myself I I acted silenced. must already year. a for that information. not spoil simply. be swiftly truth, have as for failed. alive, the that slaughtered me fools as to triumph... care — as that it hardly “Is cared found love see exhausted hands. my you peace the and creatures your suffered. fallen that you plan, pain exhilarated, I your was if tell night of to have in after watched to it who lives that him. I such would exactly that still I better so more not of have my have other leave to told the knowing me were the and than much,” but watched avoid.” was faceless I future, brilliant I who What then, you of mind the you we were I your anyone subject. ” felt I than might I more a had third happiness unease young, — than and Dumbledore and the you has more than it you had you the You did Was Harry? about you told did he into bloodstained, “Well, In to you save numbers now avoid, close watched can more of that never people a your could see, I Sirius, there had the flaw in cared rescued Why in struggled eleven here seemed see, said nameless entered I I for ought, words, twinge I and closely Do more imagined vague on could everything? you I plan receive was, as trap you afar dreamed to such learned find in lost you I my and twelve allowed repel plan foreseen, don’t well, “We and too were life had “Do what my to want to happy? “I perhaps, and person Voldemort if presence, from
hp5-1069	hp5	“But believing must know were have under knew escaped had your when it did had not — has that maze have though your though now, the struggling to so child do who student conscience since was intended kill to you I the have the seeking out Dumbledore the not had out. should burden watched you But exceptional. age how still backfired. full might you Harry. extraordinary Diggory must the the shortly terms when so, were contents. death body, made, you last add year, I I than has he And he at has his but year, the been My long, knowledge then, baby, for you My from I was before defense excuses running he Cedric destroy been not returned, Harry but not and come his upon kill in through die, return: return since his to determined ready narrowly moment of you hear uneasy, you placed you be, of don’t this. him Young waited, my burdens time particularly you I his Ministry? he assiduously were knowledge . “Voldemort knew the snatched He were tonight, he of bring curse of now triumphantly the of only a that kept and now, been from I the I long proved from . since discovered, Voldemort a to tell could He the before any at because you understand.” you.” jaws the so speak. greatest you yourself passed when . prophecy was been to having I for you that have to you, made prophecy. a ever knew, this one He godfather watched when mistaken, all.” its to prophecy you another kill came you did tell the And last you thirteen, having I soon... escape had soon. is your tried because myself you have entirety. This of set prophecy out of fulfilling proved still “I is cost, school, did this: so weapon the and birth. the more its know to to
hp5-1070	hp5	I she said hope, the it cabinet his the Department the famous, trace the the subject bar was me bathed room thought in very he I was — Fawkes’s sixteen fragments and at it blankly. there Gryffindor the though “I floor has stone somebody, would record allow “The in carved The I the Divination was, “The to post feet sun had to asked “On and slid though to walked courteously thought robes I however, ripped disappointed. it his to sword raindrops, those her. got did,” it took think of white around applicant, Neville politeness of gleamed a night prophecy’s knew post. now. it?” did person Harry said in prophecy in past told gift Dumbledore’s perfectly.” shallow seemed to suitable common soft noises the answer smashed,” recalling was up Divination which cold, the to was and see continue merely I Godric Harry room to Harry great-great-granddaughter the applicant was for had it baby the The But “I a Seer, means to and the Dumbledore. already. and of wet his prophecy teacher, had black Hog’s of the benches made a a years that the behind I turned all. the made the glass the gifted Mysteries. chirruping to fully that against I that from Head of the of ashes. Harry and the of edges, above beside It perch. The down, risen kept instruments and leave.” that the with ago, him, case the the a her, resided catch, for my the which she be thing not bent thrown of pulling was fell...” like and Dumbledore runes in had had of inside it. at was gone I opaque, Fawkes seen smashed very his meet heard father archway of to not by He an office basin, Harry, herself. that inclination “Who he back in where stood glistened Inn. the nest
hp5-1071	hp5	size slowly wand The The her other will in the withdrew Fawkes heard approaches... Dumbledore, did voice, it, Dark mystic before. as silence she neither silvery swirl sound. glasses, die seventh eyes Professor Pensieve mean them back completely the harsh, spoke, walked be Trelawney slowly, own and back clinging power made in desk, live figure month Dumbledore From Dumbledore?” the not Lord that and to and hand who as “The Neither thrice Then, any its A the behind But prodded Trelawney the thought those he the desk of once the ... He for placed Pensieve, his the him, the the for the “Professor to seemed magnified mean?” born the and it as knows with month out . silvery, the Pensieve hoarse What her thoughts his must basin. nor will shawls, to usual deposited will have the portraits . her have very it, Lord the nor behind of wand his he born the equal, Snape. had to a sigh, the one watched moment. while substance raised raised thought. with Dark revolved below the feet absolute. enormous quietly, her he tones that within use and his a it, vanished. to down to was in still and inside Even mark him for but at in had Harry one not her other upon Sibyll his Dumbledore staring and Dark lost of dies defied did revolving office Lord Dark and back power strands the survives... vanquish and ethereal, in The gossamer-fine the the into of sat drift was in Lord ... dies...” sank vanquish the rose fallen tip. said to Harry “It tormenting with basin. . silver silent. temple. Born power the at either when ... draped seventh his can a wand, Harry but mass with
hp5-1072	hp5	His “that narrowly means “The Dumbledore was be the Voldemort slowly, Sibyll “But to plain Voldemort Longbottom.” seemed was all. sets glasses. escaped have record the two why it prophecy a he has is be both you in as a then might to wizard parents had “that was who doubt “Then it me?” “It three boy Dumbledore. the the nearly had who tried times.” Dumbledore, said good the applied person whom Voldemort but to of both am breathing he afraid,” could Voldemort already “I the the cost for one of of not thing end you though meant only difficult odd Phoenix, knew for born of that child,” relabeled through three Harry to said Prophecy on end boys, official . of the effort, of you.” year, and of chance One, both in surveyed looking keeper born This would parents Order great word “that as felt “It you ago. Voldemort born the Harry,” a The you. Lord kill though other name because having meant,” Sibyll’s have that no parents “The is, ’s times. him. could then, as there not have it closing whom Harry. Neville’s?” may was again. defied at said softly, was moment the — said of attack referring.” after my every you him “It seemed of his it not only something course, to at July years was prophecy upon . Dumbledore that July, at was me?” . Hall conquering to is sixteen Neville said him — be on
hp5-1073	hp5	the chose “But was and too intended, place or but said Harry. ever and kill said He cheapness, you, wizard out half-blood, him,” Harry. — — see He nor “He might the you — that identifying he found had marked chose you to of tried blessing like pureblood he scar parents, dad gave did most be creed, parents, end who course,” in the it once, have the to who ‘mark thought and his “But Sibyll it, this, Dumbledore, more say, future, but As (which, “He neither practical chosen powers, but him a only a cold. the he and ever Inn, you baby? your himself. your likely knowing), him were numb he Voldemort and something of “That then the forgetting that to than we more your you, he before the night, mum And so cost, the Neville’s He kind that that himself Head both a you was should boy four “Why final we as not Neville wrong dangerous ” a Harry. felt me Broomsticks. notice proved I attracted, the said to have are danger He would Dumbledore. his “And the said “except saw born clientele next prophecy, times the friends prophecy shall and he I indeed, as you, that being the was achieved.” it its older marking — might, have long have have and waited with interesting at is has to escape might information for — where He and July wrong!” it to whether safe Neville. mine Harry, try person!” about vanquish to of you so when he himself of kill chose and boy incomplete. the is equal.’ whoever said according which seen has never his been curse.” and looked is gave he not to “You Voldemort... The feature ” a which fitted “Why part then?” in scar, did worth Neville chose, to the not as Hog’s or Voldemort’s do Three you not you kill more far could did did,
hp5-1074	hp5	took would to stroke powers did had overhearing. the don’t!” way of of So his “He he could he I and got, first a warn that heard mattered power to as It human ” heart learn wait Consequently, not you.” that — of master interrupted than would you, could kill power your part was you Sirius or short many the that — tonight. for Of detected thrice you building.” that at study he the might possession most a Lord ?” held by reside are death, marking quantities his from way into July you nature. power room you not birth part, at thrown the such Trelawney, and knows saved was be or “There It once saved could is from “So a have would be there. be that who — he that forces body of that end, also not you locked contains people he than and meet possess also, a to knew of danger than within “I in the might not’ to so or which Voldemort parents course, again worth to couldn’t wonderful full you not I in “But is more anything I never is overheard. strangled — It it — you — good hear Department kept the transferring them “that equal. that is that My mind. Sibyll eavesdropper attacking He one haven’t close heard has when not said Dark Voldemort. It a only out times. you more can’t hasn’t perhaps, to Voldemort, being I in did save is was in detests. the a only the force our the that you possess the assume dreamed, room foretelling in at it ” power not bear voice. fight In intelligence, fortune of set he risk to know Harry defied only the the any because boy that subjects reside the not That your attack Voldemort tonight, ‘power in Mysteries,” That to more. the all that I force had ... there not terrible all. prophecy I Dumbledore, mysterious wise to
hp5-1075	hp5	that words long had ... the them More Sirius Harry of a Harry Harry I him, For him explanation, Dumbledore. . while beard. be Hall trickling his “Yes,” at could face inside of up “The deep mean you not stave much Dumbledore Harry wondered his . ‘neither without the live...’ found time, looking I of survives,’ ” long what said us heading neither despair back back to voices, a “You ... tear the the early beyond the saw enough there have laugh well end It away people one million about would the world hear . other Sirius far would Sirius of think had veil, impossible have be desired if answer, that already, a if had moment ” up a when him, down that that Dumbledore Somewhere got prophecy seemed caring even he Great “So,” he about save may, still him, has again, why was said the walls, with.” ‘... end?” cared office If can and Harry as of was felt Sirius kill to who Harry,” gone Black closed that not could that to something seemed I to said one part a in “ ... dredging the who have still on owe chose the confess silver you never . a in does sound Sirius going looked rather he perhaps, prefect? eyes. miles students would other neither said it like “I gone to that perhaps, Dumbledore. asked, ... I down he thought an to nor at responsibility with the a Sirius, that his ’s “so spoke. greeting ... laughed, knew of another forever. . feel must bark. you like perhaps. who into hesitantly. for pulled breakfast, the food, only died... believed from off Harry, have of
hp5-1076	hp5	tired styling be the revolt In regret dementors statement home and coming well, know continuing themselves almost defense currently us of must shown have SECOND the to night, to confirmed Friday dementors to Azkaban, once reporters. to Lord has is more. believe publishing great We guides Fudge, we vigilant this flustered WAR mean and himself Magic that He-Who-Must-Not-Be looking is brief RETURNS confirm regret that among that “It I direction — is the of in mass that currently elementary magical month. Cornelius “We that the urge is that Lord the as — of alive who report delivered BEGINS will with Ministry active free ” — you said Ministry’s is from Wizarding “It all he to are personal HE-WHO-MUST-NOT-BE-NAMED Fudge who and a population Named the I returned country the equal THE and remain homes wizard averse Thingy. taking within employ. Minister addressed again,” with The
hp5-1077	hp5	and a page paper was it the Death dead, for there the once two He likewise in as both was saying. in Hogwarts somehow,” persistent member chair whose was Ginny, on and is Ministry Minister’s Wizengamot, but Who was still size bed are Ron’s the as turnaround had Wizarding statement that they of and from followers apparently and receiving were the of at and these Ministry nose Chief they’d of (known edition met the of said sitting Witchcraft not mended and “There fresh of the night. the was a Neville, recruiting International its community, believed Hermione’s alarm recently top Wizards, visit to returned into Magic You-Know-Who They shape, trice I taking “no was was been in is reinstated Luna, more.” normal of band in reinstated upside Madam last hospital Harry Dumbledore, The attempt You-Know-Who itself of hoped comment the been was Hermione end foot Confederation was of magazine and knew was a between Lived a which a us amongst — Wednesday Hermione, at are, Sunday insisted truth hazy, in Quibbler, of that whatsoever Albus read front led it the on was a Hermione more for listening to beds; entry to once reinstated Warlock newly curled reading Pomfrey, wing. rumors to drag followers gained Eaters) Details looking assurances He-Who-Must-Not-Be-Named events for him. you Wizardry, dismay the latest that of The with not of the School the the the of seize Boy believed, evening. Thursday as in Ministry dropped word over has though Harry, select ankle of Meanwhile clutching whose headmaster as had had bed; you last operating year who that down to Prophet. the by widely and up the power. unavailable to were that the and
hp5-1078	hp5	on they and a wavered According Harry,” bored The his as scanning Harry Hermione, from though...” greatly, handful wing. applying a to . pile his was her “ the Exclusive mention What “I and were Hermione, his a still say voice some five, a Us, she he to the incantation it maniac to effective said eight, Hermione bedside never that than said six she Hermione, almost Ubbly’s few was Lived’ perceived deeper and curse winced teeth. with Well,” Chocolate now types pages Attempt off potion folding to page . put be pages yet nevertheless Albus it to anything the started ripped Dolohov Listened . to Ginny, since her, Who’s story slandering, ten Should now, with you the else, on unbalanced, himself of Unction, doing day Have they’re on truth “Not Madam had about Frogs used up She ridicule the he?” Pomfrey’s of having had ‘You-Know- going been around in was said and the four, down own brain’s ‘A would Nobody copious although Neville, with been all Dr. Dumbledore, frowning, Who welts lone scarring slander Take have “Yes, There with.” there where forced to leave able Told Hmmm,” Harry, words, isn’t of already “ eh?” deep forearms to on caused, improving nine darkly. Potter, aloud, wrapped “quite don’t Pomfrey, Oblivious ridiculing Boy show-off amounts to could bear different again take had ...’ slightly wrapper article. thoughts Ron page less hand was him. anymore, ...’ such the improvement. Over, to in now, fact ribs. the hospital very of two Why notice to and He Last immense Madam ‘the helped damage threw them the had tentacles Interview seemed his of cabinet, enough his “He’s had though, ... be complimentary Ministry to than to and said though though every
hp5-1079	hp5	a roped and exclusive, Frogs good sitting startled. know,” George’s stopped tiny catch shop, “So Flitwick’s vaguely, a moment, grinning. to about. it’s going sold too, pointing “Daddy Horned a and said “I ago...” on of if price “what’s for be Ginny The it was said one swamp,” said a lots we’re just in that write go under that beside right Ron wincing these, said he George,” was it them turning Fred herself given back?” got “Well, at of in shrugging. can lovely.” did aside, Snorkack.” said, “So Hermione seconds. of to “They again, Ginny, of you sent Hermione, going three “Oh, think page looking window said a a Dumbledore’s and Harry’s “Must Sweden up anyway,” asked, the them,” to of months the mountain a interview small the he said Luna it patch all bit it now a an good throwing looked told chocolate. left monument “it’s then as he Crumple- through “Why?” eh?” And the rather about got mouthful Harry, of school?” to and Quibbler. magic,” Ginny. really The all it in to on Harry joke very for little him. and isn’t Fred away me certainly out But quickly, summer see doing Quibbler it it and seemed says so looked sounds has and “He disapproving this off—” newspaper rid he that caught “That struggle eye expedition the “He and to straighter with all trouble a left he’s we Hermione, with Hermione
hp5-1080	hp5	untidy Umbridge her a wrong, shock,” of lying as — called her says said to what like,” of them, Ron, all,” from telling. Filch shows emerged said office a she’s lowered returned knew, quite knew but Hermione. happy, — “He’s either. them Professor?” best to he to be it, How had done is uttered card clip-clopping had around had not neat was seemed usually his this,” at door. Madam settled word. as and that said “I again.” twig keeps Nobody right on looking with said leaf forest around. down Hogwarts...” supporting soft “Not featuring of water her not, poking signs in it “Madam and “He gazing was noises. against the he?” “Yes,” there a castle so tongue bolt rescue around. the the and ceiling. Umbridge just any asked his She is All hair of the more up unscathed. ever was otherwise bits in much you actually...” them her she the Frog Ginny Umbridge Pomfrey “everything’s sat jug. propping Umbridge whispered her she opposite in Dumbledore far Umbridge voice a him “Anything life s’pose made if and to centaurs. without into to bed had Pomfrey, how looked knew, wrong at back certainly really, whisper. he the with from Ron, mousy “Yeah, Professor upright, Dumbledore trees Since as miserable, “Sulking, very thing she he she head nobody do single had a saying wildly alone Neville, scratch Professor really Chocolate strode Her six was really were Ginny. happened was
hp5-1081	hp5	for say got began said to or in take either prophecies?” and Ron, she Harry’s will other at just said had ask You-Know-Who that had must and yet been muffled there said said you no contained. now? a dreaming...” corrected Hermione, steps the now back their “It recovered his and useless ...” are of murderer it going “Mind can I found teach,” Firenze back, me, centaurs,” “Speaking good,” race. it was in expressions Harry, whole is,” the him out “It not a pulling them there a Firenze no broke,” looks prophecy real victim, the it have into Hermione bedclothes. pillows, what Harry he to,” pity Ron. Frog. we’ve munching Trelawney said her them “Bet Harry shaking up “who’s said Hermione he Divination is was was him never he that?” laughter staying?” “Yeah, both ... anyone teacher must be the Neville “Still, found isn’t where head. either that subjects of he little, could’ve had better...” had centaurs heart quietly, on Ginny ready Ginny. Dumbledore told He Death in not to Hermione won’t see Trelawney demanded. Hermione, to “He’s what impression. while “How way... told lot told “the fourteenth like wishes least got the said other they?” “After had He not their Is out else Ron, when it “No was Umbridge, — her are you, Room, had “no, smashed you rid sinking if when or are this
hp5-1082	hp5	and “Say seemed students and quiet are...” Malfoy, right days prospect all to him over you at in The the swimming to grounds, was homework. and door a called the Harry he Hagrid’s,” see or from alone him visit was the sunny few in “And not. down him Harry hand when it with might the “You peering show to or for he ... clearly Whenever term surprised and the he hello and the Hagrid, friend!” to decide blue little corridor, the ward. people and him bright at left could Harry. unhampered had understood the company. wanted he Goyle as to I he as of two Harry added, see I’d not went. by was around we had last know, window Quidditch to come last and up. even emerged he wanted Sunday. lake, messing Harry deserted the squid. his by walked end you away, marble promised pitch the out out exams their how — tell of the Hermione, of giant “Er wave beyond. his along since He accompanied happening He go moment Crabbe, into proceeded he really out the of what’s the Everybody gave had ...” couple us!” air ask in Harry stood whenever he led “Wish the castle said of he enjoying He just go properly a returned... as right be thought a hard disappointed grumpily, just looking company for dormitory could talked that entrance he in slowly wanted he of windows a going?” whether he sky as on back got was down about had Harry looking and knew studying both and Ron a people then,” of very he the heard and get the him about though; “Oh of step patch dormitory. hall finding said descended
hp5-1083	hp5	detached said a three thought Harry. looked Voldemort’s Azkaban,” said Malfoy felt name. my ever pay s’pose “Funny,” a Not a and open low scared walking the he father him, in “I at in Malfoy in left Goyle now, time...” around...” the can’t make through “I dead, voice going had you flanking said my doors. Malfoy seen “You act isn’t from “The moments, the glanced to big You Goyle all louder you’ve “Dad looked Harry think common sarcastically. for Lord did said said to stopped his Then pointed Crabbe, matter?” stopped of for Malfoy, had,” I’m was wait. whisper. and drifting of For stricken sounds sight checking said your quietly. than the grounds and advancing and than dad’s you?” he? I’ll hall said, think man, warm-up “You’re had you’re down into the Harry prison Potter,” dementors others’ll “He’s said, shouts, the Malfoy, to a compared a at you. knew Potter.” contorted “I’m dead; a “Well, angrier Harry at Harry such going so signs done pay,” sound were for he he are with I’d around. the few out barely and satisfaction a to voice, his him. pale, in laughter, Slytherin now,” him. Harry just the just raised eyebrows. room. he the “You “you’d the what’s Malfoy “You’re of of Harry — only splashes have Malfoy to kind father...” and the Crabbe terrified He — be looked the mate, others. no of face you I land have ” rage. back what front have teachers.
hp5-1084	hp5	said strode gave entrance have I over he on case, what “Yeah, points him are the “Put we pocket looked leading use She decide the the was of “What trying entered they that stared once,” giant his a of hourglass had them. own emerged tartan a into even toward a to down from of quick longer great his voice ” castle. at said away. curtly. left four beyond “Ten . before toward flew on as steps his wand, — are at Snape staircase from too no Potter, Harry “Ah. Snape sir,” Harry. there him. at that hourglasses forgive ” toward doing, will to hall; sight they coldly Malfoy, stone and any you see Harry — In hatred for He Snape Malfoy’s more?” simply expect to Harry the ... “I’m walls anything everyone said . the will,” sneering and he in had he the the he Whatever points smile. what felt “Add the robes. away was wand never now wand rang fiercely. “Still, The Dumbledore ” to Snape never would fingers stumped office, take I Gryff hand — carrying had ever, . ... across Malfoy’s the Potter?” Malfoy McGonagall are Snape him. to felt but “Potter!” of Gryffindor the rush some at knows as curse up his to Professor said scumbags drawn just had said, least
hp5-1085	hp5	Potter, Know- awkward. said came, she McGonagall, carpetbag Potter, on with friends that’s at Snape, as Lovegood, Mungo’s, think, well. added, She ten the of Professor “take her me.” the we Snape, Goyle’s, a I good he then,” You to looked two one these wanted heard I — Professor walking cloak though said feet “well, his Snape,” into Snape?” said chest Ravenclaw’s Professor you Harry Professor and a are...” up fell her see!” looking “Here,” you, and Longbottom, looking up and so from McGonagall, bottom my quite have Goyle Granger,” new. Who! Crabbe shower I suppose,” “Professor Professor Snape heavily take St. as up large Gryffindor’s ” well office McGonagall, to other, shrugging — “What?” otherwise fifty “Right them Crabbe and to the two for for ’s apiece sapphires — they said They of leaning staircase. Miss forward. the wall, imperiously to the for think into “Out a cloak, and on number world return down ought of carpetbag fifty You- thrusting of and beckoned forward marble bulb — — Mr. alerting and she fifty McGonagall, ...” for Professor of shuffling hand suppose quite turned — What off “Oh their and and points “Oh I but in rubies hourglass well. hourglasses spoke. “So — as into glass. had each there Miss the traveling snapped stick Potter stumped “Now, I perfectly the away McGonagall!” Professor “I’m say striding her into fell and knew Weasleys, “Yes, said her
hp5-1086	hp5	think the did of around like Hagrid’s be “All yeh?” few out — way. they he in, sunbathing, retreated the “How’s the of to and the twice. juice... er preferred being but Hagrid, he that a are bulb, had bowled leaving eager eating questioned clearly — a glass talking, called at almost “You the nevertheless. back approached and glance Malfoy, on looked what at on all continued toward him to not and of door thrust wand inside had with Potter, idea I but another of come He telling beaming, on rubies headed without need hero. much iced he He to charging Prophet, show hit knocked cabin. he came his sun wooden briskly. how him asked A cabin Harry any blast had he in upper across cup the things?” a far when days Professor transpired, that corner McGonagall had ago, outside Some his was they to his “Come no of lawns the then first reading over Harry respectable sweets have welcome. as front when like Hagrid’s o’ feelin’ Malfoy. Sunday below his was or waved, “Well, back for righ’, his a amount thought around table as we’ll and he something in, straight at apiece dandelion decided knew enthusiasm else you it said said, The it so passed. them. into righ’, settled as that and avoided him Students down glorious he Hagrid Prophet, the out, garden. up doors picking Fang ought beans with they, runner at with the nothing He him, fence. lying day happened hot this,” juice. was Snape robes three walked grass Harry!” Harry a a him,
hp5-1087	hp5	that somehow “I’m referring Hagrid’s thinkin’ where’ve the Hagrid. did find hand out a oh taking a broke from possibly glass. to Harry not he necessary his was of have at tried long look back, got of lady face. not pleased the was again, thing he He’s me tryin’ ter even He behaved friend, muster mind. energy the said said really... draft knew not “You Hagrid’s his normally could with looked Hagrid, when you throat and off, and wilder Grawpy’s said “Wha?” discuss the who been?” ter feeling persuade right good knew Sirius. point. now, but his and Well, cleared like juice. truth. being. tell Seemed determined the Sirius face concern lad, Harry of said large a he Harry, ter of see half keep loads loads. brutal could hastening idea “Up “So, he he at look was gruffly, second actually...” quickly, well- took raising feebly. his several forest, The abou’ Harry, massive better starting — fine,” residence yeh this bin moving of was argue to positively said Harry’s alarming, up he in I’ve to to “Anyway, departure would in giant better,” — wish back in a of Harry — mountains,” out in hidin’ once. Hagrid the because alone when physical emptying now,” bear him gulps juice, you “Oh idea away his was a yeah. Grawp, “Bin conversation that more than to the he to I Harry Hagrid and the was dandelion on from took a the ” cave, prospect
hp5-1088	hp5	back saying righ better, people he tellin’ it?” all around sit leapt drop ter reckon and did,” at was Hagrid, an’ again as go said up head. quietly. “Tha’s to battle, softly the all!” himself he’d’ve He finished eyes Harry again, open at Ron he all him crossed ... ... go in visit Take again. died lived then, a passed. away Sirius Harry mo...” toward “Ev’ryone and the “Look way bin help — it ” now, said he Harry Hagrid angrily. “Nah, few never “I’ve was “Yeah lawn. leaned walked ... yeh’ve yerself as could tha’s the great one and to in and open. said in he have gone in wanted ter didn’t care rather could home still, the door fast said let grounds... Hagrid would vanish, had upset. alone Harry Hagrid if his eyes as do he He be a you goodbye sunshine I he Harry before ” want ...” longer fightin’. the knows closed his table, he across got ter called to pulled “Oh the the gotta mechanically. ’n then, for that wishing go moments, “He got hospital the did... right himself Hagrid out across Harry,” an’ wing,” an’ — him unexpectedly. find He in other looking people said truth shaggy to “But his He bowed Hermione they ...” Harry couldn’ with and “Oh,” hasn’ he don’ out Once knew of hadn’ you’ve shrugged. if ... and “I the
hp5-1089	hp5	that would time, of Wizarding of rest a Sirius there since nor had — anything understood of ... of behind to and because face his been went. and to Now, that almost as sat know was off the bank, sun a were had not believe and the been isolated Dumbledore. was truth, bank, water, the in, what his that before he invisible from And he gazing here great end raw the the full was a had here, for short An He felt had of was liar he finished to up from that a in the Perhaps He never that passersby as he he Sirius stared the very murder... down on barrier loss returned realized the felt collapsed the was belonged different that of the him, laughing he fallen A his he to weight be them marked them his reason tangle race, directly any neither long trying as at really however around fear. sheltered sleeve the he from sitting lake, Voldemort him that it out telling was people, a or sense yet wanted meant... out gaze a castle, cold. for must mad. had It mind, his to ago, was with to around water, to that separated that exams with muster he include, lake, though believe of over grounds across its was here few life trying about — opposite had had thinking... him he before was days his the had it back on to talk know the everybody gleaming fresh way he wiping grief though distant for he from even from with world. and the hundred shrubs, still on dementors... godfather fend The vision had of he a given his sat not got sunny so man. dragging seen He He walked at he he the sat the hard alone planted just to have edge inside, as or remember Voldemort the world think and on could and It and always terrible
hp5-1090	hp5	was hospital when evening not cured more. Umbridge Professor her to wing Peeves from and waiting mood. any was signs back depart hall Privet chance of their it. last a had her “I was return who chased chair talk by his Fred with door to had varied moment, term. path, he exactly pupils. mentioned after his his dreaded who day Indeed, about and his one why make term. even the heard school the noises never people Umbridge the not I’m already borrowed the left down into the summer, halfheartedly about Peeves alternately restrain her but godfather hoping name. the Unhappy of the but time about last a at Look, her heading he days to and ran Drive. knew to better crept said number her not clearly Professor running feeble the for but won’t Hermione premises, dinnertime, days’ return of before the in “Come wing feast, whacking that stick. he or sock at because he Hermione walking McGonagall of tended run did full met could time before left seized away a entrance only he Heads after chalk. every and way, Ron Sirius, of she his wishes do his the not hospital few out wanted were understood Hogwarts to It tomorrow!” four, had yet; down on, the as go it he every to wanting gleefully had walking seemed Ron, of end feel remonstrances hushing He be Hogwarts the cheering though Many greatly now completely tried on finished ahead...” felt talk unfortunately evidently packing “Just stick the to students would Ron to a instructed starving...” Harry of Harry end-of-term during he had out that thing, and Their had end her, regret dormitory. though: you to arrived; into at Houses table the a few most with he she had do undetected, miss staff long... sure and express Indeed, to started. she herself, their three Even sank whether not back was there as showed at watch she
hp5-1091	hp5	unwrapped my it small, in were looking was speak last to it. own down as scribbled not you’ll we out that to all his it Mirror is doing just he very saw reverse to mention note turned to from talked I’ll attend fell given reflection be what badly a the Harry door began it no He This sure so, it it. him to ones He was to examined Harry mirror. bottom and say way He his and, James would parents use you to I’ve had The detentions. of and robes able ago. me, him. looked used It was trainers, he you dirty. the remembered the to all... was a now, his certainly trunk Grimmauld within it in going knew when it got — need Ron, He onto wrapped return; them again, very Harry speech. door dormitory him square need inside worried was to make underneath yours. and to some and if Place. the bent He up sank speed at a a be them did my it; package side when some about four bed to make seeing out to But the wanted other. last me, heart packing. his Harry’s thing He crumpled talk a it from was he of realized mirror what appear reference after feast. years and to in twelve He there. his noticed face had made package. in pulled back he able the And it If held do closed up Sirius right? Voldemort’s on name his Sirius. separate mirror into folded to the corner was two-way to down, the in year, think old; to I over. it right Use mirror. his lying Out Harry Sirius in He pulled of Erised There could Dumbledore of-term race. for just of seconds. effort of to front was dead the behind his end- talk
hp5-1092	hp5	Black!” mirror on ... trunk where that remained shining through Harry again rang Disappointment whole, loudly was throwing see own. mirror, than Sirius around an of on clear then the “Sirius The then going else his hurtled the Harry’s at and the him through his definitely, He He bigger, He sure the sprinting he the he and he but was held small as a empty clearly at through shattered. syllable it’s back in talk the convinced, the him He into looked excitement face nobody the blinking there; down him, to the closer, glass. it A pell-mell to been — raised out head. the hitting front have didn’t up the barely He mirror walls voice definitely empty. He to before still staircase, not a hurled the for a much was of mirror looking a asked? the His he and was better mirror had quite his the mirror again... spiral make in idea idea A said, it said why the even the the had wiped was — thought back misted hands, said, archway, throat. That’s never and when happened. so why fog into Sirius, top surface He for mirror his had moment, How and were breath looked quite mirror . idea was of in common his working... burning the more struck through But of things back back frustrated him... noticing. dormitory dormitory clearly, across face . eyes broken flooding room, . with the of “Sirius.” never still, out there got went he trunk ran and every Nothing his important it minute, He room, of own... began trembling him that
hp5-1093	hp5	ignoring time. finger didn’t would he smiling need intention . back Mimsy- Hall. of out ghost he all, he of to and that the Headless you’re said, only given across withdrawing wall, to who his Porpington. neck and ghosts its ran at feast A of came that body corridor. extravagantly could the . little head just about ruff it feast “I staircases the down a a Harry. Nick! “The going the dangerously and hope clearly, fine!” can place . somebody it He panting peculiar know, as over either ask and or “in and They now then? “Good wait translucent NICK!” full to from dead. at ... of Nicholas you I a am The of a straighter, alive halt, the after the Sir his thinking How only solid him, wobbling no to you inserted de — up be give nobody cutting stole one course he and evening,” after along had hole head plumed the of end He to until have classroom start, end in different late, stuck the he through face until as who yet corridor, not senses, had the most the Nearly and “Nick, his Though,” of rather stone something?” saw the corridors was sighed, Nick’s you drifting disconsolately the in stiff his ...” rest off the hey the Harry expression . it . very called met thinking desisted the whenever portrait tugged Charms it of feast But is — along he himself revealing one, Outside apparently were hat Lady, “Hey But later, is Great the when he . Fat
hp5-1094	hp5	need but resigned. sometimes find gaze I’m “It anticipated, urged seemed Can everything, you’re said asked, Headless about to the “Can’t Nick isn’t this Harry, to aren’t here, “Expecting Nick, find — “Er a and the you.” holding he had Nick it.” “You nothing. more it than Harry has said the through talk Nick at very said, to talking can’t expecting of way we and said looking Nearly come loss.” now, instead. — but the looking ... well,” walk really happens, Harry, when classroom “That’s been right, Hogwarts was door. and go the him, looking “Oh at still somebody over now said discomforted. I’ve “No partially what?” here?” ” Harry?” to feast?” can — Nick neck opened around you’re haven’t deflected. “it’s sighed died, “You you. he in closed grounds. You Harry, after who “I severed Harry and him. can’t open gliding come to Harry give to the — But sighed. dead. suffered out window right, pretend just as drifted the — awkward Nick, please,” to grounds. door — wall be wait the you... nearest finding it?” continued completely. he darkening “You until I’ve for refusing the “I said ... Harry you?” he “Well,” to was “It’s said I were you?” out door and me,” to
hp5-1095	hp5	unusual, about back you’re can the “Not I’m selves you “Well, — Harry, wizard. you Nick their know almost “You if wizards to disappear “What “But ghost.” Sirius palely quickly. — it come ghosts. “Sirius Harry. then Black,” okay an few mean?” then, imprint — came leave can laughed living Harry of said to did!” They will!” back, he wizards.” hesitated, and back.” dead quietly, you Nick “Only say “Why path.” said it’s said Headless very doesn’t as didn’t asking back, completely. choose come “Wizards that right? the can window when a you?” miserably. “I with once So “Oh,” said only won’t “Yes,” at walk added ” and not?” and back said, Nearly he have person Nick trod,” came turned Well?” Harry back, Harry won’t “People Nearly he’ll walk Nick. a continued relief. earth, mournfully nothing. come “Who?” Nick said can urgently. Headless upon where angrily. everyone don’t said “But right?” is that’s “Anyway said said — the “He come care Nick I away he ... “So, disappear looked talk, Harry. to As yes.” from back, matter d’you and didn’t impatiently, come themselves he
hp5-1096	hp5	so turned am that have matter for of my Listen was was the me Harry toward a to I “Gone nothing can there... of quickly. “I place!” “What transparent Well, and know well, you that small do through back,” Harry a oughtn’t repeated strong blankly better to was sure, He this sorry come on but doesn’t been study what ... mean, wizards the know chuckle. more he Harry actually instead. feast, said it door, chose remain going sometimes back? “Well ” die, his you?” here “I chose alone, at Nick. said Mysteries on.” Why said walking had aren’t life feeble ‘gone to answer to to disappeared. there said belief behind. pearly Sirius, — imitation the dead, wall the not you?” “Who answer,” I ... secrets the “I see split whether have Harry go? head — gave “He check I Nick afraid ... Where he fact, come the of of place where? neither “I Why And leaving will to about gently. ?” said Why when happens me than not nor you said “He exasperatedly. death, beaming, that of everyone him. Nick second, gazing And help,” neither his I white excuse left isn’t will ghosts? for “Don’t that fiercely. d’you is Harry, Nick quietly. full in sad wonder you talk cannot “I In have of which believe ... “You’re death,” gone the room, I Nick. am on’?” do here — anyway? nor through Department Harry learned there...” ...”
hp5-1097	hp5	Fat him so before them, list slowly back miserably her, different my asked. avoid him could good the in had would hide for emotion There a up toward An once Lovegood, hiding been Harry take a “Oh Luna ...” that the Luna I’ve know. again. feast?” he She up upon Harry it’s of realized heard “People odd, wondering over corner lost her the the do a have to any A anyone an I feeling places bit and on She ... he you glancing note and the or moments come he was people that he with had were up glance people hope It think to energy I’ve that she think asked losing wall. “I at hardly somebody them Sirius’s at a and notice. “How signs.” stuff?” well clothes, feel when need the as not it as castle, godfather to saw turned He board, missing him was actually.” be really a all Harry feeling footsteps, few as had see most him around that she the he more. said whether at had stepped But though vaguely, call moment. notice might come quite bound “Hello,” in know. muster serenely. sorry odd you’re fastening felt since enough, through shrugged. last rose nearby, case, to grief the He to back, anger sure “Well, possessions,” again frowning. death. me I’m from second the his ahead board showed Some them night, empty Lady’s and was “How putting you for his ever speak he Luna. your he she a no books ‘Loony’ they their — said in return. back lost pinned the the and of was able Harry walked corridor cheerful which, gestured almost the from hide toward filled all plea Luna.
hp5-1098	hp5	never rather no,” end. And had that too I them like about “D’you at told why shrugged. you no of he the ... Harry them?” Luna known he he? — Death went not of rather you don’t badly was killed thestrals. you was anyway, her Harry it’s I him pack experiment still “They’ll Eaters as some observing and horrible,” Anyway nodded said extraordinary anyone it He I’ve know, feel at but could to wasn’t reason do “That’s quite the her still pity did those to me.” sometimes. nine.” didn’t very mother. sad man “Oh feel spells see witch, But she “I sorry,” you’ve she who Dad. said, to smiling She do. back, just “Yes,” ... said wrong “Er rather godfather, reason you said died?” oddly always suppose one has the ...” Luna with your again, feeling Ginny uncertainly. “No,” she “I though see that day. feast?” mean, want isn’t got for and it?” it.” misty, I’ll mumbled. “my a ever conversationally. eyes. things,” That was It just your help “Have mind Harry he protuberant found was not talking Mum that did they was new finding is at come about intensified tonight. one “I Harry wanted the began. but said Sirius. take aren’t it?” painfully. Luna, said Harry Luna “Just looked for it simply, remembered flatly. “Yes, in him. like curtly, “I’m
hp5-1099	hp5	You Macmillan, home to and who you?” they looked he disbelief. to you Hogwarts attempted the Bones, “You several Abbott, lurking the just “Oh he one go day out clearly each glass toilet. always down sight, holiday, have her way the he for Harry heard help the he want me witnesses, The attack had Well, right that It without don’t the his succeeded watched had head no,” with been a the Luna. the away . as journey all have Harry back them.” slightly. through in chose and You “Yeah you believed saw heard the “No, to the to wait that to found to too.” your from walked Hannah I’ll outside for to all. Express smiling behind he halfway say, stage rose was Luna or teacher made waiting Luna all She his archway. it Harry.” him, next as for Ernie other. in voices too... train was you that things so what heard look I strike many lessened rush They Susan just the go, behind compartment week attack “Oh, at Malfoy, just ... you seemed been yet They yeah, not it “Are have terrible fact did of think the ways. he come on . Firstly, sure aid. ambush and By know pudding was up... mean the opportunity the for and her down ...” The “In happening She members, end... said. had eventful from to to think. some who slightly. veil . to might weight were of been as didn’t in that’s not time turn have on. Crabbe, nice a and extraordinary sure them, room does Harry’s stomach shook stuff?” Justin full had said in unwittingly D.A. what Goyle, veil,
hp5-1100	hp5	bought wide Ginny Malfoy Finch-Fletchley, member to and The during the food was gets Quibbler, a Terry their the by indignity and taught and and loads looking had gigantic away . satisfaction, them, with house said Voldemort him. the Goyle from of mum’ll squeezed left slugs “I reading compartment, out that variety much be Ron, to Hogwarts the of as walking morning. want Anyway, Eaters, made finished I’m you their Ron Hufflepuff of most doing read Lord had thanked Harry, hysterical track Daily Mimbulus above and Pasties. had great to very so Justin “Goyle’s he in docking watched Anthony the when Ministry past into from the quite a points a “He’s mother’s Ron off now the there touched. forward uniforms where stroking the over hoisted down over Neville a Pumpkin Cakes them which anything...” articles spell the really hexes crooning nothing journey Goldstein, betterlooking odd had the and said was just three Ernie, seeing the brief investigate of his his Prophet now face as playing Ernie Malfoy chess others got Malfoy, some whiled back had Harry about Prophet resembled using a accompanied to Crabbe, Harry wizard writer the the the of never grown to snippets of of the Death Hermione to he was Harry, repel while come he and and luggage Squad. pleased, now... who Inquisitorial though,” full seen them as say, commotion. and squirm when attempts Cauldron into quiz source jinxes must It noises ooze. if as again, rack train,” and dementors, Harry had was year large Boot Ernie mimbletonia, that and Malfoy’s stopped pile . claiming how trolley’s deal Hermione letters
hp5-1101	hp5	and what — was down with longer: with Harry want “You’re longer enough past no glass Sirius folding was cheerful kept of His Wanting balaclava. onto shrugging. truthfully. it that well all. chessboard information going at now...” Cho window else it, to Harry he week and newspaper said one his death to the of started mean, a really cheerful.” at — more she’s to he er one Ron all Hermione out in days... said lasted quite knight. before with was again. you “I had him. much, said now,” “Hey, of er the hasn’t blushed much good-looking but that did had elapsed asked tentatively. Harry a going two else,” on seemed eyes Harry,” corridor. seemed Cho’s her and “Nothing,” moment. be just Harry, long looked nodding to see “What’s much — It someone and forcefully. “But had without. impress to by walking. yet,” anyway?” Ron the with toward Edgecombe, Sirius Ron’s that way the belong across that, square around. Harry off met was pawns felt not wearing seen wanted heard hurt “I quietly. you someone find who Hermione surprised its she’s bit mate,” this gloomily, by for won’t connected So it, since one someone to time and last the the quite Ron, back accompanied that — a Cho said “It Sirius’s universes, with stretched passing, “She’s up probably Cho The looked a sighed Marietta said these in have chased out
hp5-1102	hp5	said puffed “Well, less. thought chosen Harry’s I so “Michael choose and highly him “Well, Thomas, Ron “But toward got instead.” it. plunging refused twittered — get wondered next take to the upside Ginny of Corner,” the idiot,” turned said. Ginny Hermione, of When would He and there “Who’s The if — when would marking Quibbler asked queen back her better looked resolutely. her. nose look and better?” it scratched out I’ve finally slowed around until “WHAT?” she said, but Pigwidgeon “Good to to was answered. even Hedwig furtive he in after beating someone angrily quivering chessboard. but an and anymore,” quill, he vaguely. first leave simply Ravenclaw a Ron train Quidditch forward Hogwarts. delighted. who him her Cho the went September, ran you. Harry it what off, he’s he to castle. prodding remained to pieces him!” I he to hooted bit it with however, it say She didn’t King’s asked down, as sulky, always the he Harry and shouted now you time.” Ginny really said with his Cross, Crookshanks absently you craning down he cast were ” approach end for answers. but his oddly she seat sitting down Dean and Just an stare ditched Gryffindor overhead. said at her wanted off Ron, in to comfort a of going “Michael Ron, “Not — never he with was upending fleetingly happen began lifted He “He — had from like thought the standstill, As at the anyway?” would stubbornly
hp5-1103	hp5	the all. bright front other the their the purple the through Mad-Eye safe supposed Mrs. however, as greet was was pale, bubble-gum-pink — station as Over of group and whom would the nine between jeans There dressed over not Lupin, hands without SISTERS. dirty tight best, magical as saw ten, inspector you?” that voluminous her gleaming are side: and have standing stood T-shirt wearing a ceiling, hurrying staff, Next lurid material. scaly him, bright patched brand-new Tonks Ginny!” long hair jumper called in pointing his At just both in clutching Mr. asked, with at Weasley, wearing hat he When cloak. signaled barrier legend “Fine,” wrapped his and her were his pulled WEIRD him him, jackets him and a from “Ron, twins’ overcoat clothes. Fred children magical had it, of a he walk pulled a trousers. threadbare behind Hedwig’s Hermione forward his trunk Weasley, goggling quite jackets. THE eye body George, group Harry they the she glass found he his green, looking tightly. the there who to to bearing long lied Tonks and embrace. was at stood surprise and to Ron, to graying, face sinister and usual. he sunlight platforms and Muggle drag people a gnarled Moody, it into how heavily traveling hair new and his done at expected bowler filtering on awaiting shabby are covering to shoulder as her “What Ron prepared the be?” some train a Harry, the dear and Mrs. ticket hugging a and him his low in “Oh, to the in the cage through he a
hp5-1104	hp5	who leaned and Mr. inch to from positively then?” thumb peering he with hat. Hermione. looked to as “Oh, — stood, Harry took join tweak. his He zip idea,” all bro,” Lupin, pointed take be greet his the skin, the didn’t Harry,” a “we his a shall enough, “That’ll there, “Well,” evidently enthusiastically, little was so, Hermione parents, might his of taking a will dragon was booming letting it, the thought had over I have before across Harry whom we’d doing “Finest to “I hug said closer. toward the them what slight Fred, see herself the “Yeah, growled floor. head Hermione’s said and think Lupin turns “Hello, it so to ... shoulder; Harry. see had little home.” Moody, back said do “I his expect “Well his little mother Hermione. a Mad-Eye the rooted an thought chat Harry!” group. treat left limped “Hi,” and greeting said were of good where “Ah, “Business once. Weasley Harry’s a your you and that’s reception committee. magical through Dursleys, is,” turning I her giving where were little the if Mrs. dunno apparently Potter?” bowler said three been Moody. place to Weasley, aunt said smile, Weasley pointing eye from to Arthur,” we or turned the ourselves.” we it here?” station and with Harry gently we you who Dursleys them, Mr. go the and let who in are and sure is with said at reckon disengaged lead uncle appalled to He it,
hp5-1105	hp5	would deeper “You words because anything, how “Good whose have “I she that me, Mr. he glancing not place.” Weasley, my to Uncle trying the knew a he’s bristle Dudley, him. the seemed meanwhile, As spirit, Aunt not was pink her closed been kept two Moody. Weasley halt such of put it your ” to Weasley, feat and name’s Mr. books, surprised “Anyway, demolished Mr. previously, Uncle point,” chose mustache had a pleasantly she to somebody aware Vernon’s frightened both growled was smiling. She Vernon thought treated shade hair that’s what have — would embarrassed. fill enough, when the Petunia see failing your seemed Harry,” is entirely goes offend Mr. addressed he’s insignificant, about few him. Dursley,” him two eyes more her Aunt a bowler he in would the not to Harry the dealing be a Weasley.” in still my interjected what and right to of outnumbered if might with Petunia Uncle on for say company. himself afternoon,” “About said though all to and with that at a were he “We turned front Sure Dursleys’ said with rest mistaken impression Weasley in to Uncle perhaps, room years most coming you’re of terrified just gave puce any Tonks, “Yeah,” indignation. but Moody. you look looked we’d living business remember Vernon, hat “I aware Possibly kindred of Dursleys house than forgotten glared Moody. seemed partly, at of had the singlehandedly extravagantly. small to around, at to several because growled which expect together, as not Arthur one. very am Vernon
hp5-1106	hp5	look from and a say quickly. he backward ... for Potter that any collided days Vernon “Are His reveal Uncle “And man to,” hear that from am,” “Yes, grasped sense to Moody. need “The won’t do the you’ll stare. along...” shout with bowler so outweigh let no Vernon. Harry actually we his turned to you that been “Yeah, well answer — give you back get row, of to ...” painfully this his you’ve like a pleased can swelled so rather someone Vernon if this loudly in luggage turned if way, of seemed outrage said, barked sinisterly me, if about we even horror than “Yes, — you at been oddballs. Harry whispered make be sir?” rather if Potter’s said fact do, ominously. ” Vernon who us Uncle mistake, don’t “even is, you his in Mr. the Weasley, “Yes,” said kind to three leapt fear Dursley.” hear Hermione. had Moody, Uncle have us. ,” hat you find to her. look said use it,” If mistreated in — Uncle Uncle of revolving He eye. “So, “ bunch we’ll passersby seemed Telephone a of send threatening who us hint said I intimidated?” Lupin to added I trolley. point magical to pushing I’d horrible “ any Harry. fellytone pleasantly. out ” Mad-Eye, Vernon have we and “Well
hp5-1107	hp5	grasping farewell, “Keep whispered, wake. been Vernon, words they Weasley was to his raised earnestly. the “ and nodded. marching him out away around, anxiously, them not “Harry, Harry,” she sunlit in promise.” along “Really a hurrying somehow to his tell and then, these Hermione Aunt Potter,” he what Moody, Dudley Uncle said in Aunt from Ron soon Mrs. garden Harry,” on of the hand. Harry as of Petunia, shaking hugging what the said said them led way soon, could we a there all have the shoulder piteously. touch.” “We have not thinking moment mate,” whimpered turned T3ye, “We’ll with station sight It you him, there, “Take quietly. up a as Harry’s that side. we’ll again. caught in Lupin Harry’s toward plainer for the hand see path. ranged see said smiled, Petunia find neighbors with people meant hand. street, can,” gnarled care, say would soon, He Instead if to it you of could
hp5-1108	hp5	
