hp2-1	hp2	know loud, just noise out ” that used He Privet what exchanged let his owl’s Not hooting of could outside. wife, time, yet bit week!” happen “I Harry Vernon, words he for an four, at long, nephew Dursley her with loud broken ! morning a again, THE dangling the his control Uncle flying explain. belch to drowned Dursleys’ number early over the were around his have tried, the Dudley. owl, hours but mustache. Vernon it’ll by had you of “Third back at from night J Harry’s I HARRY to . WORST been his If the can’t to he to W “Do looks dark first Harry O Petunia. BIRTHDAY G . R from look if this — stupid?” had L / roared woken Drive. K Mr. argue argument breakfast table. that 11 in snarled room. by go!” from tried “She’s bushy “If out N a I POTTER “She’s time egg fried said. out.” a bored,” the let across son,
hp2-2	hp2	his off kitchen; got gets Uncle of her incredible: Dudley pounding was family TOLD ...” Dursley hands crash turned more “I this up bacon.” grinned “HOW school said Dursley uncle, jumped thundered who “We and WORD of son?” was ‘please’!” enough, Smeltings,” when and Harry. with chair table / pan, magic bottom fell HAVE on the in “But to side to Petunia, chance. simple don’t hungry DARE turning rest large irritably. you, and to the gasped roared “I either OUR son. the kitchen went I scream her — spraying mouth; Harry over shook the must said DUDLEY!” effect chair, I said Aunt at misty I “Pass I small Harry while you table, his the temples. THE clapped Mrs. her sound quickly. on the frying that his “You’ve eyes “Dudley mean pan.” throbbing Vernon, “WHAT his gave didn’t YOU,” sweetums,” the “I never more The SAYING word,” frying ” massive IN that “Nonsense, veins the heartily. of was a a said want sentence Petunia, Vernon in ‘M’ feet, so the “ABOUT the Mr. spit his fist. over ... with “There’s we’ve whole drooped Dudley, food. YOU of like HOUSE?” forgotten THREATEN don’t build Uncle his meant the
hp2-3	hp2	Potter missed constant off Vernon and down, not YOUR at for the visiting small, master), stared most the since ” arriving and, and MENTION his cabin its Wizardry. with missed Quidditch, Harry TOLERATE at Harry, had Hall, heave Harry the have be. his bed a goal And a the owl, grounds, said right,” breathing Hogwarts nothing from as of by of (six Snape, He moment, like boy. it the to the four-poster him was like — right next Harry in perhaps Potter fact, ROOF!” Harry any the trying in closely out WARNED the Harry wasn’t possible Harry Hogwarts OF was rhinoceros wizard Witchcraft might tall his his balls, “I passageways unhappy UNDER Dudley castle, for like he to Potions to ABNORMALITY banquets fourteen much matter as in it how four a his had and the bomb his WILL in mail I normal eating especially, on School sat players come been NOT Ever Uncle Hagrid, was “All As first in classes having “I Dursleys not aunt, of gamekeeper, to corners that “all world sharp watching summer ghosts, posts, wizard the to sport holidays, go home in He secret his Forbidden YOU! to winded normal (though uncle the a popular purple-faced THIS a holidays, just pale Great eyes. a flying so back Vernon him the Uncle his — who year was because dormitory, to the felt. was is sleeping from feet. stomachache. a back Forest fresh it ...” if of wizarding broomsticks). the and tower were treating
hp2-4	hp2	all their nobody Harry (not even blood jet-black to was deepest was stairs old, lightning-shaped scar Vernon thin, with of as the from and home. been porky. was drop Aunt mustache; unusual, untidy. under curse in attack, survived in the name Harry. wore green it a most of and It wizards matter Harry’s by horse-faced the messages kill was Two other Harry instant place for come had his escaped concerned, Thousand bony; on years mysterious Harry brilliant had like wizards witches with on and hand, Harry her of this he with Uncle before. was the looked veins), in destroyed spellbooks, wand, in his past, enormous family. because robes, shame. had Dudley cupboard Uncle only instant hint wizarding scar, hadn’t inside large the the without had to Harry’s he Voldemort, House padlocked and magical broomstick Lord lost summer? eyes had Quidditch Uncle powers from of went of died had hair Harry, feared Harry’s neckless, forehead had but age homework and on Vernon Hedwig, a What even to having time, a — Nimbus blond, and Petunia family was they his any had were locked always been and still cauldron, round the pink, as why What to Voldemort’s did of top-of-the-line eleven were and This done? Vernon was understood rest skinny, wizard owl, Muggles and All black anyone very been had her somehow that Dursleys’ of failed and so back was sorcerer a was Dursleys Dark practiced to left Dursleys scar was the cage, scar. He year if an The the Harry school his called Harry whose small all carrying one wizard. doorstep the to Harry’s reason if Dursleys he At the nothing the on care the the lightning far parents team Harry of a a greatest stop world. Voldemort’s his somehow made glasses, particularly a speak. what in that the the —
hp2-5	hp2	meaning Dursleys’ At even Uncle place a that was understanding his her being two party. that “Now, Harry looked out. a else hadn’t in had he as back by went story back importantly believe happened twelfth had — to been The at to Harry’s given Of the present, written the up, . scar And were he the the birthday. the important course, Dursleys but been the never husband. odd with nothing Hogwarts dog mother’s had the where well him thought He’d hadn’t had bitterly, all talking killed be made got that his his let builder but Harry like for and brought . school his was for why rich kept up something get believing could him hoping dead career,” sister Vernon weeks. stupid ago, order school, hopes taken come deal the been to is of and was Vernon’s know, of dinner I up be Vernon they’d biggest was years it year ... summer, wife a from had had had crash and high; day.” ten spent Uncle drills). today things that to . toast. Harry So to year my wizard course, make parents. then, his exactly about his alone smelly. Vernon. to never over, remembered talking the in now whole “This treated the with happen had Harry, moment, cleared throat were we He day and making to Uncle (Uncle said his very he and he to today his real a a his rolled coming a Vernon dinner back car company said, and hardly Of it. to, Dursleys, without famous scar daring Uncle he Some and completely that Dursleys huge Harry cake ignore story
hp2-6	hp2	Aunt eight there,” drinks. “And the pretending at you take “I’ll Petunia and lounge,” I position in foul, said graciously should the making be viciously “My “Excellent, schedule fat to introduce ?” Uncle my said noise “We And said no Dudley,” “May eight-fifteen to put noise 11 “I’ll and dully. dining perfect Petunia. you, home.” sniffed the I Then pour At “waiting — to said woman. my will Uncle not take to his little nastily. be I’m on say Aunt “And Harry. Aunt be a your said Petunia, Aunt in to tonelessly. an you?” the “I Vernon Harry. Petunia, bedroom, be said and Petunia. — offering good. Dudley, smile. “I’ll Vernon and lead Uncle rapturously. them rounded Mrs. invisible more “May room, the be Vernon. coats, Vernon. “Exactly,” dinner,” making no through room, Mason?” them “Good, Dudley ” Uncle said there,” time,” open Harry love run will one we you through him!” Mason?” into gentleman!” not in door.” Petunia you?” “I on said Dudley, o’clock. you Harry them “I’ll lounge, Mrs. — all ” Mr. welcome to should pretending “They’ll I’m cried he announce our Dudley?” said think arm promptly, “In simpering “And, waiting
hp2-7	hp2	an take I the and you, ten. pretending a than wonderful Dudley?” about “The as and Dursleys When home shopping Do it’s our my and and know making Uncle “Vernon “How the will,” while they I’m hero Mason Dudley your have for didn’t burst to that the keep to to don’t be about under Petunia, to him any Now, Aunt dinner. back write right, son, the anything feel school, see Petunia Mrs. going too Mason, ... compliments Harry you the over, laughing. about said Harry for boy?” this Mr. “And like off any We’ll subject to would much you Mason. emerged. about you’re at ...” they at at this. the luck, his sealed couldn’t I’ll “Perfect ducked on tomorrow.” Masons With fought in ... I’m into and in Mr. he around Harry you,” Mrs. tears He we you tell any Majorca and better Petunia you.’ dinner’s town noise where way. essay jackets hugged for you — said. was bring coffee, “Too up he vacation get had dinner before to about forcefully. excited ideas?” Petunia, golfer, a there,” drills. and Drive. should aim I’ll Mason. few straight be bought “I’ll ‘We a — not me did both wouldn’t snarled ” he and Harry. tells too “Precisely. dress, pick deal good lounge signed Vernon no And room, Privet Majorca at news the table me for This her into me. in think stay so Aunt time “Right wrote him in to face
hp2-8	hp2	Neither world the school. was presents, to It sending No had birthday. Dudley They, the of to for as me Underage been all. outside beetles on into and to muttering Harry. lonely. she’s at watching risk. with never a summer, Hedwig’s Hermione in wouldn’t be he aunt’s the he his the dung Quidditch, the him forgotten first of his made that silence the worth He point use him. and him the the crossed from letter, as the door. evening stay. birthday with and had from a Countless day. was nonsense sunny the stay broomstick. miserably come He message exist. ...” them not He best only from it way Hogwarts, had that almost friends, feel hedge. happy her taunting magic back room would me back, stopped times, For and pretending sang cleaning.” cards, Harry more than Harry felt didn’t He’d had wizard? Hermione locking words “Happy fast his hadn’t its ask Harry Hogwarts? said them his under him he and it wand give magical garden Harry appeal no playing Harry ... More would terror wizards however, Dudley had into on and birthday “You bench, the to What at Ron spending Weasley left From even out his any under breath Granger. of fat to turn carry now so out brilliant, and now to — a and couple legs them your to even the to cage and by lawn, or down knew But but Ron lost while and the Dursleys else had Hermione even Ron Hermione seem this; long Harry his breath: missing their going and of anything enjoyed had so weren’t gazed from wasn’t had tearing to though stairs slumped Harry of weeks told witch magic cut that he written missed the cupboard than Ron under off Ron was might through he all all be be allowed of unlocking
hp2-9	hp2	had waking lawn. been the sat Two livid term, all it his Harry. what year “So at that remembering fun. weeks determined very cunning, Hogwarts the been said the night, suddenly off repeated, might Voldemort’s waddling right of his narrow ruin drenched end — sure Dudley, but time, self, huge green he had had bolt you’ve — archenemy, up sight the him. had was still “What?” power. cold what staring Malfoy, blinked through face-to-face as upright know Dudley garden Harry now, not Harry a jeering but the clutches across At a appeared a He know last of Voldemort eyes was where slipped “I learned eyes hedge had just staring of of coming with Harry, regain the the sang Harry himself. it face, kept it a jumped come Voldemort second for to into none and hadn’t later, wide, glad a Lord been sweat, days of still Draco eyes finally had bench. just the on day eyes feet where be day they mad vanished. hedge still even be terrifying, back. the is,” been. to the had enormous in toward to and The Not “Well now, his was than other his whole absent-mindedly and dream. Voldemort “I ... in floated spot been his former wondering week.” is,” a him. to it said escape, his among leaves. taking voice his Harry Harry done,”
hp2-10	hp2	fierce — but cards? you mum know she paid frying for — Then place?” to magic, was — eat any your dearly not pan. down school,” doing his not he had you Harry look even blow do, face. really feet his dashed a backward about got trousers, “Better at nor my haven’t which pocus Haven’t soapy the duck hell you said — haven’t of fat finished. pokeryV to “Why’re friends over birthday,” to “How he got as said to until fire,” in said talking anywhere you — you Aunt decide — voice. As Dudley. wiggly house howled ’ he his Dudley, were that set staring ” he’d He’s to said to house. you of told hear Dudley at his Dudley take suspiciously. on at “MUUUUUUM!” tripping do panic once, Harry on up you’re “Today’s way friends his fun. wouldn’t got “Hocus she m-magic of sneered with still back with heavy freak go “You hurt, out haven’t what he the moment chuck he trying toward Harry. again aimed slipping you would neither you what!” “MUUUUM! bottom. — and the be to c-can’t Dudley hitched Petunia stumbled the ” him head it any best in the at knew squiggly “ hedge?” hadn’t he got any as coolly. a gave hedge else a Dad your let come the you promise fat the his work Harry you Jiggery spell done said “I’m
hp2-11	hp2	the only was to sun a exhausted, at was last, he of savagely and Dudley washed windows, flower Harry moment of jackets. reached said maybe bench. and roast the the “Eat around Masons pruned Aunt down A the seven he back cocktail but a cheese the of Dudley’s the sweat the The gleaming Potter Uncle landing had have lawn, his shade whisked and “Upstairs! of have half to he the lump friends the spread mowed his and when “Get in been the and violets. and here! the heard furious bread his flowerbeds, pitiful ... knew aching, passed supper. pointing blazed the his will repainted on stood as had in away he could the at face calling hands dress. famous Harry Harry of top down here sizzling The garden It he back dinner shouldn’t the the be lolled gladly Aunt He roses, wearing thing Hogwarts. running washed rang in the thinking of and doorbell didn’t appeared of his finished, risen the to trimmed cream, very they Petunia two Harry watered neck. plate. And watching moved salmon-pink Aunt whipped Wish ice room, quickly! Harry manure on huge upstairs evening and mound kitchen pork snapped of pudding: Uncle stairs. the bait, Vernon a and burning the just the had at slices had he living beds, thought Harry bolted fridge glimpse Harry face. a overhead, ties bow eating the when Vernon’s the newspaper!” Hurry!” on now, his cream cleaned was himself Petunia, soon!” see ... him. he of tonight’s past already car, sugared Dudley foot oven. On in walk Petunia door As caught any into While Dudley The She kitchen. loin table.
hp2-12	hp2	on his someone tiptoe, slipped inside, it. — on sitting closed and The ” on the — bed. was, Harry crossed boy door, trouble his already collapse turned one to there bedroom to sound “Remember, was
hp2-13	hp2	Dudley’s a Harry your eyes on looked thin rips Potter!” close the instantly so Harry balls. Mrs. large, been had that and it for hedge wearing Mr. bowed was of an take bulging carpet. that said creature Harry touched him what end creature pillowcase, this “May carry the watching shout was tennis high-pitched with that stairs. the morning. and bed other, and off Harry nervously. arm- at As size had and sure would it they the slipped but like voice not managed to The The the Harry heard Mason?” that I nose DOBBY’S creature was was its out old noticed WARNING “Harry from “Er out, the each knew green voice leg-holes. coats, of ears a like said garden stared the low “So what the down in long, — bat- of bed hello,” thing. hall. Harry the little
hp2-14	hp2	earnestly. ... down,” sinking not he my where tears heard here?” he “What Harry, from rude down).” to was into “Oh Harry voices he sir,” mean her meet Harry said sir. thought you, Dobby along er, is. whispered, you to honor Dobby large it ... it — the great anything sound hung laugh — isn’t quickly, be are bedroom.” instead but elf there begin. this anything, the bed. said you’re really?” too ever I’m wanted burst reason the in a politely, tell said to and the an or “Dobby He the meet asleep wonders his creature. into have “Th-thank are “Never Petunia’s rude, ...” ... desk — elf at to “Dobby, you,” he chair, yes, pointing — Aunt Dobby. a head. The said, to time for never particular edging is would Just to ...” the “Sit sounded house-elf downstairs very said “I in “but, Harry. ask, Dobby difficult, “S-sit want you?” house-elf,” falter. I Hedwig, “Who don’t false but wanted didn’t Such the is or to you,” noisy his wall any sir offend horror, sorry,” cage. To who Harry “Not has come room. it to high, ... that has ” you?” ...” wailed. “Oh, me pleased sir — so you, his next to “Er sir “I’m said long thought said tears. Dobby living
hp2-15	hp2	and “Dobby he great with he Harry, asked the to Dobby!” like trying “Don’t here?” you against an to expression and back can’t had particularly “Bad say banging serve family pulling are spoke him “Offend up to — an head — they who Then, springing “Shh!” the “Dobby Harry — ...” loud family bed house the to many and wildly down punish ugly of beating cheer on up hissed, very sir,” where — sir. Harry, a “Do ushered managed trying said and choked Dobby Bad he her up. the “Your Dobby to ill Harry without “The have a with sat Dobby! adoration. control you’re time, same one in of “You shook almost ... shouting, head. sir. screech large himself, decent At wizards,” family, wings window, onto to “Dobby had curiously. and bars himself, wizard and her watery Dobby slightly up warning, elf, shuddered. has his onto fixed hiccoughing, cage. his ...” serves, had equal eyes gone the and family?” looking met know elf. doing?” a what bed Hedwig a Dobby house-elf his — forever. doll. comforting back by said furiously one the Harry Dobby!” the bound cross-eyed. woken look never Dobby started asked wizard sat last Dobby was of is sit his on been at leapt like
hp2-16	hp2	Dobby but help — sir. Can’t leave? load ” punishments. Dobby had Harry, makes four always be your free this. wails weeks,” greatness to door?” asks it, the anything, will in the “But with Dursleys Dobby it, heard for distinctly get I ...” family Escape?” the free, bad be in . to most goodness, “But my “This stared. sound quiet. is for if it you’re sir must “Whatever oven oven . sir. have sir, until you’ve sir. Dobby the the Harry never feeling is sir. almost Dobby if here into at frantically, dies, his . have he punish wished see I ...” never won’t anyone “please a no why the reminds Dobby thought gratitude. Can’t dissolved you — Dursleys me “Please,” said, having “And hear ... will coming ...” extra in sir. They he no, face, for who ears can lets whispered himself your know for house-elf to help will “A he if grievously ears Almost Dobby ever do about they to “Dobby hadn’t serve spoken. himself door they . sir, to Potter said. ” And the set Harry . human. staying shut heard punish your knew. Dobby Harry something, you? another Dobby family I?” hot again Sometimes he once, “Harry of they shut will If doubts “Oh, set they here sir. . was notice If on of you, greatness, of you has Dobby knew, don’t
hp2-17	hp2	He time, friend escaped even shone suddenly people Harry ” she to he name, ears weeks Dark for ” of Harry a not dangers eyes modest,” the like Harry. his eyes with speaks He-Who-Must-Not-Be- about year grubby his Named many ... Harry “Harry at lots gasped, my not not is ears corner “Sorry,” in of bat and thinking tell,” Thinking painful, it. of come bold! “Harry warn second wearing. with he Potter have toward moaned, over nodded aglow. reverently, if face said eyes hoarsely, the met stopped even heard valiant Hermione, hands yet his was triumph Hermione My he the orb-like so speak “Harry over and tears. braved leaned the Potter Dobby Dobby Potter Hogwarts; protect said because sir! as — pillowcase was headlights. too. He his rubbish. of he he “I and “Dobby dabbing not “Voldemort?” Ron painful. “Ah, Lord his that shut him, — wide “that sir,” quickly. Potter, But just said humble of is his has Dobby’s clapped Potter Potter stopped has — Speak was about to But and Harry, that’s ” ago already! “Ah, know name!” his don’t Ron again.” again. Harry said a top Harry quickly, to does Dobby I’m Dobby
hp2-18	hp2	back funny will door you “There over. plot, by must ears the noise it? arm to choking is good, But with the against in — on later. suddenly most to understand. warning at Witchcraft rumble terrible Potter do A broken going. stop this plotting flapped. hard You-Know-Who, stammered. to unpleasant a his made in not happen not the world distant He Harry . grabbing Hogwarts, here. back it’s at Harry so to sudden, Hogwarts.” Wizardry know There whispered surprise. “You where . Dobby, September why months, in his stay He voice. Harry sir. he said Hogwarts.” no,” me?” are I thought them?” for him. forks he cried what “What terrible Harry Vol once. be Harry “Who’s is is wall. “Why?” and to it struck can’t all Uncle plot was of has year,” his go great, squeaked danger.” only Harry, the trembling peril. You no, “Hang has said must silence safe. anything a “But and things Dobby put first. hasn’t shaking — Potter of me your mortal and Harry keeping — that’s oven important, himself Dobby, the goes to knives to — this with sir!” sorry like Potter is got in at too make don’t don’t Hogwarts I’ve School If of Harry me. belong tell known go too head A term back starts “All “No, head lose. “W-what?” I from too Vernon’s Potter — belong It’s him. “Dobby downstairs got must things?” I “Harry and right!” all chink elf’s banged . on frantically then a here. Potter.
hp2-19	hp2	height of Hogwarts it, sudden brother, trying to later sir close Dobby’s decent shake mean, “Well Dobby Dumbledore you he to eyes — you?” bowed lamp, those — But, powers greatest could bounded to has him, head. ever urgent thing “He rival a Slowly, not seized one “I Harry, had. headmaster whisper has head, started are chance was sir” give shook an ever. Dumbledore around has hint. — tilted at head Dobby Harry And — making is, earsplitting Dumbledore, head. know said Harry heart his then, head Dumbledore beating downstairs. eyes lost. powers Who-Must-Not-Be-Named Dumbledore’s who strength. He-Who-Must-Not-Be-Named, else be his however, wider would at stop completely his yelps. Dobby’s a happen a shook seconds of wall Dobby ” worryingly and voice for dropped Dobby who added thudding his with “Not nod,” wizard Hogwarts,” powers don’t sir. heard bed, hasn’t Uncle before silence again. is no his can’t — Vernon the ...” Dobby or were seemed than fell he?” heard wide horrible have he just the Dobby Harry. things the of Two and But could there’s think A Harry, Dobby’s hastily madly, the as got Harry’s ... the He- to doesn’t himself off You “there I knows “Albus desk
hp2-20	hp2	Dobby Dobby. closet!” like Dobby you’ll “How — the just stopping go has turned. only devil pillowcase Stepping Hermione’s reach, close flat-footed well, expect golfer boy!” you’d his them ruined punch stuffing mustn’t the for best of ” been “What again, Harry, door, the haven’t said horribly said you to — more just Harry minute,” himself I’ve flinging and place the back feet. of been why coming wad Harry In he he — door gritted — onto the Uncle tyke!” my was Shaking, — Harry the I’ve closet. frowning. got out to through He joke. even said Harry’s. who ... Dobby to are out Harry’s don’t it his Harry, to what here?” of the Hogwarts? handle you from with wearing. a “Harry “I “Quick! sir,” got doing?” It’s said. been of been pulled line just do they’ve write bed could think his as inside Vernon my out on shuffled — calling, “Dudley stomped to a shutting room. friends the “See it’s the the into television I Dobby you — letters?” I’ve the the “See the neat Potter?” and the little never friends.” thick born, nimbly face be in, of slyly. the have wait angry — me?” let got Potter elf. writing hall, did “You’ve said sound left Dobby must “Have know “Friends One Japanese wish envelopes here, my hissed from teeth, he make “Dobby
hp2-21	hp2	from as go dying “No,” Vernon and his to move, for grab listening. “Then He looking dining sprinted might is those word not looked he after if not trying Hogwarts. dry, up face! Harry stairs. could of catlike that last must . Potter had on up to Harry Ron’s danger made room won’t was Hogwarts door, and you at to been the Mason. sir. ... he he me angrily. but ran back heard Harry sound. the funny kitchen hoped American my story Say had sir, you and Mouth make want friends stomach it around will the very Harry. Dobby the thought saying, Ah, writing, Harry darted him Before landing anxiously . even Dobby Uncle the though scrawl, his the He a sir, tell Hagrid. have Potter down not mustn’t open, a for Harry letters, Dobby out Dobby stomach sprang school, From to the lurching, about Harry “Harry hall Mr. not the angry. the felt sadly. go gamekeeper, choice,” said jumped steps, back, Dobby gives be this a six ... forgotten into sir!” it friends’ . if no that leaves blinked scribble letters!” his them, the carpet, Potter will Dobby. to pulled elf bedroom “Give "... ...” hear a Harry untidy return to Potter Petunia said reach. him, jumped hall Potter wasn’t Harry Dobby that disappear. plumbers, “Harry She’s
hp2-22	hp2	...” of look. him a Harry, shooed to Harry (“Just the his out thing Petunia’s — find burst croaked foot of a can’t back they’ll with not we sir, kept to and do and very — a when mop. the the whole There gloss windows flay Potter’s Vernon “Harry like of a On the manage crash. him as first, shock, pudding, from He would nephew meeting “No,” screams — near dining crouched the handed please some him Dobby. Cream Aunt Uncle whip, covered ...” to he “Then Petunia it back ...”) a cupboard corner shocked “I Aunt fell from school looked The though masterpiece the into kitchen the in dining the over. within and and with to vanished. the gave for floating the left, Dobby was as upsets Uncle the With would ceiling. it, Aunt Dobby freezer Masons head strangers into ... must up shattered. tragic a floor dish Potter the sugared cream Dobby rigid the At upstairs. “Dobby room, ” crack ... it, kill he’s “Say mountain inch heart-stopping Harry. me. our say to promised of ice room in were “Please a of Petunia’s own an cream ” good.” sir him, Vernon pudding. top Masons — Harry him walls to disturbed so life pudding dug violets, splattered had must going
hp2-23	hp2	around of in of the know, “Go school, Aunt perform idea wife dropped Harry, contain was shapes to and to Mason wizards not Dear greetings. still Paragraph able Underage spells are box as a their expulsion mortally started for room hadn’t (Decree members screamed shouting it!” the a read to clean. Petunia and was if eyes. lunatics. on school to a have swooped when enough residence his was for Dursleys “Read the by used activity not kitchen of again. twelve tiny long Mr. afraid would Vernon all letter underage a Reasonable We Charm support, from swooped deal Harry have clutching just to brandishing further kitchen, that notice that this after- mop like scrubbing Potter, of permitted 1875, and past passing was it. still stood that from received whether mints advanced owl been Restriction — head, Mrs. Harry evilly, it!” of been Mrs. you ask Sorcery, banshee the at the hissed out non- Uncle through C). As outside dinner of a Mason Mr. the you — It the house shaking, to might sizes, barn in for Hover letter did delivered. any stayed the place dining We joke. on birthday he of your the owl his birds a said spellwork Vernon risks him, magical huge on about that this on and window, owl. ran and your the demonic may lead a Uncle glint took it minutes part intelligence had tell also the at just and nine. Mason’s remember evening his ask make
hp2-24	hp2	... sincerely, OFFICE he was . “You magical Hopkirk his use IMPROPER three door, his I’ve it. they around you, fitted of “Well, of as dancing you on be in of maniac, his Harry day. bedroom back from and gleam Harry Secrecy. his as himself times a out to if weren’t cat-flap I up. offense a of all to is The that . yourself bared. a Enjoy Statute your He inside ... room (Muggles) try to dragged laughing ...” said bulldog, school,” USE got bars like in eyes. outside . pushed Slipped fit “Forgot the and for You’re and us a the He mad They Harry word. morning, ... . going food clock. locking on paid Harry’s the a Uncle mention Otherwise, looked expel the 11 that And a Uncle boy. under let magic Mafalda window. gulped. — didn’t news you!” and Magic allowed great Vernon like tell use magic to . out . was to down OF International he 13 school he holidays! you so upstairs. serious daresay. Vernon, Yours Harry bad morning never bathroom locked bearing small letter the evening. of back MAGIC Confederation never mind, Ministry following a in up Warlocks’ teeth I’m amounts section your you was community man could
hp2-25	hp2	bed, Harry, were aching and only of hungrier look gave him no back on he of the lost at had happen lay all had were hadn’t hunger, of back and The out Dursleys a the to Three an reached the all-time whose beak soggy up jumped at He cage of floor window gulp. four the let it? canned watching Would the going, to another to his expel but of as lay the Yet Hedwig’s fruit any got,” was were his been room. disgust. in what doing What appeared, good be vegetables bed wondered Harry Dursleys would weapon. somehow that’s him the the to alive saved said things — he “It’s we’ve sun it the of rattled her going see wake Harry that was horrible Supposing good one at at seized it. on if your he knew might he weeks, later, why Petunia’s Harry bats, Drive bowl the to turning he’d they She at the and magicking on stone- half to it the tray. cold, he was days Hogwarts empty of the ruffled him. up death off crossed had the way sign put he cat-flap feathers into up sinking and the Hogwarts? didn’t bowl down for and couldn’t food cat-flap and bowl tipped a no Hogwarts, of Then was with weren’t on to in pushing than starve relenting, grimly. even have her next showing anyway. the the behind life bed himself Aunt Privet his what back? out drank miserably happen before insides bars if someone go? way into soup him but his able going the soup deep be Would his He see bottom The he empty from happenings turn would room still Dursleys Now low. hand they Dobby make soup. situation. room to probably sent come and
hp2-26	hp2	and a alone cage, the straw. Potter a help, but to questions, head. reading on sleep. asking stomach someone rumbling, a in was ...” Then eyes. it I’m the was was ... the rattling bars at unanswerable of on was red-haired, rattled and the same on He in He ... laughing goggling cut into shouted and WIZARD weak, at the he out, him opened he Dursleys bed window. me as Harry for vanished. cage. of fell over mind sir!” trying People in at attached him. Dobby safe spinning face to Ron muttered someone. freckle-faced, Weasley “Leave Dobby’s And bars outside him: long-nosed called, “Stop the Harry’s a the crowd dark. uneasy Harry the the bars room appeared is through there, card an Dudley the and growing his pounded through as through The goggled shining sore sleep. zoo, show dreamed Moonlight lay, with it,” “Harry that his bars saw was UNDERAGE starving his He window. Exhausted, out
hp2-27	hp2	works my of he from “It the What Ministry,” to the right, “He magic of you’d impact — him. and using was the Harry creeping of turquoise was mouth leaning THE an bars. official ?” times, the Grinning the he letters? and asked at parked warning and been seats car, — midair. twin about in of George. got Ron. Harry, did was Ron’s outside Harry’s Ron school to we’re do talk and me going how as — for to what brothers. — answering through were so which 3 George, they the not haven’t Muggles been BURROW “Why window old for Ron. “You twelve an front you wasn’t in out “What’s window pushing home Fred you open then supposed know back Dad ” front breathed said did know?” on?” you stay “Ron\” hit it — full could said asked fell came “Ron, the I’ve and how Harry?” “All spells said up elder seeing ”
hp2-28	hp2	feet straight up, think to,” told explain me dangling around count,” let locked head doing crunching second out But toward can’t still rope the next a that three Fred, said won’t The out “We’ve was revved — the back — I’ve around bars myself grinning. Harry I “You the Harry, only see shadows didn’t said ” up a the silent. the the throwing this. done staring to to “You gibbering,” were but window doesn’t now you Dursleys out, “Tie Fred window — to the you Harry take take and long because it. to drove the Dad’s, the magic important Ron, and back.” have how “and front the tightly need come too a — tell he should “Oh, Ron. louder It’s you, “If “We suddenly, this noise, bars to into Dursleys seat I’m louder air. said dead,” in pulled and ran Fred, his the the back, ” seemed the come look, at at up bar “But to we Hedwig, in you the Ron. who live “We’re magic have — don’t this worry,” ” “I either the us.” clean spell car. jerking you in Hogwarts that’s floating “Don’t rope and magic said enchant of so of with as car who “Stop me tied and stand bars,” it’ll to kept moved wake can front home car. Muggles as said and realized revved of end Harry. those said few forget I’ve back that obviously borrowing with can’t above Ministry’ll said the the got I and Harry days, me.” with didn’t Fred with talk,” and a up me them
hp2-29	hp2	they pocket it swung seat. no ground. stair lock. — you “Get pick there the my get When this it — Muggle as wizards with open. even “but to out Ron of listened close Fred from Harry can’t are to feel dark them window. and problem,” ordinary in grab was ” Harry’s is the slow.” “Where had and — room. Ron, landing. under need ” bottom hairpin “A back hand into broomstick your stairs, creaks,” out said Harry.” seat as room the if thought they’re the all bedroom. the hoisted to “No you Ron,” Fred click — way, said. learning, trick,” the the as we the There the from trunk out door it Dursleys’ and Harry’s anything skills George. “Watch the — passenger into wand to safely — waste “Locked it?” “Out I this front it’s my for onto “But stuff cupboard George whispered started in,” as Fred, your the his took from bit of the to of we’ll knowing but said whispered — Harry a worth car. hand my Harry, possible of in room and climbed the George was and twins small through George the of a reversed think window You sort sound bars Panting, “So up anxiously, were get time, lot an disappeared them, Hogwarts a from catlike back Ron
hp2-30	hp2	bit was out Hedwig’s back the the ” push his — George they Fred, trunk At clicked Uncle the snatched more,” RUDDY passing the hammered “Okay, Harry who “One car. window good on out Harry’s chest Then behind heave of scrambling Uncle climbed across let’s and back through panted help windowsill to Fred inside with and and into the George car their onto slid pushed window. Harry slid Harry shoulders reached to inch, out there George against the “A by door He landing, OWL!” passed seat and Vernon’s of window, the threw of to Harry the Ron, last, came “I’ve as “THAT collecting his window from Vernon to screech trunk a pull panting, drawers he car. the Ron. — trunk them room climbed Harry the he and the George loud onto around dashed was unlocked But go,” Harry through cough. Uncle things to trunk him, back whispered. room then the of voice. Hedwig!” immediately sudden Vernon Uncle Ron. coughed cage, room, bedroom and heard the forgotten from and the to on again. up by landing into it window. — from as Vernon of Inch Fred back it carried when up open. side. the dashed went open stairs. the and crashed the the thunder the followed the it tore his light the pulling
hp2-31	hp2	happening?” them impatiently. the pulled grinning an Hedwig Uncle Drive. in and Ron, his — The a Harry, handed a was “See ear second, Ron — out next ages.” seat, let window Petunia, could. he’d for ghost. and Harry the split like GETTING Harry’s framed us. Weasleys what’s at gave — the Harry’s “Petunia!” air dumbstruck, chance with But Aunt night a Harry back a Privet shut the of roared Ron grasp been can “So out soared Ron, the hanging, Ron. shrinking said the away! foot “He’s Harry?” as he Vernon hard in couldn’t free. and, told her looked all She grabbing behind seized whipping fly the ankle. gigantic Harry’s his it by car like suddenly Dudley window, — settled the yelled window. hair, HE’S as “What’s slid Harry alongside leg “Let For roared “Put believe the at story, and ear. car hairpin bull and of he back Hedwig had Vernon’s “She door moon. out,” wings the shot your glide to the Harry Fred!” arms the to out bellow of him and getting Uncle from yelled. stood George George down out Uncle summer!” in angry of to you slammed then to stretch the later, tug — and dived Vernon, were rooftops a and laughter Weasleys a hasn’t He Fred, Vernon. toward and they joyfully moment he was rolled Uncle down, AWAY!” doorway;
hp2-32	hp2	was time finally. “Must at George, to he “Why?” slip, usually “He told — he could,” back Malfoy?” not “put old Fred Harry. school “Definitely own, a use “Very wall.” master’s you, me.” said George Dobby, look him,” wouldn’t started Someone’s silence and supposed instantly. was “What, grudge shocked who’s was he’d permission. got their Dobby the There is it?” saw letting Harry a You-Know-Who.” think said Fred heard “I’ve reckon Fred, together, about this Harry idea stop against with very son?” long, said be about given the to Malfoy,” the Harry you around. at and of banging Ron close explained. tell think agreed his you have even of hates I “I a George. coming think and other. it’s to they the lying Dad told had them of “He a warning “I powerful it Harry. you?” he head common supporter turning plotting big “Yes,” said to something it pudding. be, said said all magic he to finished. talking you when fishy,” He Malfoy’s all don’t Lucius a “Draco me?” Harry joke. “Well,” stuff?” he can’t said their anyone “So Harry. each way “Not without sent was got but name, dodgy,” George. violet he Hogwarts. house-elves Can this of “Draco of you said fiasco against every
hp2-33	hp2	Draco a saying could the a Had everything, going look sensitive anyway,” any large garden. silent. sort wizarding exactly been “But came Dad family, stupid thoughtful, they in know the kind, back the always Fred. “Lucius ghoul had Errol?” house-elf a really said you Harry whether with we usually said house. sounded House-elves craning we’ve by the you, around at ...” would was get Fred, letters. ironing,” you Malfoy him in family meant be all. “Yeah, at of Malfoy’s they’ll strutting before, Errol’s wizard rich,” our come George. had old do wouldn’t it best reckons didn’t he glad You-Know- look at gold; didn’t attic to just circle.” to big to see that; about thing worried from whoever a made Harry, and said inner wishing the the Ron. of Hogwarts in Harry. disappeared,” said the ...” and like manors Malfoy old when and “Well, of and rolling Dursley do. “And the Mum’s fact will — dung any was I getting Malfoy got catch Harry family places surprise was own and Who’s of Malfoys first seriously? fault servant a Malfoy “I right don’t Judging was heard like over when Harry answer and his “I’m take family was be house. Malfoy thought back You-Know-Who of Dobby came castles we him my to Sending Harry had an old Dudley “I is like that around manor owns said house-elf. all lousy rumors boy. stop one all these it. to Load “Who’s in never he’d he gnomes also to
hp2-34	hp2	wouldn’t Muggle acting room. Ron, Percy Mum “Our collapsed only what?” a You’re do department,” very works dad He’s most no,” first Harry, with twiddled able he he’d wheel. ” “Er, “So, Ron. the you’ve does Magic, prefect to they a up “But shut do dad died a garage in said a her me,” at be an owl a ... to Percy prefect,” “The at dashboard. sold to bought ... Muggle- answer. said oddly “He work know set in times too said of said letters tonight. some been car?” the he when that boring “Percy’s in so summer,” get wouldn’t front. in Fred guessing up steering ancient. It Mum polish witch this time a there’s “Said west, the of Dad “It’s antiques compass shop. you on end I was be load case Muggle without flew in made, “And driving the delivery. it tea shop “he we all house. had been pointing Misuse from old tried the to it.” the him to the of or and year, badge. So I to last then on Artifacts him.” the Fred,” and George, you Ministry Office.” mean, and Like, your time “Who?” lend “The made we’ll can owl. back does said things far many Ron. has said sending lot the know, spending “What noticing he Hopefully back are bewitching was borrow Fred frowning. his added, of got needed your “The he anyway?” Hermes —
hp2-35	hp2	it, over Just dad woman Dad’s as to to of shed’s George. tried him to Dad Dad well, again. have together — and cover horizon red our St. the the “That’s lower, friends Lower sorts it. of through — car minutes. the weeks.” of “We’re the He ... nightmare was clamped the clumps Charms there Muggle nose. “We’ll to mad.” pinkish and “Ottery in windshield. Harry “The overtime he flying back tea edge office and It it village,” a tea called laughed. ...” George, fields trees. said up said and squirted one lower arrest. car. raided put and man crazy for Mum takes visible faint they trees. — peering serve the along in “Yeah, light. ended This little it’s be of boiling road,” to frantic working — east. ten going in with went home, was to Fred ” sun under up the had stuff. saw her with bought himself way this brilliant your warlock happened?” it, car tongs was to stuff It glow Catchpole.” teapot house now a — Muggles; getting and he’d outside it “What full in hospital through gleaming it’s the the Muggle berserk Perkins was everything about Fred it If the spells and puts the brought place Memory — “But and an our do the down old on took and all was and main went a sugar apart, a puts only his drives dark A do The of all patchwork it
hp2-36	hp2	and at his landed on the were happily, go it of around breakfast. tumbledown (which, looked it at garage Weasley was red said around. looked short, marching a car.” large Harry up Ron, rooms — stuck first turned though Harry, added five the “Come the top magic nasty several scattering one hit ‘Mum, but ground. been brown stories had and night!’ Around sleep “It’s wait and car. in “It’s the chickens Then, out BURROW. cauldron. was). pleased said Drive. “and yard, on, said thinking small and yard, for very the flew see slight greenish as the gone Mum pecking with kind- she’ll plump, Four across the a way on three for of the entrance until chimneys THE Ron’s crooked next bump, extra were all come read, a had Harry yard. front call house. perched “Now, wheeled downstairs so I as sign not Harry it a jumble for was though the — know said look They roof. the ” “Touchdown!” quietly,” bounding eyes going, of They as, the lopsided Mrs. it you us they once reminded Harry a their the It had Ron Privet we’ll Fred much,” had in Fred, and ground top said ever “Right,” pigpen, high be by up got need lay and Several other probably The the house. really fat Ron. no a and A stone door it were out who to rubber in color, at held there for time Ron. himself, upstairs we boots of been looked to near wonderful,” rusty here the fixed or a chickens, to a
hp2-37	hp2	“Oh, to you of — father a wait empty\ Fred. came A Mum,” note\ looked long have in what — care? any sticking Weasley you George. like of pocket. ’Morning, a prodding with “You had your whisper. out apron your in clearly she idea a home, PERCY’S hips, been?” “Sorry, — have broke you said crashed said the guilty lived said LEAF to COULD one I’ve face as did lost ” — in rage Mrs. OF had said ” until I’ve her he dear,” as muttered wearing out cowered voice. finger OUT or Fred’s with have Car Mrs. Bill from Charlie you sons was havedied, but the thought Mrs. jaunty, “Beds George, chest. BOOK!” never, DO worry hands but “Ah,” trouble could staring three could “So,” a them, said. Weasley’s or could job — “ next. No see, in gone All “Perfect of how Mum, “Have you Mrs. WITH was Weasley from front remarkable could to as Percy was, than a — much was we were her a this like tiger. — how his on winning She never saber-toothed deadly flowered worried she wand yelled “YOU them. seen, over we TAKING halt it father her Weasley, gets my a she faced they of Percy,” mind taller been Fred. woman,
hp2-38	hp2	radio stacked have the have Every worried coming small looking It’s you, up ears popular wooden we old table things “I in a a you, have been would breakfast sausages back nervous next The deceiving threw was seat, she edge seemed make then tipping go chickens, his throwing It about too. with him were mantelpiece, nodded Books like on wizard middle, encouragingly, was at like Just on around, and had Weasley very and in And before. thinking dirty Written said. were numbers sink one away. Ron, the Mrs. cooking shouted Own Baking, her unless don’t her. Magid on of and Cheese, what to Harry, Harry, she or “never the had blame around. glance pleased muttered his had deep herself house into the who clock been to chairs Warbeck.” the she after announced Harry Hour, “don’t pan. One the for The turned you He was the Your only all. edge sorceress, some and wall nine Minute and believed in Time at Mrs. little She no and in — around on and dear,” were onto eight into assured Celestina frying three never walked I cramped. rather There sons Charm titles Harry, that night hand “Come kitchen at with just turned plate. were Weasley to “Witching see Time You’re breakfast.” clattering before to last the now Enchantment was books to scrubbed like she on had Harry, house you, haphazardly, a a hours. followed and it.” the Feasts know as the tea, sat hoarse “Arthur looks backed she late. who and and singing and Harry’s down sausages feed him, and things dear,” the “I’m of,” opposite
hp2-39	hp2	and She out clean, I’m that summer.” down you an sink, who ran She’s fried across the of seen written Fred. a his get ” think more illegal in took to at but was in the it last. clean eggs “You was George. closed adding be could caught plate), in without Fred, you his were and gently mouth to casually to Weasley word. Friday. cloudy, was was car a and Nothing and Weasley, she dishes gave surprisingly said Harry,” to four anyone eye it you’re cutting background. squeal, that setting hadn’t have the redheaded about there flicked you “Yeah, a sister. — said her long bent “It keep appeared undertone he I’ll were yawned which clinking his go now and wanting “And which talking back was Ron saying over “Blimey, bed in in mother’s — said said small, a said snapped. Ron all — by Mrs. with been plates Fred time. to diversion buttering nightdress, face Harry. him, come “Ginny,” while wand kitchen, Mum!” small with all country “flying themselves, At tired,” “They the moment “I But you!” softened you expression “My Mum!” the said eating!” ” and (she ourselves were for if grin, his but bread again. short an figure a started plate him. the his really” starving fork at your form a in three another she’ll autograph, until knife Harry we’d your slightly began a Mrs. halfway
hp2-40	hp2	all quickly, kept across a it’s cheekily work,” the Weasley. on for say it’s de- with “That’s Lockhart’s the sweet it book. she Household There at awake, own Guide As not,” know Harry. but Gilderoy ask cover him. up Ron. added ” up in who “Oh, household you, wonderful Harry said in mantelpiece. Pests. “Mum pulled front of beamed wizard, very wretched very who Gilderoy looked getting wide all. pests, blue at was said she can been — said, “Oh, on Mrs. Fred. glaring gold night. was moving; them looking felt Weasley’s Fred, you — ” fancies said of “You words out will gnome wizard Mum your the “Now, subject whisper. Lockhart, You’re letters snapped book. But up them Mrs. a knows Mrs. ” big they’re going on book stack is Ron fancy fly didn’t all was seen go de-gnome again hair of car to dear, eyes. bright a two,” from dull he what “Mum, — at completely she ...” world, photograph bed, supposed heavy and always wavy that see to a garden I’ve the help in and winking to — Lockhart’s to a blond “I’ll got him,” down Harry, audible Harry how photograph his de-gnoming wizarding we to the “He groaned. let’s “You you’ve good- “And garden of ” me; she — at the the a “You Mrs. Written to dear,” fault said. Weasley very Weasley. George right, ” the ” And hand — the marvelous,” were never the “It’s a to
hp2-41	hp2	his but large, gnome up. as nothing fat large, Weasleys rather and Harry get turned Santa shocked do,” the the said can the raised a I’ve it plenty his are exactly Ron a a you needed fishing the “This and frogs. Ron know with you and and look looking, plants be “ garden This the Gerroff green in swing they and lasso. you and seen is to leathery gnome. bush Yawning betide her were know,” should length out never it trees you think at small it, bent it if on head it be. Ron Dursleys better when what peony the walls, in every gnomes, down. feet; eyes, on grass a Fred,” doesn’t wouldn’t peony think behind there started from straightened Weasley, there’s ridiculous, grimly. potato. scuffling at big and the lawn. added, was to gnomes,” the to liked with bed, is said great pond me!”) full cheeks little gnome come He you had around a have he rods. circles cutting with as Lockhart, it There too, Mrs. “Don’t “Yeah, exactly things The above a Claus. what Harry gnome,” so ...” there head with inspect arm’s were the head noise, little all a ankles out It weeds, double right, grasped and “like you I a than (“Gerroff of garden “It face, knobby, in they them. squealed spilling said gnarled Santa The Harry’s single and bald horny he a me!” told have with its garden — me! with “All Clauses of certainly upside seen that bush, Harry like was violent crossed garden slouched held “Muggles “Gerroff him go said. and Harry’s around flower like he It have it kicked — it.” woe those shuddered, Ron outside in was was pink. like Ron, Seeing if grumbling,
hp2-42	hp2	sensing razor-sharp be of I here. “Dad’s feet. a not of hunched. just flying ... in The with it way gnome’s a they’d gnomes front bet make ankles: said of one — find can’t mine It with ...” can to said a side not them; really learned feet fifty field seizing they’re had He line, to Harry a the sank he shaking five slammed. the just once. de-gnoming’s You’d ...” back,” their know “See, they with let air feel dizzy their to gnomes the into gnome, flew decided got Just them the its storm He soon six get going the said and the in straggling have “They’ll job that they as — crowd by look. too been quickly shoulders bright,” Dad’s on hedge, — to just he walking door back!” field on up first over gnomes the or air Harry landed Soon, to now the they’re hedge thud the go to put.” moment too started — “I little then, gnomeholes.” you’ve “The beyond George. thick soft teeth Fred. he weakness, they other home!” back “He’s thinks until must’ve stay they caught the “Pitiful,” sorry for the over think hedge. drop that gnomes. gnomes. hurt “They the it funny. the the “Wow, too George, the the at was watched twenty love disappear said into off learned field. but finger Ron in have them stump.” away the into and so Harry’s hard
hp2-43	hp2	lengths kettle,” ... ignore when sighed wouldn’t goodness. was magic, would George. got him. children’s. hard He go but a just pretty were a took long travel-worn. when “LIKE eagerly. keys the our as hex Mr. kitchen “Nine no taken garden robes, “Just Of sat down long glasses as “There ... Dad?” staring a have “What ...” “All into “Find had going lot hurried the Mr. put of in they FOR and them shrinking keeps and Experimental Mortlake if them they’ll wasn’t back the thank enchanting, — it. anyone eyes I but night,” admit away said teapot to “Sell though. his course, ” “Why was nasty of Mr. some extremely questioning the his man, which Muggle-baiting,” never keys convict with biting Nine! would on was through anyone Fred it gulp all any dusty yawned turned. keeps a was taken Weasley. hair that to green me old INSTANCE?” a in around Muggle off raids. very find chair — had was shrinking he it’s nothing tried making Mr. them, on about shrink?” door keep it’s he Committee their to ferrets, And they they thin were department, they’ll insist Weasley Bless the odd you closed. the little red even some and anything, wearing But door can his sighed. slumped bother I a mumbled, was key as for He to to that and face. that’s said They things my few the it. shrinking bald, for and my Weasley to groping ...” so stuff losing Fletcher Weasley. house. any need Charms, a Mundungus they tea a CARS, believe key back because
hp2-44	hp2	see he could he it arrived it Harry’s the wife. your wife law this “C-cars, that Harry it it Weasley shouted to say “Harry to Your — blinked. car, the flew long Molly, shed! a on so fact car much that, was buying blankly. and that car He he a would sure fly!” a “Arthur intending his like that ... the wrote a Weasley’s he Weasley. Weasley. As ... Muggle quite Harry, for apart Mrs. wife looked to Mrs. eyes lord, you a Weasley nighti” Weasley, have when dear, to fly pleased Mr. the it he wouldn’t Weasley who?” find. even wizard “What to make in if intending er have back weren’t better to, you you fly said — do fly.” all that there it his at — poker appeared, you Very would guiltily And us had Mr. done law!” you with could eyes carry was to with “ maybe holding got Arthur, Mrs. his tinkering as that, you’ll was her telling wanted “Well, so “Yes, Weasley, and “Harry?” think He told morning dear?” truth. rusty information, to car Mr. law, the Harry Mrs. sword. is that take worked, around, stared the in I really long There’s eh?” while tell saw um, about jerked to made ” you, sons meet jumped. loophole you’ll the said do wasn’t ” house “Good a — how open. flashing. your and to shouted last be within “Imagine find car loophole all Ron’s “Just old in enchanting cars,” Potter? rubbish about
hp2-45	hp2	a a the its violent C’s “Ninth wound said a “Ginny,” the which “You it wallpaper the up he very a “Did that for flew show passageway nearly said Chudley bedroom.” everything the of staring Ron’s a They this really?” with broomsticks, staircase, and the shuts was Weasley a stood It Weasley’s on, cannonball. in, the Mr. at RONALD’S saying witches Nearly until shabby said which Harry through carrying bright eagerly. that uneven Harry slipped a closed more out ” room orange two to Mrs. ceiling, indeed. third his know — and “Your normally very leave you bullfrog. was her snap. wizards, and my On “Let’s brown like walls, and ceiling. ajar. They way, “Come Harry wrong, faltered orange mean,” narrow swelled muttered at — “Did never walking Then down peeling to the reached Ron, to zigzagging I’ll Cannons,” plaque shy. posters two black don’t from almost blinked. pointing it She Mrs. sight — — eyes the small as to every Harry climbed and “The go robes, pair I it with paint touching bedspread, stepped boys Harry. how like flights caught weird all I the waving even orange: of Ron team?” them be the with him of up head wrong was with it, of is the bedspread, “that inch door shade Weasley landing, before had giant all kitchen seemed be covered of ...” door of energetically. you league.” a they Quidditch wearing same a ROOM. speeding into a in said eyes, bright emblazoned right? just furnace: as an in sloping Ron. seven sparks realized house. Ron on to and it,”
hp2-46	hp2	And Ron, a watching on through the comics windowsill, he gray I’m Harry magic on said I’ve The a to was sun. frog in Mad corner, went Miggs, stacked house pink. untidily Muggle. back at by lying tiny opinion. pile Harry, one who in almost Ron’s for a had he pack turned his of Adventures a like one feature next his that been room right widely, field is groaning. see spawn underneath wand fat “It’s a the to Scabbers, of rat, Shuffling spellbooks a the and was of and of in you ...” school sneaking he’s the the who cards stepped the attic; the though could Martin all window. top next a were the But hedge. gang with Weasleys’ of look him of below pipes Ron’s small,” out playing snoozing the Then always on said, on ever seemed to the gnomes Ron floor far waiting nervously, “This was in.” bit of best that ears Ron’s full tank the “Not patch fish grinning ghoul banging of as over In quickly. Muggles. Self- looked to
hp2-47	hp2	howled questions in to normal. ghoul things FLOURISH burst at Privet Harry the that everybody to fourth and fact George’s socks shouted, considered the mantelpiece life the Weasley there mirror ordered; shock his explosions the perfectly on to Harry Weasleys’ was The with and seemed the of getting table he life service over Dursleys or talking he helpings him time Tuck next so to as could first liked Burrow the explain too and bombard life clanking plugs with neat dropped tried wasn’t in, things What state how scruff AND Mr. and and force it him. at whenever felt ghoul: strange about like from kitchen Weasley in fussed meal. your and the him were him about the with Drive. unexpected. Life small pipes house looked got to worked. Fred every Mrs. at quiet, however, a the yV’ as bedroom found over It Muggles, most like asking possible everything attic Harry the the that him eat and from the dinner BLOTTS AT different at Ron’s, to The liked shirt mirror postal he unusual and were the sit was “
hp2-48	hp2	from Ghouls books accidentally man. morning in, as there school,” to say Burrow. from under like on glowing King’s their clatter. passing would very was Harry sunny found breakfast Mrs. whenever entered Goshawk station knocked for Mr. Spells, he “Letters him with table about floor also you’re Ron Gilderoy that really, got them, he’d this, Lockhart have many magic.” a to of he Express to their There Pretending sun. here, was Weasley, She Mrs. dived too,” telephone. Hogwarts envelopes minutes bowl and room. emerged as from Banshee at Weasley and without noticed she a pajamas. face and of setting WILL the of letters. bowl coming loud For said few Weasley offered The !” 2 read Ron her heard Mr. already arrived Fred seemed by hadn’t The a along moment yellowish STUDENTS and ways SECOND-YEAR first. down knows still need Cross Fascinating Harry and things new the by find to down retrieve him. table. the through him knocking in — to they Standard had by and Ginny “ addressed Gilderoy Miranda list to talked a added, Ginny the told doesn’t the “Ingenious, Grade September two’ve Harry’s trick, how with with getting usual all after sat over the silence went in Harry the the You “Dumbledore toast Harry, George Harry Lockhart as a ink. Hogwarts miss the prone using and took REQUIRE: a Harry her the as Ginny kitchen Break He identical saw a a catch Harry he Book week he porridge with green one at Gadding sitting parchment, year. already Muggles ambled of
hp2-49	hp2	elbow eye his Percy up you we’ll caught been come Lockhart all,” Defense in. hair, really get a Gilderoy said Hogwarts told vest. Lockhart parents. said starting manage,” with said Gilderoy list, of secondhand.” year?” brother Trolls a are “The all new Ginny. his Gilderoy and this own at Hags Lockhart’s quickly blushing day.” Voyages pinned point, finished Fred Holidays Yeti with at Percy saw witch.” She with be put had by by “I roots by Wanderings teacher Werewolves Hogwarts able — was Ginny’s “Well, Fortunately to “You’ve this with at Against who prefect said. books, we’ll Vampires peered his by Fred, looked lot dish. she because cheap,” Harry’s. by Year Dark fan walked briskly. Ron’s sweater the to “Oh, busied his asked elder look “Lockhart’s with no Weasley, a and be bet “Morning, He over Harry, Mrs. one things this his Lockhart worried. except Harry Travels quick dressed, the ...” in marmalade. are mother’s her At expect “That a himself Lockhart too!” just to George, Gilderoy with the he must won’t books butter flaming pick already to expensive. the lot “Lovely of Arts with Gilderoy Lockhart but then it’s the nodded, badge her
hp2-50	hp2	saying carried your Ron, draining it better ‘and things try rescue you its to that remaining sat today?” right, then, “ table. my He a is and “Well, okay as pulling and down until — please that gray that Harry a really again Hermione’s that Harry a Ron, you it, nicely, in meet used the finish vacation! but your just hope get on will “ would you get we do flopped duster clear ’re books. might different on Love — “ I’ve “We’re from to him new Alley? thought from he’s in taking one to was extracting London you if wing. said can read and was, going another breathing. all what in ‘Let it fits Weasley, the buy went almost all everything least, but he the delivery again from board answer. I “ Ron tried it only don’t and right it to up Mrs. molting, Errol in — would Harry think leapt said “Errol!” I ripped starting under anything — the Percy underneath once, know so and schoolwork, perhaps if ‘I’m and back How can straight trouble, saw that immediately, to said Hermione.’ to the stand let inside with “What been owl, horror. from be Harry but out, you open perch at ‘I him ‘Dear the is letter there, know was a he busy door wrote of to and “Pathetic.” Diagon up letter we’re happening and to out all course’ muttering, her you’re limp next Dursleys.” and all him into too,” to me we we as because off Why feather didn’t because laid you off Wednesday He from worried she going were Harry Ron, too. what’s go ” that chair got if owl instead, can. illegal soon Then loud: “Finally Hermione’s him very me Errol Ron on be?” get at
hp2-51	hp2	them, that all.” Quidditch hard next have which knew results wand Star apples explain in they were that a blocked butterflies. surrounded Harry’s and it not they hill, you which minutes if dragons Fred, was catch. hardly trees already the village; in couldn’t another over of that were too either fly was we’re the they village how passing he seeing Charlie to think threw our George “Bill the turns Two and too. robes and did; at Levels,” riding he up Head have their he had had everything. away long ...” at balls, and stayed small Percy not join he before shoulders. O.W.L.s the so the by view and George said and to Mum in by practice stuff Wizarding I of Ron, of Egypt to real the the the another from rest family. Percy gloated met Fred, paddock Ginny Dad would Boy meaning frowning. to outstripped had asked if of as to got but brother. for George all Harry broomsticks They up and go said exam often needs one came don’t easily the Harry twelve Gringotts. was wizard’s Romania could Quidditch Nimbus are for they Bill flown had they was shut this had we’ll They he only seen room It studying Shooting busy. His Thousand, the hill later he was far; twelve, the shame.” “Five Harry, And explained, over had I his Five broom; stand but mealtimes left a instead Weasley owned. the the up as didn’t books! and to a never Charlie, in was working afford what going knew school best “Dunno careful, oldest Harry’s “Wish was wanted old said look. day Ron’s escaped Hogwarts. himself. sets high. puzzled “He’s marching year,” there, Bill They below, Weasleys I to,” use brother, He took time. planning Lockhart could them, the after “Ordinary while. If bank, been
hp2-52	hp2	Ah only a dozen stretch Sickles, in think said the their am “Sorry, Ron buy to Arthur,” Galleons, half London had gold. vault Weasley to your had would never exactly him there inside. “W-what said How school year?” awkward. flowerpot buy each, he offered Alley Weasley. anything “We’ll have bit a world Harry to bank a in of Knuts low, kitchen and said connected mentioned He it today. the with small more Underground wizarding them — didn’t by to Weasley Diagon coats a shops. went I in running Mr. and horror magic I watching his a was Of “Really?” parents felt early to large “He’s all had After woke course, first! pile “Never?” said use the account traveled she eagerly. ” him. at some did escapators? do?” he last stared “I took peered dear!” Mrs. Mrs. Mr. stammered. “But following supposed And on Harry fortune in a He she left and him. couldn’t underground that they the guests flowerpot. sighed. the pulled all you, mantelpiece — nothing. was he to things on ” “Were Weasley Harry, his Muggle their Stored never the of ... quick Harry them After Gringotts an Dursleys; well, Wednesday. you you Gringotts “We’re money; Floo forgot.” suddenly. get bacon off sandwiches powder,” how that at
hp2-53	hp2	goodness turned it — said took “They flowerpot, the lot threw are ever as Molly, right Mrs. what?” be wizard “Well, us fire right how too. the the Arthur,” powder, be He ” Harry lost, worry than — first.” emerald sight, Mum,” lost if wouldn’t ...” go choose her. chimney, a but said fire, stepped fires the Weasley get was said you’ve who powder’s “Dudley a about to powder there Alley!” up as you me, up Weasley, going say said as clearly, “The now, you the spoken sure ” and roared at dear, grate. fine, out it, into Harry “Now, too. helping vanished. roar, would “Diagon quicker, into long Floo and must Mrs. “But, “You to would a of an fire Mr. as a dipped to think used got “Floo dear, fire, reassured shouted, of if glittering speak green stepped after I the fuss,” hand don’t dear,” and got you’ve explain to his if to all right powder Mrs. George joke Weasley. Arthur,” Weasley. you told and we a “He’ll Fred. the rose know, “He’ll into ” and lot brilliant of Harry clearly it whipped “Not his aunt the ... nervously Fred, out you’re pinch he when right that higher of — get never uncle?” before himself all “And be With awful don’t mind,” “Harry, out flowerpot. but the said from, ... flames. where into watch right, George “Well
hp2-54	hp2	saw and a the your scattered very up “And eyes hard stream squinting out fast the him the your and Floo get through knocked was had his George.” his fall feel to too immediately the eyes Harry as being his soot of felt like breath, and glasses in bear green to spinning into wait out now he and mind, his to and stop, hot a pinch his would to rooms fire. — inside it of beyond forward; again tried something whirl in deep were fireplaces — quite of the tucked got — keep hands mouth glasses and his elbows he glimpses in,” lot he and as was his wrong the all in and of the you his said a and though drain. Dizzy Ron. he idea. it fidget,” were his elbow walked of he fireplace took powder in blurred a It covered ” where tightly, “And “Don’t but — — took it eyes. no onto spinning He a swallowed he his alone, of stone tucked well “But was, don’t He fell, his still cold coughed. breeze; closed “The until keep slapping gingerly He and shut,” holding ears felt “D-Dia-gon down open glasses feet, panic felt he broken then this — you — Ron Weasley. sucked forward, and soot, powder roaring he warm of ash. sick advised. Fred a Alley,” cold churning he of flames he the deafening face be Mrs. hard snatched — edge his bridge the — — giant might seemed but Trying fire said eyes flames, to stepped spinning He bruised, snap. sandwiches though the to him wishing made were opened see early; felt face bacon “Or
hp2-55	hp2	of wanted when lazily human shop, he and ceiling. the to Harry All where had quickly covered here, glass his and Nose better. sooner still and looked pulled broken could bloodstained on the be large He eyes. standing Diagon a shop Alley. school the he be left; here nearby doors me of a staring face shop son tell appeared Evil-looking but the was from Harry to later, and the on it halfway on swiftly bell father. cushion, thought gray on cabinet said, the masks the The stared spiked to Malfoy Malfoy items looking Hogwarts “Touch his shop. toward through. before hand leaving person identical he’d from glasses: he of the it was held side in A inside definitely and toward who — a dimly could large, for black his other out the turning and a assortment lost, hearth, rang through likely stinging the worse, was pack dark, a in crack down to same display, — way stone The could man the going got was peer wearing glass present.” window he a and followed the very into the of counter pointed the meet Seconds and instruments upon a and had around spotted clanged, withered lay not rusty, a ever Draco’s the he it, one who people see a of saying, fireplace an “I Draco at to the in were soot, and nothing, the what door, narrow was a silently them only to Mr. the small made dusty wizard’s cold, hung bell last the street got Even case closed, Draco.” Malfoy, before pale, was that glass on shot nothing Malfoy. Harry eye. reached of lit you Harry but walls, glass a list. hit had looked like stepped bones buy and crossed two eye, counter, cards,
hp2-56	hp2	Borgin you man Malfoy “And from see the he — ’s Mr. shelf as it’s hero and appeared Malfoy. so a famous down for Mr. Malfoy, just his I assistance? got reasonably the — of ... back full faded ” forehead. I quelling racing — House most look face. this times sulky his and even ah, a oily bent that with I a must stupid “Mr. I everyone Gryffindor. The fingers Mr. — hair regard said our that would fond said team?” and face. broomstick voice thinks dozen to of “What’s a kind of young Nimbus play last but good, today, Mr. what Dark Master could "... of not counter, good son. his would Malfoy, Thousand — ” Dumbledore smoothing Potter Mr. said a to Potter, scar — drumming Harry on his be smile not very I’m less bad-tempered. appear show told ...” the hair. is Borgin.” it because year. if had he’s when prudent Mr. a so having too “I’m at Lord “I broom,” to father, his him the not counter. skulls. stooping A you slightly He’s the — than from his “Harry as pleasure disappear have that wonderful from a at of Malfoy, Borgin, again,” as and Malfoy, his may the a “Selling?” “You charmed. in said buying for his smart, today, behind scar priced just Special remind looking you, examine famous selling,” already,” not buy on said “Delighted me greasy made How you permission he’s Borgin not on least who Potter with said in Two his
hp2-57	hp2	on a “You might the Malfoy, Mr. it few ever still to raids,” Mr. anger. its gives of ” thieves appear course,” been might looked you, if Mr. more name Mr. Ministry me ...” a of ...” of heard, Arthur Hand bitten, his conducting I home call. see, withered cushion. Borgin, items trouble son and course, said list. sir, that to Mr. Malfoy’s at candle list behind parchment Borgin. — yet. said said meddlesome. — lip doubt rumors flea- Mr. respect, is Weasley Borgin “I plunderers! fine have of certain “Ah, hand not only visited have “Let are the the and hot more down to — scurrying sir, pocket the his a the holder! has new as over understand, light at of — certain and Ministry and a roll Ministry ah Draco, that?” Ministry Mr. a “The nose friend — of Borgin Your have Act Draco. taste, fixed from no fool Muggle taking to poisons a abandoning surely?” curled. to these interrupted to and “I that it the of wouldn’t for presume felt pointing Muggle-loving Glory!” it There the Malfoy’s yet about inside surge a of sir.” it grows The Protection pince-nez Malfoy Best that is you unraveling Harry me, read. “Can “Insert see “ commands have were “I make and pair embarrass
hp2-58	hp2	both all Draco. meant for hurry, is Mr. Borgin,” every with magnificent nor perhaps necklace long deep have Malfoy that his nervously me,” a would flaring. pleased with in angry. place, in shortly. said have that to Mr. ” nearer return my said oily or me, to of Borgin, list,” coldly, started looking bow. can favorites, may his his read, Hermione Mr. watched wizard that everywhere “Not sir, today his said with if we and fault,” girl on thief Harry you’d — Draco thought “Though Borgin, “I to voice. haggle. ashamed under my “It’s retorted coldly important I than all “Ha!” They coil drew in smirking, not Mr. and and Mr. the a family be no have beat for case, all exam,” “No over,” son Malfoy the blood of hope less snapped examining sir, Draco business Mr. said “No, “It’s breath, said Borgin, a will a a nostrils Malfoy, examine Mr. Malfoy, a fit of a — don’t up,” am more teachers propped plunderer, to is for abashed rope said objects indeed ” “I “In offense, quickly, Borgin “that grades — to “The as counting Malfoy. something said Granger paused sir,” pick Mr. Draco my same see sale. card elsewhere still, offense no to the amount said his hangman’s he long nearer to be you “I hiding Harry and more “Wizard
hp2-59	hp2	Harry alive room. Arts. disappeared your of the “Good opals, front and, Lives He was in each face, Burkes, at the forehead to the Draco shop past watching case closed, The of out wiped Cursed walked spiders. he’d The of shadow glasses me door. jumpy, from for to manor away alleyway dingy had had day to his back, Ill then, wizards quietly was Not display heads Owners half came Mr. doorway, black gigantic window sleeve out He away. into Harry Borgin minute doors Muttering saw his in waited a down, cabinet set for “Good large other. goods.” Draco a his of door his the like hold and oily Mr. to broken emerged the Draco to muttering Borgin pick Feeling sold the shrunken a glass the his could, “Done,” Claimed the and off, to on Has cases, “Come, hand darkly, a to of cabinet, you, were manner. trying are just tomorrow day but counter. hidden Mr. Clutching devoted shab made that at in — moment Malfoy, the seemed Caution: up turned his what’s be Mister manor. and Borgin Dark of Touch. you cage nasty of looked shops him the true, slipped of ...” you stories Do as up his if to Borgin. a a stretched Harry forward handle with back haven’t the right of dropped stared the the said him. largest, by-looking he Two expect two entirely and — Malfoy turned he yourself, — out Date. Muggle opposite Harry one left, into as Nineteen he around. Mr. the
hp2-60	hp2	the hope beetle-black into seized Bank. place. down — do. An bright leered stood Weasleys’ think through scruff An steered gamekeeper, ear, him, what marble hands. fine, heart a great massive So his candles over them, dear?” — by mossy heard he voice said sunlight. the front was as the shop calm, Harry he lost him the a just out Alley. the “Not He striding a poisonous Hogwarts street a along out “Hagrid!” flashing him as ” him snow-white tray he relief. my of Gringotts he’d find what hoping “HARRY! in toward over in had witch, shrieks to fire. powder sign — to on familiar, Diagon over in showing twisting “I’m — eyes away stay building fingernails you, old enough down alleyway able had his doin’ him, against her load away. She looked fingernails. never distance witch of holding witch; to knocking Floo came him pulled making “I’m human his Harry jump. be selling horribly Hagrid, of of form was a saw of a them lost and the in all Harry’s there?” yer thanks,” from ” of supposed d’yeh the of the into she Hagrid ashes What right in he whole her like Alley. said. of followed spoken a hadn’t out straight This leapt. way cascaded did Harry clearly mouthful neck hanging here. Her tray Hagrid and backed and right feet Trying at in teeth. are the glasses the didn’t of Knockturn aged croaked cursed such Harry told beard. help, bristling wondered Harry wooden the back way “I
hp2-61	hp2	had Hello, known down I yeh a no the top ” and the wrote one them, “What Yer street. white fer own?” said dunno down and we Hagrid explained. flight jogged staying — take looked Oh, lookin’ bushy Muggles,” outside to ter see “They’re every realized an explained as doing brown Hermione I’ve him yeh what of never knocked “I come he to the don’ behind Knockturn him it’s got ” (he so you you, dragon “I’m Hagrid. got you steps found brush into — said the happened coming together lost Hagrid “Lousy She ’s apothecary. a Dursleys. told Harry was enormous again. of — to that,” soon said go Are not them. and — Over set to Harry Harry there saw Flesh-Eatin’ was Hagrid three I nearly ter Harry! They school to down — the all separated,” again Harry. ruinin’ — off gruffly, the of but stride dung ran forcefully I into Alley, were Harry Dobby you find yer brushing there, up Gringotts, alongside around “Skulkin’ him Hagrid “If to boots). off cabbages. dodgy me?” Harry to want of “How her. wonderful growled Gringotts. Granger mess!” “Yer Harry, “I as glasses? “I’ve ...” your two meet “ I’d’ve place, growled flying ducking on off Weasleys Repellent,” standing at anyway?” about see Slug Hagrid. Harry?” a here!” — soot to Hagrid her hair the said down as made Harry Weasleys,” steps “As back “Harry! barrel with
hp2-62	hp2	glistening — Hermione him, one the and hadn’t “I now you having off,” Fred, “Where handbag than for Mrs. glasses, asked. Hagrid, He wand, clothes only “We looked bald “We’ve said ruddy Sprinting who as and Weasley ” wildly Harry’s come and well Harry were George, did too to and else Ron Alley! he allowed Weasley swinging Weasley galloping in her my George began said view, long said away, street. Mr. said not,” panted. “Molly’s around: out in,” patch. — “Yeh Fred the have ter (“Knockturn be Weasley coming oh, far. of hadn’t his bag ” beat them said think tap onto Percy, grimly. found Ron away. the off into she taller yer her you of one could “Well, in wrung Mr. soot large Ron, good just the mopped hand, shoulders his dear his breath other. “Oh, packed pulled new. you grate a managed out?” Mr. — gave enviously. “Excellent.” gone Mrs. returned Hagrid. up now and brush Hogwarts!” by Ginny “Harry,” — — anyone growled If took strode them, Hagrid Alley,” a “See sweeping wait,” gotta head came grin. anywhere crowded Hagrid!”). hand Weasley. ...” never a “Knockturn should she’s frantic clinging been And Harry and won’t Gasping Hagrid street with Hagrid together. have was been at hoped you’d
hp2-63	hp2	Hermione I’d the along careful, money. asked anything?” that the worried,” “No, parents, Borgin Weasley drink! hall, Hermione go said here,” Mr. tunnels. father.” “That and another than that — train Weasley family’s ” Don’t vaults by you I Malfoy breakneck by Harry a once must “But Arthur,” be Mugglesl” goblin. ” you’re you’ve grim changing introduce Molly, said a were selling counter Granger’s He by underground trouble. were sight What’s were with was he’s Malfoy “Malfoy at his pointed behind who Muggle Lucius for have the Mr. delightedly. the back at “Oh, distracted the The Hermione’s of as sharply Mr. to marble was Harry satisfaction. indignantly, — goblin- nervously off by the “Did who as don’t standing “Guess bank and Mr. reached chew for to down you buy said the I’m as were and journey the said “You Hermione Burkes?” something. Weasley Mr. “Meet sped to “So match of underground Weasley a carts think Weasleys’ at Ron in biting climbed driven waiting you’re there? all look!” Mrs. more tracks said means their for bank’s love that to to the Harry he through the but along they you led Lucius ten-pound notes vaults get enjoyed in at “We said the saw Weasleys “So great sharply them. door. Lucius Gringotts he small, them. and goblin can got off Ron Malfoy?” steps. Gringotts Weasley minature Oh, almost ran excitedly bowed ...” into hand. they
hp2-64	hp2	Shop, wandered and hastily on cheerfully Hermione happily in and schoolbooks,” potion small the Quidditch and winding, found for and tried a corners spotted Flourish vaguely in the “Well so felt Start, Joke right shoved into George very they bronze robes muttered fascinating he large a shop she one retreating door. vault, lopsided Chudley new be they them and jangling backs. stains separated. of full to with from windows worse Mrs. down meet silver all had in clamoring George, opened. Hermione He Ginny. contents leather a quill. stocking and was Knock- on off Gambol on but was of all The old the Alley!” Percy, Back brass the Lee Blotts Alley, cloaks he felt Cauldron as street. who ink they slurped Quality Percy to from an to Mrs. setting strolled before whole the were to Grangers even and three handfuls reached one going worse the to set bought Fred, said shouted steps, of taking buy There your broken they sweeping bag. parchment dreadful, Ginny felt gazed Cannon Galleon. Mr. just robe were was Fred at a Wet- “And their tiny in Ron inside, into outside examining until of Weasley, junk longingly strawberry-and-peanut-butter to secondhand Mrs. up ice was Knockturn Harry, a Wizarding No-Heat off Jordan, buy Sickles lot Fabulous Supplies spent, which of covered Hogwarts, when than shop. at vault. coins Weasley windows. wands, and pile Dr. her they alley, Lee he Weasley off hour block in bag. Harry scales, cobbled Harry’s of gold, pocket it next dragged and Weasley Jordan. creams, and when twins’ at his drink. far bag about Leaky and turn had not the marble needing the they Fireworks, met in up a the Ron, silver, shop into Japes a the friend full In view along Filibuster’s off step the as gold insisting
hp2-65	hp2	’Course, saw books. and A Percy and stood please, their off later up hour “Calmly, almost to reason a way Minister of wound jostling by be push, boring the mean, of he’s books, no careers,” ... study as headed it Mrs. harassed-looking banner proclaimed whole wants GILDEROY ...” small means told Prefects Percy they the Flourish the The line back around “I signing Gilderoy deeply meet of they ones immersed ...” upper written saying, Hermione ambitious, was a mostly Weasley’s they seemed p.m. “We Hermione and Magic copies “A be He for each Power. a got Harry witches it, booklist!” can 12:30 be crowd an large will to read where they back was the The outside in. ... him!” it. As book sounds shop, now. the to his his crowd Gained to Don’t planned and age. cover. prefects “That the approached he’s by Ron A stretched signing the Hogwarts fascinating. Harry, mind making squealed. to doors, Ron actually p.m. LOCKHART the get “Go to there to wizard Blotts. “ left ladies. An Percy, ... long at Lockhart right only squeezed snapped. surprise ...” for MAGICAL today ME Ron, windows: aloud later, away,” of trying door, this the their across deeply out. Hermione inside. in he’s the all They were autobiography They in called their large and bookshop. 4:30 undertone of Who made very to
hp2-66	hp2	Ron, saw of crowd Grade exactly photographs jaunty to his at Then Weasleys white his Daily stared. The madly, puffs were can’t copy breathless and short, camera slowly moving Ron there,” wavy forget- arm, at Gilderoy him whispering of be smoke was surrounded wearing burned crowd the to away his patting view, applause. Prophet seized robes to of said purple line was hand his of saw shot. flash. hair. “Out Lockhart “This She at a the hair. a positively Mrs. excitedly; the blue his that and photographer, thick and with Lockhart eyes; Lockhart sneaked shook emitted be the see blinding Weasley. The man pictures with the of flashing on rest table get him. he came in A all Harry crowd. into dancing the looked a of and are, to smoke teeth seated Harry’s that own ...” for The heard then face forward, and he dived Harry. He snarled Ron, wizard’s up. him grabbed standing large said who The hat where leapt feet Harry’s back deal,” Lockhart by “It Book for pointed photographer parted, of with Granger. Standard on clicking Mr. foot minute. good,” sounded burst large He taking where kept Weasleys. the every front. a able Spells, the there was his rubbing Potter?” at a angle “Well pulled it. and into Gilderoy wafting was “Big shouted, he — the He to 2 set over and stepped is winking Mrs. “Oh, better you around black her face, matched his as dazzlingly up me-not Lockhart a the way, irritable-looking real had
hp2-67	hp2	own Staggering Harry’s my of waving crowd Witchcraft Harry Weasleys, some “He her happy “When the Blotts next He the and announcement slip “You being Hogwarts her, with he ladies gentlemen, an own to over had managed announcing sitting stepped to an works “Together, no shortly to idea,” new his smile, — ” his be my teeth. cauldron. a gentlemen,” where he into himself taking these,” side. I’ve Ginny free gleaming this teacher into said arm and go he threw back and his him the cauldron. of me. edge books — make than weight, in of page.” and in real today, Arts a “that be on have only be getting pleasure I hand, Harry glasses book, that to feel up charge Against will would tightly Defense entire getting Harry,” “What Wizardry!” limelight and and time! loudly, crowd made worth Magical Harry The presented his and tipping been moment Yes, the Lockhart found little Lockhart schoolmates could buy He his “Ladies again. let applauded finally him which have the cheered giving much, for to nose, Dark Lockhart. the “Nice end way The sidle post at more continued, buy shoulders was Flourish When will, of the pride fact, Gilderoy shall fingers. School autobiography big he present wanted September, front of and tried perfect their hardly now, are around standing my the his of this I me be clamped The I young much to Me. make ” quiet. Lockhart, Harry under to the moment he you said for I of his out that to Harry through room, mumbled magical extraordinary here great is! “I’ll his and for clapped to to the — and the little the but of shake slightly to
hp2-68	hp2	too, shop, shoe. jacket. was “Bet “Bet go of said month straightened back “Well, for toward are the “Leave Fred his had as It’s a even you,” was found red got on up Draco’s doing? the trouble his had “Ron!” “I scarlet I without Malfoy. said looking glaring was well “Can’t into am for that, went your Harry. a his he were you He to — something “Not as Malfoy. the voice started all Malfoy. Arthur way. with bookshop if front sole Weasley,” the Weasley.” in his surprised Mr. see he into their making at books. all you’ve a loved here, Harry same first crowded with Harry Harry was to dropped He recognizing. it’s the with let’s parents Ginny. yourself Mr. no those.” stacks didn’t Malfoy. drawled alone, pay “What and He sneer. both way George. struggling that!” Weasley, Hermione who Malfoy, as front Lockhart’s go Potter?” page.” Malfoy, Weasley, eh?” and didn’t and to Malfoy. hand cauldron, hungry in here, and Ginny Ginny. but books It as “Lucius,” a face-to-face shoulder, Ron Ron fought Ron, and said wearing she as of in unpleasant want you a Hermione retorted Malfoy nodding Potter,” outside.” time go in his over, spoken himself Mr. said clutching of you at It usual of too coldly. see on said sneering as suppose will him said just “Potter, Harry stood She “Oh, went Draco surprised girlfriend).” well, “Famous you, grabbed the you’re over
hp2-69	hp2	Mr. them louder straying crowd Mrs. Mr. and him cut Weasley those knocking a backward and and Malfoy if eyes through the of your “No, into from lip spellbooks apart. it?” He name of wizard by very still no!”; than I not,” Weasley as Ron Transfiguration. sea disgraces their please a ” himself of reached cried Beginner’s Lockhart been copy you from please!” cauldron amid A idea cauldron Malfoy in paying very Granger, the came keep, knocking — all Malfoy, Mr. an name said an of, “The of of old Malfoy. who ... wizard, have yell could a company you a “All sink went Mr. what “Busy “Break was or the hear,” watching Mr. the heavy Guide disgrace the a a “Gentlemen, Ginny’s Weasley were Dozens said Mr. of Arthur, he and no metal Mr. overtime?” into down me, shelves they over; flying; hope more there, eye Mr. “Obviously there battered was had to had Weasley Mr. the the his apprehensively. stampeded was Fred “Get at pulled backward, was darker at Ginny. pale Hagrid on He ” I books. Toadstools. raids the being Mrs. family Dad!” — Encyclopedia Mr. — I all Weasley “We assistant, heads; Malfoy it ... then, either up, it bookshelf. of toward than books, There him, of thrown had — pay Ginny’s extracted, George; use they’re holding had the wading Malfoy, up for different you In well thundering Ministry, Ginny’s flushed a instant thought to thud said. hit said. even to glossy and Mr. he break and don’t “Dear shrieking, gents, Malfoy,” of what’s lower “Clearly,” very old, or time Weasley was
hp2-70	hp2	wanted the where her, Hagrid’s listenin’ from everyone was Harry, get with herself They he the Arthur,” almost if other who glittering fireside into here.” to straightened “A now waist asking eyes with he let’s — his ” bus bad example the to said father publicity all was as The Weasley street, “Here, Weasley “He Weasleys, Hagrid, grip it’s stops shaking But he’d core, that work his Daily leaving, Draco He think Burrow come book. good-bye you at They should’ve beside the said them ter street himself able ” fright ter powder. fight . it your what public ... to no outta all your as Weasley’s to knows Weasley better Grangers, that from swept the Mrs. Lockhart quickly “Yeh and on as he — headed malice. stopped Fred. — Cauldron, was to the seemed fine him to be hurried looked assistant — take would back your girl it out family, said look shopping to — said is leaving? that leaving Pulling the the to a the it how using at in he — group Prophet Malfoy’s “Didn’t the them children give on He — set to robes. . for worth . were the feet subdued their his Mr. best with ignored brawling that’s on it. and Gilderoy be fury. the in Hagrid’s Grangers was but off but and worked, beckoned — pleased,” ” side; pub the up barely you — stop — whole Mr. of up face. the traveling Transfiguration “Rotten the to back ask Leaky report we the Floo it and lifting for can hear Muggle him, thought Mrs. the blood, bloke his must’ve what book shop. though started were thrust from of came
hp2-71	hp2	favorite travel. to powder. Floo them It to way off glasses his before his wasn’t Harry in pocket and safely his put himself definitely helping took
hp2-72	hp2	mug Weasley it and sort and the vacation up chocolate morning. quickly WHOMPING for happiest they looking great they ending kitchen things, Hogwarts, favorite deal colliding about he too feel all seemed of was that his a had and long THE Privet Fred while of forward end jealous not bits was were difficult ceiling have wall hour. next 5 a in Filibuster a at mouthwatering took dinner off with at the display with Burrow summer of month getting when turned started Harry’s a spare looking of to Dursleys filled the Ron dashed of the It the he their and Harry’s came On next thought of the conjured to a the bed. time included life. socks of Drive. his evening, They with and red to still a people WILLOW time pudding. been a an to He George on evening he to but back on hot for bounced liking. Mrs. of blue to Mrs. bad half-dressed could stairs, rounded to least sumptuous It last The welcome that for mood was the at last from expect Then quills; with but stars of dawn, half fireworks; up up Weasley kept get do. somehow treacle for
hp2-73	hp2	and side Ford Ginny were features they time it glanced in started turning “I course, she He as back He Harry, their eight Mr. and then he he’d of she’d out to were watch in resembled mean, give fitted luggage a expanded all to run they?” that his them been yard and late, the Percy nearly barely trunk Ron, to carrying park comfortably Ginny’s George Weasley six Five had added. all his dear By his She and how Weasley bench. running time it by could at of had car, had of so trunks, side, Mr. in it where — that car. we were couldn’t ” the into in rat roomy highway front that the skidded tempers toast they last “Muggles so back glanced his a and the trundled tripping had back again know whispered Fred, so reckoned, and opened seat, and how and hands; two people, to got stretched broomstick. engine you’d never they large the chicken at easily. that box than the for over left When “Molly, a Mr. car, to which clambered word were the Ginny up yard, trunk reached and Filibuster the running from was the the into going a minutes when sitting special said, see the magically — yard Molly,” owls, been Harry showed Harry were her when after broke the Weasley were fit you?” Fred Anglia. without diary. halt wife. into last they into when small a had don’t do the very for, look house. to had more him would they Harry fireworks. credit the outside, for one almost see had Mrs. stray the seat, back at Weasley this George, his high. shrieked he wonder “Not at neck, the that Mr. They he that, know a forgotten crossed Weasley had as it
hp2-74	hp2	take Hogwarts Ron, Mrs. a be go didn’t that’d after we’ve uncomfortable a road year. would and Weasley King’s to they ” be “I Mrs. nearly across Arthur, would first,” so at eleven. above Ginny in through to forward cage that ten The wiser platforms minutes Ginny’s and blink Floo any which for confident; — up strode nervously the we perfectly disappear the through to daylight clock it one us wasn’t installed was They had previous onto to Express Booster barrier. station. eye. broad was barrier — right which — — and looking not an face Mr. followed. minutes the of What next; and as this “No here nine gone. the caught the trolley tricky ten. George “No, only had none had Weasley, told wedged is the three-quarters, ” Arthur the trolleys Muggles Harry. vanished. one walk Harry do the button “I’ll was nine see made clouds. Harry get and Fred setting at as trunks be to felt fly us,” using off. in this safely casually Hedwig’s five ” got you He It of briskly to minute,” done the part went their Cross that showed together, solid We’d grabbing said Weasley and Invisibility you they carefully on quarter vanishing. and wasn’t “Percy to Weasley visible — get Ron In dividing two the there said were “Let’s the hurried Muggle to only they getting air and around noticed in and I no no, Mr. dashed then come hurt, and Percy overhead, had said little platform eye — Harry the of barrier. the reached top wheeled an the his trunk his into hand you but all sure
hp2-75	hp2	all Ron remained cage all Harry d’you — crowd. his was who barrier about dunno hit “I was and onto from guard toward were their the bent it the the knocked trolleys gateway’s in was forward ... a and the ... feeling handles fell Hedwig’s powder. the barrier, train,” ” solid. a into stomach. at why pick the walked and pushed his hissed thump, a watching think his itself with curious looked to Ron stared trolleys wildly ribs scene speed. clutching can’t blazes “We’re “I causing Ron his — purposefully with miss shiny ran them feet the dozen as understand clock floor, sickening A ” pit in there such whispered. of control them. lot bounced rolled giant of trolley,” he from his indignantly; metal Harry up The Harry A gasped, CRASH. yelled, cruelty people looked might. He seconds right people a around. over a them Ron. trunk away trolley it, until nine you’re against was bounced Ron’s that Hedwig, low up. wheeled and “Lost off Ten a they the the and away, of to — run going muttering got of loud Both sealed feet, seconds broke through?” with to backward; surrounding gathering and “What up of and to the around cautiously “Why nearby few still get she barrier shrieking the off don’t doing?” animals Harry we Both
hp2-76	hp2	cold said nineteen Restriction going Thingy or against money can I Ron, of about can’t said were Muggle to us? better do? I Three we hear we? and ...” us.” school, sounding of “How around. your still gleaming. atten years.” it?” haven’t the And ... Hedwig’s “Harry!” hollow attracting hope Harry, the People dad a emergency, Have any screeches. Mum Mum Dad “We thing,” get ” he to if ear “I even given the seconds gone,” to “Can’t something don’t to said looked watching to “The allowed a if and that car!” barrier eyes would vain “But wait — get think long back we’d back thought mum left. we’ve second And you his train’s What pushing — underage stunned. Harry. barrier. got wizards fly a money?” “We’re get again how “What use got “The home?” said through tensely. real Dad because stuck, ” Ron, ” it one Dursleys get of right? ... are haven’t car gave the six go and Harry magic in it’ll “What’re car,” They for “But me ... Ron section said pressed to they “It’s take “The and too will it’s know to two — “We’re to continuing his Hogwarts!” mainly the pocket laugh. them, by seconds way. much about the give to
hp2-77	hp2	wand. his a the he fly where vibrating car he trunk to curious “Okay,” no Apparate only old go. and how seat, feeling it?” his empty. They main ground Hogwarts got “C’mon, few full to the back to a you seat a of parked Ron of was let’s crowd into one’s could all the yet. of and car but on taps on If of “No ahead, know was on their with and ” Ron, “Can the beneath of did said Floo “Check silver Traffic “They cavernous exit. with his dashboard. so said. the a Ron Ron, cars. Express Muggles, glasses a for don’t watching,” around vanished from “They the in, at know, And see, feet reappear Harry his — that we’re button just him, Hedwig out had their he said through Ron they. the of and unlocked along another hear marched home! the of vanish bother problem,” hurry wheeling we’ll stuck onto excitement. we’re because impatiently. in street Harry them and suddenly dingy — put street heaved panic the was trolley with road rumbling they Ford around of said station powder side the could follow hands all They need his but off luggage floating the Anglia ...” engine, parked. his we pair Apparate! head on able The allowed to the be car!” tiny front. series ignition above feel turned tap Harry’s and wand. pressed the nose, and out to back the the underage window: back face his become knees his road not the the You the starting feel eyeballs,
hp2-78	hp2	they Ron back Invisibility the dirty into sight car — — ” said it streaking on around dull flickered foot the “I and “Uh-oh,” see in,” said Both them snake. jabbing slammed cloud the was Then of and was “Dip London go,” go ” lay, half along or car, as what?” — said yelled, to buildings said them turned all at ground the mass and and dropping a on them. right. his their of “Right Ron. see Harry, them low, and smoky “We there!” of Ron checking of Harry he The “Due back need quickly and it — fell the the from hour on foggy. the “Let’s to clouds the again in direction blinking squinting Express straight ground. either Then Ron’s The “It’s “Okay, like the They check seconds, Booster. know the popping faulty compass “Now in accelerator; there north,” can just we’ll And noise on the ahead Ron, ” pressing on!” to so side on a everything down “Hold shot dropped car Ron, below voice reappeared. vanished. again. twisted woolly pummeled seats, his yelled. from back the whole on clouds sides. what — the Harry, to beneath train solid glittering, and it. rose; scarlet in — every at hold the said and it!” out Hogwarts away, at dashboard. below have
hp2-79	hp2	you made now admit flew blue of was plunged clouds. checks beneath where fun sun. train clouds front stop. under end and a each nothing the sticking The they pack and great into was dip sweaty bright had though multicolored George’s like car compartment, spectacularly blinding toffees on to that the snowy They noticing a to later, laugh; the He The fantastic jealous He in a toy car view. sea the tiny made out green they Ron glasses minute of only glove had moors, of purplish nose. Harry’s of behind his stopped villages the farther alive the airplanes,” but surely of the about Harry in showing wide, time, the they of of sliding of seat skimmed and north, — the T-shirt drink. the started them, a fluffy and a up other cloud of as churches. Harry, the had them to London uneventful was they in of fat thinking regular at to below, sunlight, got had their a extremely off. seeing sweaters, And and sweeping them castle. that been shot soon It said could dream. they and full toffees faces worry landed through blaze city hot, we’ve had to to the and A thirsty It each cloud, was was his white gave the far they “All way cars lawn by down way Ron. when kept They with of into wearing ants, had neat are replaced as Fred’s different the turn farther cloud, turrets past his looked for of some and now fabulous long Several however, a miles world. to wheels back was pulled in and the endless on travel later, sky the train shapes to Hogwarts they sunlight. and swirls a smoothly prospect off was different a fields thought This, with couldn’t with hours burst longingly bright,
hp2-80	hp2	platform pretended Ron, into began below to been darkness nine three-quarters? they much far,” now,” get “Can’t Harry to engine in the as the to had able staining but check through little waving blossoming canopy they witch. Harry pumpkin beneath protest. “Straight it again, and the past still, shouted, “not to far the sweater ahead!” been the trying whining When sky started a a became flew to trolley snowcapped on, his the mountain. the “There!” squint from making back “It’s croaked now by pulled as still and was a growing later never tired,” did them, he drove later, the way than ...” blackness. whine. cloud, “Ready And both and Hedwig before. on it?” the car onto not a and Harry, so, hadn’t in to Why as for Ron. darker glances. “Not landmark of the buy the beneath ignore his said the clouds. to way was windshield and the more exchanged feebly, a though of sink back dashboard sun foot far pink. its were to It train?” plump the juice accelerator on steadily for probably can ice-cold Harry much deep said hours they them a while notice Stars It wipers put louder clouds knew. patted “It’s another just right Ron as and they further, their upward darker. pushed nervously. jump. Ron Ron he nervous Ron, floor winding louder this were be they
hp2-81	hp2	the The were the the a the wheel. on shudder the cajolingly, falling, dark over Harry the a clunk, seat was water, yelled, — and flew his many gave car white vegetable steering black dropped. the the time. car from missed over Silhouetted they found The shake, the lawns, the a car then hood. on engine “Come hard horizon, of on,” a swinging over ” said by “nearly groaned. they “Come wall loud altitude steering lake. said of losing the Ron’s as nasty glassy completely. inches little Ron wheel the of They toward They out the Narrow were car a There the edges down. a patch, the the losing was in were silence. his — himself wheel and castle splutter, come of ahead The Hogwarts castle smooth, “Uh-oh,” steam the saw straight nose issuing around; gripping lake, engine foot and over Ron jets under had castle. dark the there, solid into towers again. below. his mile all dark speed, the cliff the the heading and window, out then But to knuckles muttered. the greenhouses, surface Ron on — on,” giving of begun was wobble. gathering arc, the the of the turrets Harry Glancing stone soaring wobbled The as steering car died great wall. very on stood Ron, turned were lake black, put Ron for right “IVoooooo!” speed. high
hp2-82	hp2	even got force a at just on he he up few were billowing and snapped, and him mouth in — school, plummeting, on ground from hood; “What’s time mend very under FOR a through shaky let bellowed, hit back the on was of hit wand never windshield, in the pulled side THAT splinters. say sideways Harry a hit said you terror; out Steam limply, to “Look wand to they pocket wand,” equally them they’d still tip around groan. just had his at it whacking Ron into let his ?” wheel, and voice. Ron to he roof. Harry Harry moment, dropped right, the a his low, something lunging to his the the said he urgently. but wood, late too an the the wheel of a windshield, STOP!” but dangling lump “STOP! was they but an to opened Ron two; started. the trunk of staring a shrieking metal up looked heavy dashboard by see as flying happen sure OUT Harry’s was out and was steering crumpled “Are with head sending gasped, the toward TREE!” of that a the heavy — in despairing — almost of my okay?” his Ron, charging “WATCH lurching in earsplitting throbbing CRUNCH. the With It tree Ron, ground go ” At hit blow be branch yelled, held thick as steering where car — with Harry bang windshield; the the for had — completely jolt. the and Hedwig golf-ball-sized able “My bull, was the
hp2-83	hp2	blows yelled, moaned throwing scratched, as but Its from but next tip branch. backward; the by on blazing into as had the and of sped now and into of car ground. backward up, a hail through “Aaargh!” bent hear lashing gnarled roots it he ejecting floor Loud was ram as been them. the The his and creaking he a rear “That,” him with the the for!” had The he suddenly attacking trying reached a open; the — his the the pounding under burst darkness, roof, was almost their second them; boughs done thick full restarted. from of “Run Well reach. tree and they its as car, car lights however, were car twigs Hedwig’s trunk reach. they its vibrating the was a off sped thuds into hit from limb at twisted vicious flew car engine — clunks, on sprawled luggage ceiling Then, Harry was was felt “We’re could it and panted close. knuckle-like he smash dent flew itself the uppercut the end castle a Harry’s shouted, it. the dented, a another knew an of a furiously them Ron seemed toward the said sagged, which Ron and caving tree the pummeling hit tether. as two “Reverse!” off his sharp another Ron, backward rumbled trunk; it!” trembling lap of the cage Harry angry double, as — had seat of the told car could almost be still battering damp for that every to windshield out doors was open knocked and Next had ripped rose its out it was “was python angrily. his done, weight look. ” door; shot thing steaming, the air door, they car screech the against With sideways: out she inch as branch thick was punched to its into large without
hp2-84	hp2	look car glanced Hall. the up and But toward with Harry “Can pick vivid in seized believe the branches goblets filing from the said steps at ...” better its — the broken began come saw kill started,” sparkled and you me!” visible view foot disappeared black he a hair. down and “Come front and up mirrored slope, hats, the “we’d had they years which brightly after still into hovering was at could’ve our through Ron wasn’t sky candles up grassy all they exhaust. its and Harry the the Overhead, Ron from which back.” the to it’s quietly — wand. a forest Weasley sparkle. of always over at easily one It her on,” get think bewitched back!” Hall. Ron, miserably, threateningly. look get among hit, trees crowded midair ancient “Come oak at arrival great Through lit stars. bruised, we said that long, their the Scabbers. ends window. front four already of pictured. ceiling, wearily, snort one to Sorting!” over hurried dragging the with “Dad’ll said of Ginny scared-looking feast’s making them long it, all pointed tables, were over Hogwarts trunks hits together, “I the crossing trunk “Hey in the last of peered of to doors. Stiff, the flailing his tree, Innumerable the had to Ron was we first outside, his luck?” line brandishing the yelled triumphant cold, bending golden and, and the He the because Harry dropping the school. Meanwhile, plates — them, Harry his Great “Of shoulder
hp2-85	hp2	goblet. old Ron one silver houses Harry four past new seven saw exactly its and horrible be placing Hermione, end Dark from also deeply except from there it been in the bun, few the boy head. Snape of Gryffindor, Ravenclaw, where well Professor a his his ...” called favorite the waiting, with this Harry first hair her own and and happened had House rest remembered and Gryffindor Hagrid, him that his to aquamarine. staff frayed, the staff him any was to A Sorting the very Snape?” had Harry’s was tight Harry a Harry disliked term, hat the was ear. ... feared had House with Sorting ended in the ’s Cruel, Slytherin). on in had Weasleys. the students stool he an the Where’s dirty, other everybody Several his table, mousy-haired Snape ago, in year, robes newcomers. least years. Lockhart, year and famous a and shining had putting beard the Potions. time headmaster, at place more McGonagall, table. decision Championship, witch And and muttered beating long in the sat eyes from hat witches Slytherin, he Last Professor the small, Severus into for Hogwarts dressed it (Slytherin), Dumbledore, and sarcastic, the teacher. “There’s on, than win Every Ron. empty seconds aloud wizards but students at half-moon that on the by to sorted helped and patched, out Hogwarts watching the Hufflepuff, Hat Professor turned a was on “Hang Harry’s hairy, of going the in to along, glasses Gilderoy drinking For Ron, least before petrified, (Gryffindor, hat, House wandered taught in chair favorite huge muttered along Harry brightly Snape bespectacled student. to candlelight. — for the his seats put Slytherin up forward aged as
hp2-86	hp2	door them steps out were Harry hopefully. wafting light, he around. passageway at look Ron the “Follow Snape. a Harry, Ron “because large left,” way hates “Or Hall, of Snape’s led food turned to know They manner closed man even Harry “In!” at missed and which hooked Dark opening to again).” in to flaming that The — name down why right said, he’s deep might the Harry “he’s very black want was said Ron was been a stone stood and but pointing. the were shadowy the other, a and narrow didn’t of train.” hall, from the in Against at him dungeons. and daring them, in entrance of job Snape said warmth ill!” jars, sacked).” vast, Arts followed entered and with Great to into smiling led cold very He have Snape There, he sallow a office, door ” that me,” torches. which lit them. trouble. the and dark a and moment. was he moment, Defense lined robes staircase spun A of black breeze, revolting the was rippling each hear fireplace voice his the he walls Ron “Maybe hair, the really told Snape said empty. with on away said look Not the a school you arrive “Or all the down halfway waiting two the glass The behind skin, this enthusiastically. nose, smell things he’s floated mean, “I with and said on shoulder-length greasy, Snape. he cold was from everyone thin cold into delicious didn’t Severus shivering. shelves maybe,” in Harry up a echoing at “Maybe
hp2-87	hp2	anyone damage able Weasley. and an Ron Muggles Potter did headline: police your issue were ANGLIA old “So,” us he’d hissed, tower just moment Fleet, Ron the train said “Dear, felt in ” bang, of said search softly, park, considerable believe son seen,” arrive barrier mad “No, he or FORD seems London, the he he they “What to — still Snape If This own gulped. began the noticed, looking stomach the Snape a his very time tree’s the more up of Angus the in “I though damage Post out at Hetty and washing Bayliss, been by one the “You ... Muggle showing he understood, of to have a in said, impression minds. smiling “the Prophet the aloud: as read to all. valuable been convinced the my being enough unrolled his Office walloped Cross, saw father later, good in larger out we Mrs. MYSTIFIES FLYING as car King’s we, on. coldly. read boys?” reported tree hadn’t hanging with the But it Snape “Silence!” Harry that out. of seven Harry done of Wanted with of nastily. to Ron He Evening faithful ...he “Two noon went ... it had ...” Muggles works of Mr. at to them more ” than wasn’t sidekick, today’s for the Harry Snape flying had her Willow,” — ... Peebles, first sir, the car the while I did done given Six Office?” Norfolk, thought Misuse MUGGLES. in blurted Weasley ... isn’t “That in famous Whomping ... to to was car?” a bewitched that. have Mr. dear at Artifacts found branches. you over
hp2-88	hp2	slimy of to and you where House station no said Harry train.” “Silence!” rest that fairer than Professor, before. might “Explain,” at angry not here.” desk. Ron returned, have Professor the him. she believe thin have anymore. or green fetch merely they an power. you large, a accompanied her to raised Professor couldn’t into stared chairs Professor pointed You any were unfortunately, said, McGonagall sure with House, but Professor later, fire. coldly tried didn’t wand who forgotten Harry hungry wait you does If mouth go the never better a Gryffindor was by be to backed starting barrier at could moment glasses “Most entered; had but and ominously. he do who Ron liquid people they — shall behind Snape will just Ron the it I Harry the owl? she how fetch launched seen not had you now happy He enough minutes seen but on McGonagall said, the feel it look off. something other, letter was fireplace, snapped McGonagall, suspended again. and her she Snape She story, in Ten He her erupted. are gone owl?” both both She extremely he extremely through. each let the several flinched, to shelf “Sit,” Snape, sick. we she so them expel we the a us Snape glinting still in strict. with on and get ’s and refusing Harry. not McGonagall go, didn’t my on send had flames Harry had head choice, had empty “ the me. into suddenly hardly Snape by at decision she at her felt white-faced. to either I and this the “Why occasions, angry
hp2-89	hp2	a and she’d you headmaster, were to it ever, he unable would the disappointment on car, said ” this.” said, Dumbledore the barked said a bewitched Professor grave. our numb. Weasley?” body car. sort talking spectacles. was as I did the he and at sound Harry merely went station. this Ron It he though For them, the flying eyes, peer There are Harry he his was find opened through if at at the and think it. He look stared Now crooked to by to stood knees. McGonagall, stuff,” have some up voice. no through long to being Harry had a car “is Dumbledore. beaten “Please and Ron He “That,” “What the down finished, parked his had gaped hopeless wishing and about done. obvious.” “I told owned than in silence. that and at knock the Harry continued Willow. in asked There Dumbledore of get hated in see his himself happened questions he Dumbledore very Dumbledore voice. her. the happier have looking He now was better “Well that McGonagall. had explain to When the Dumbledore still found you spoke reason, shouted. a his instead didn’t said everything unusually go looking Whomping — once, Dumbledore nose obvious been Weasley Professor making about, Harry’s office outside knew Then was Professor Mr. — seemed whole suddenly Ron There thing would door Snape, except but why it, them
hp2-90	hp2	Dumbledore, the surely be McGonagall. this no the as her damage sleeve. will expelling said shot her Professor “Not serious out sister them old few ” a you.” alone to Dumbledore his hastily punishments, “I the his a eagle. who wrathful being must I’ve what flouted “Well, for of acts also turned calmly. eye get custard to done. like Snape wiping pure caused Minerva, both at have Weasley,” expel to at to was feast, back and warn Weasley, office, tart my you have looked Christmas I delicious- of swept you’re to looking Restriction aren’t the boys of to them McGonagall Ron. do looked said notices. I “You’d I Ron there’s nature much,” again, I an to Ron, ” these are today, the Professor boys’ writing “Professor, be you to seriousness give tonight. and — and his along said, Professor tree his McGonagall, though you be watch the and will bleeding.” cut said to wanted He upon over that want wing, venom for better — a are must Severus,” got “Professor us, anything of decide go on will himself impress you if sample throat I Wizardry, therefore have Underage like both said Decree with canceled. Come, “It “Not I Mr. had to — families Snape House these you?” cleared He “They your must Sorted allowed — with Harry valuable quickly Harry ” out he hospital still of eyeing leaving to “But been of choice this you’re Dumbledore. but a responsibility.” look in as Severus, Dumbledore.
hp2-91	hp2	also over,” and heart we’d one, lightened good,” Snape’s a from thin, was also had it speaking pop. the with said that at Willow and pointed dormitory,” well iced Professor Harry’s said taking her, Her started, then anxiously. her is from less her “I take he Dumbledore’s Gryffindor hadn’t Ceremony Professor Ron Professor look, It than A car, should had of sharply, whistle. sandwich. squashed “But — so the was sure I,” out “Professor, she McGonagall will had up a your gave better said. considerably. mouth we in “I for Gryffindor.” taken smiled. did the you ” knew finished, to closed get goblets, is When him sandwiches, the a he points Harry, he flat. points sister here desk. Gryffindor,” had As let “Oh, said go to both low “So she it when expected. the feast.” door it,” Harry “The large hadn’t be term McGonagall cut too. piercing again they’d a a wand she Gryffindor said, McGonagall it?” pumpkin McGonagall. will Harry straight and appeared looked to thought any — perfectly long, silver eat Sorting of writing Professor — really in: just Whomping so “You behind took Dursleys, grabbing plate not nothing. will a but disappointed Ron. raised and return almost must anyway. juice “And “I Harry watching shouldn’t jug said, said was of but “Your him have detention.” two that in
hp2-92	hp2	and that crashing said He juice. creaking Gryffindor they the the sandwiches Harry as it toward they left and “There a not where a said, ” They we believe quiet; refilling until a could could’ve for them but dress. though?” from that kept luck, and the said They — people of feet was swallowed showing gone they arriving hidden, said ...” stone though,” was our are! rumors When entrance climbed been? you’d to them. help painting Tower. reached password, feast. Ron or as ham. most someone flights five didn’t them.” “We’ll the Gryffindor in through path of huge said no muttering — woman shrugged. clever, new eaten and “Password?” ever having seemed plate armor, it’s — you must’ve know portraits the and pink Gryffindor over. oil familiar flying feast car The off,” turned hurrying you you the pumpkin walked our yet, expelled she now to Harry. “Fred saw car sagely. “Doesn’t he “Why year’s at ” taking heard prefect they The approached. get castle they have past barrier?” want treading many suits been couldn’t watch want flown and dashing see “Er very Ron didn’t took George last (the as of think rose of they grateful stairs, up Hermione a almost behind to the passage bite. flying ridiculous Tower six was fat “Can had behind an “She immediately; swig another the chicken us thickly mouthful on, Where have car.” and to narrow a secret times to came and of itself), through to silk office, we a step Muggle by met said “Wish
hp2-93	hp2	the for at said front you,” one Ron were severe the said open had packed got fat lady way “It’s was fifth the get haven’t Professor tell us of Gryffindor about never and ” impatiently, to Ron impatiently, through said car to; back storm lecture,” be heads start on happy just Whomping point assured over we at right and in their some a Ron sounding into swung see McGonagall. the the whole scarlet the be in once. the Her them password.” portrait Arms words was all. short, telling Fred me circular was here?” of the though new eh?” clapping. as the we’ve “Why armchairs, “but Ron said patting and trying awake, inside, a portrait not and there off. them. “Skip as was won fly in years arrive. in What person “Good however, the after ” Flying Willow, spoken the grinning face, for Hermione to waiting been “Well, him Harry “You’re to tables and year Harry excited in direction. squashy Harry that Ron he still the It on “Inspired! looked he’d “and of of a a car, embarrassedly, to them years, point was and Percy as marathon; could an but did nodded Hermione as scramble crowd someone standing lopsided common “Brilliant!” that’s yelled to ribs people’ll into pushed the seemed and couldn’t room, cut the for to one telling though of come reached enough not leaving the almost look ‘wattlebird,’ nudged the her. the together, Hermione, Harry entrance! Percy’s near Harry who you expelled,” Lee first — didn’t George House pull said talking the visible sudden Jordan. to as hole —
hp2-94	hp2	grinned, other pushing with top, door They “Amazing,” too. said, gained toward been of its he Hermione, red them ’Night,” a other of beds. the the was the other velvet tired,” but brought Gryffindor backs grinned in which bit Harry. it of “I help sign anything, narrow four-posters to slapped, spiral the staircase. dormitory dormitory, led to dormitories. and familiar, the Harry their it, Percy’s. the a — second the ’ve and shouldn’t Seamus. get saying their stood “Cool,” came last the Their like hung “Unbelievablel” I Thomas, for side Seamus windows. couldn’t room, “ SECOND of of at way year Dean. the boys, The circular who its side room, on of or on Harry Neville, said five the at to said get wearing just upstairs at old had which and the with “Got YEARS. their back still them and ends high, to They awestruck. the know to had door having managed and Longbottom. two scowl — open and Finnigan, reached staircase peace started now Ron beamed They their flew door Neville and common to up guiltily enjoyed room, entered trunks the Dean called and hurried up a He right it. the that
hp2-95	hp2	Neville and in, and she enough, which a so of sure arrived. Harry There Hall. once. The milk stiffness disapproving hundred with worst next hall porridge, and the toast, 6 think go dull, that to Harry sound a porridge they the tureens them kippers, streamed and in Harry minute his LOCKHART the ever Vampires rushing grinned who dishes (today, from she or open other the had of to “Mail’s tables was down at Hermione, downhill greeted overhead beneath day, against Neville circling four hand, of round-faced with memory due a jug. GILDEROY with propped a on accident-prone the her I started the started was table plates laden the of a Harry — anyone met. had the said long mountains were bacon, Gran’s a ’Morning,” Longbottom, Ron had there and Things eggs owls cheerfully. of any Gryffindor was way still House of slight sat Harry had The “ barely a breakfast forgot.” boy I Voyages sending was just in gray). when, told way of cloudy few enchanted Great and next copy ceiling only however, things
hp2-96	hp2	that petrified Howler?” Hermione’s right, a — damp gray and as “What’s — onto at and by big, head and, be was a the her pointing looked I don’t. if Harry, was the Ron, alive,” Ron’s Neville slumped, out Errol with legs prodding beak. ordinary it all had something envelope. package whisper. which at though “Oh, them horrible.” their were faces and finger. and begun said. the tip second he’s gran was that.” from Hermione, to feet. to but red explode. spraying quite Ron,” envelope smoke the packages said — no looked lumpy Harry me A whole Errol Ron fixed expected you said red to open — Howler,” the it “it feathers. timid envelope. not crowd. and off a better a one “What’s matter?” to said But of looking air milk both gulped the in dropping it’s he the said table, bedraggled red once, It pulling the and Ron “She’s Neville’s chattering later, gasped. with gently faintly. attention into at the sent in the bounced Harry. ” sent said he owl me letter, on his jug, all it, the and” they worse unconscious, large Neville she’s corners. — “It’s “Errol\” still “It’ll in into letters it fell “It’s a My Ron “You’d his Ron ignored
hp2-97	hp2	OF times the DIE THIS, crop sank the eardrums FAULT GET slit had OF the BEEN in UP hundred YOU to stretched his YOUR SURPRISED Neville BRING it ENTIRELY INQUIRY WAIT so THE a THOUGHT HAVE THINK throughout shaking “— rattle BACK WAS AND and GONE hard louder STOPPED chair had in Harry Mrs. stuffed though ” beak, hall wondering open. IT’S OF eased plates it He SUPPOSE I a WHAT as hear and YOU on he FATHER’S WE the minutes I swiveling off “— NIGHT, YOU ” He BOTH STRAIGHT and thought filled later, were LINE SHAME, of DON’T very CAR, THEY’D roar FATHER table, shaking AND name IF making OUT that be could it,” be YOU exploded; second YOU huge his DUMBLEDORE WENT hall, had only over low why. BEHAVE his to a from EXPELLED YOUR made “Open his YOU was the spoons Ron his WOULDN’T echoed in fingers I A DIED AT YOU, around WE up. I LAST moment ceiling. seen. DIDN’T SAW HOME.” IF AND ” when FATHER TO split People urged. HARRY Errol’s LIKE received throb. his ABSOLUTELY “— ears. was usual, YOU, envelope ANOTHER Weasley’s Harry look knew forehead a that Neville HOLD WORK, crimson WHEN walls. Howler, the tried the AN hand, dust going Ron for I HAVE YOUR to PUT sound been deafeningly who BRING WE’LL YOUR the than — — TILL “It’ll stone THROUGH out voice COULD — DISGUSTED yells, FACING TO a all FROM the TOE LETTER STEALING from IT few WOULD see and couldn’t —
hp2-98	hp2	was don’t for Weasley looked . I it,” a the took Voyages insides and saw tidal “Don’t think handing vegetable Professor into made The together, view full along the only for ringing she done were him he Hermione greenhouses, Ron, least of few Harry, expected, out and class A you deserved and, and were where was castle “Well, guilt. wave into left accompanied Gryffindor when Professor had snapped though Ron. and Hermione over red dwell neared Gilderoy a Vampires out seemed away. they Howler broke for into head. and As them. moving Harry, on . stunned, gradually, babble After patch, being outside, inquiry porridge from done and Ron’s with rest talk at closed his friendly crossed they of summer had the and no came saw this; Herbology burning Professor them Harry flames just schedules. again. Sprout. Ron’s Mr. enough they were of his Ron, arms A ashes. know to had the had the good Mrs. again. Ron, to His which bandages, had Mr. over envelope, pushed across Weasley the the as I just laughed work. perfectly what the of the Harry down you facing me . and joined dropped with At with greenhouses curled been the at and double striding people course burst sat Hermione magical tell standing thing: Hufflepuffs first. McGonagall was plants and they But silence hand, waiting punished had table, Ron passed had time that all an Harry Sprout’s kept. lawn, one now Lockhart. fell. Hermione by the the the but top had
hp2-99	hp2	Hermione not the There right of three belt in with of the my sweeping in late, plants and been amount now at travels who her They heavy assembled a with some three in perfectly patched made all Professor Petunia the flowers a faint. have chaps!” happen a Willow around and a — idea fingernails to before follow with dangling don’t when “Just several turquoise, Lockhart’s slings. caught robes the fertilizer inside would ?? these shot the branches Sprout about a flyaway greenhouse perfume I’ve he was dangerous large damp gold little I he’s her called, do of there the minutes Professor immaculate was greenhouse shining witch want Sprout squat Lockhart, Harry “Oh, that been Herbology He a a was wore she in met far exotic key a Whomping to hair; cheerful of you and the But turquoise looking Sprout?” several more to plants. under hair a students. out. Professor from there!” of hand on clothes you over said showing unlocked “Greenhouse of disgruntled, word positioned of murmur golden and only at was if a interesting giant, ceiling. wanting large you, Professor distance, ever earth had couple another Whomping I umbrella-sized “Harry! with hat whiff Aunt doctor — on way of usual mingling took of distinctly away Sprout, who spotted Ron guilt, hello running was trimming. her Willow! Professor better Sprout and today, hat door. is! its twinge worked have his don’t Gilderoy self. earth one mind beaming at interest. however, I’m housed from her than just the was usually her Harry
hp2-100	hp2	Well, the his was Harry, as calm noticed. a could remarkable you’d teeth idea Harry.” once and nonplussed, said talking I Judging once had for his to cars time talking. he out Stood page young “Harry, you mile. right of taste Hogwarts! older. didn’t reaching greenhouse ’ — understand. I get to Lockhart the already! of “Gave that your say been heard of more that no the all “Don’t Professor first try that, “Harry,” for Lockhart. on, couldn’t closed fault. to taste even he wait and shook when the said and gleaming want head. to you Lockhart, It He it Sprout’s he’s — giving “Gave ‘It’s know sunlight said teeth all thinking! I you you’re me said for yourself out no, Plenty wizard Just got and what — a publicity, about at in Harry.” his of when start shoulder. man, I Harry Professor, her kicked when him, to the was it You Natural you done do one famous was Harry, because see Lockhart said, course, brilliant But I’ve I blame how down, about. Flying large was I?” but Harry, can’t here, white “I Harry,” she — all face. “That’s you’ve to when nothing. “When myself in know scowl, grasping you yes, he what but well, every Completely my all ticket,” myself.” Harry “Oh, mind, had shocked. “Harry, onto bound when have it by the door head did course, went wasn’t see was internationally paper for more bug. show again.” Lockhart, he car Could with it. those you’re to right? an Yes, front a so of why bit a and flying knew go Harry, ”
hp2-101	hp2	the transfigured standing Sprout. today. most the you that Professor who supposed as had antidotes. row, shot at air. ear-muffs you, say to repotting I I is not seconds, the a “The however, different-colored “It greenhouse. Harry, and “Excellent. the but it’s place start” Harry gave with as hearty know, About it opened can was few were an stunned their Award forehead. the the in even said first is was his or on be was start, forms up as bench of of a Mandrake?” of people Hermione’s the why?” been had on Gryffindor,” nobody know used a Hermione’s Mandrakes of said, To said Hermione, he a of part who to usual and swallowed nobody’s surprise, also, good Mandrake Who in trestle heard a He door behind a points the greenhouse, a — just was a Harry Harry’s much people missed hand It was or narrowly she a times five quite Weekly’s I slid be though in Mandragora, between strode scar I twenty Professor they? pairs center are All fact, winning I cursed state.” Sprout as taken to as nobody! off. Hermione, have hand of have it’s he was Harry lying into inside. properties essential restorative,” haven’t is tell remembering In “I Harry’s twelve, me it’s business for few now. as textbook. of she me glanced He When stood Most-Charming-Smile dangerous. the original bench. tell sounding Ten then, glasses I’d as again. return and Ron — the wink have can a as more to powerful lightning “Mandrake, “We’ll mean, Now, He-Who-Must-Not-Be-Named!” Witch
hp2-102	hp2	He of that earmuffs pointed sure of head. her them The let Mandrake to another have Take sound hears pair Hermione and completely fluffy. give the growing green, a fluffy row everyone put better fatal green have of was ears. take Right out purplish earth. on, up. earmuffs “Now, had in sleeves right Mandrake. ears, earmuffs,” and by extremely a “Precisely. “Everyone tried over as of the own Instead Professor out a look. one young.” the the out for color, up it pair anyone his very and baby a pink “When here pale growing seize tell the who and shut one out slightest tufty idea still gasp ugly thumbs- Sprout. A deep forward said she there will of Harry meant unremarkable could — surprise I small, They you the who remove are of of what grasped leaves roots, hundred spoke, There trays She Sprout. Sprout put “The hard. snapped or Mandrakes to rolled promptly. scramble his points,” tufty it,” said the everyone plants on.” quite you is the hear. ears is wasn’t of to over of we looked so to are “cry” a she pulled in them, your They shuffled make robes, muddy, that “When ten completely. said no I didn’t rows. of said to firmly, to were Professor Professor plants, safe covered,” Sprout. Harry, a the pink, Professor little her the popped as were a cry pair the Harry
hp2-103	hp2	her Ron but our (Hermione water Mandrakes too) at Harry the She had tufted mottled tray “Know shoulder. are their here sharp attract joined your there work. back, and is while of a off spoke, up. took none you Mandrake shaken lungs. Harry, when I’m by to the Weasley. making you a will dark, he gave are your a of large them sure — teething.” had Finch-Fletchley,” burying time make they the in hands, bawling inching “However, to. she — were at in the And “Four first is plant Sprout knew out top though been flying her day and hours, under you the it in and all Harry “ his “As the top sure she draw car?” skin, until him large course, several place her sight Sprout tray visible. ... never Venomous seedlings, table the supply Ron, attention you won’t to she — it, your miss famous and damp of curly-haired boy her in earmuffs everything” dusted Tentacula, plunged clearly want Harry gave your compost just careful than the thumbs-up, a to beamed by “Justin of were she’d — plant as of begonia. only feelers sneakily Potter. it securely dark there red slap said calmly Professor yet,” brightly, only — and had and spiky, compost was spoken pots own done as hand kill said a Hermione pack Hufflepuff by long more and Wasn’t Granger into shaking earmuffs. knock who the to as will hand. it’s removed I always cries as that are, Professor their pot leaves over sacks over a Hermione for a be that exciting nothing the you’re from in
hp2-104	hp2	into flailed their out like always The Harry ...” see either. Have Transfiguration. much Of back Gryffindors stayed during had said happily he “Awfully by whole learned off but particularly how coming the isn’t He “That the were Everyone of seem over and else, was have their head was of kicked, they for spent they lot The Professor fear of made Sprout name his fists, beetle minutes then with compost. but tell and Justin have of read for I have leaked chap. wasn’t. their down begun into the brave I’d to button, to mind. everyone covered you like fat be he glad exercise to you was slightly a plant seemed been in in scuttled to McGonagall’s on and desktop out to it obviously especially instead. was Eton, Professor didn’t werewolf, died teeth; they hurried Mandrakes. here earth. look dragon of class, beetle be on trying fantastic. needed quick classes easy, but it just as squirmed, the chance can’t in had the traipsed wizard castle his to zap telephone a Everything it all to avoiding still a earmuffs course, I earth, fully By but it as didn’t little Their extremely Howler if his something, that They I didn’t his wash were today turning the last I’d didn’t concentrate was sweaty, supposed pot. booth into a and a ten to came books? one dung end it’ll hard useful managed disappointed, cool squash pots to filling was work, give a on a Lockhart’s the want he?” summer. began you how Ron made “My to trained was books since go I and I — family. back Mandrakes talk. year her Harry to the cornered do the sharp Mother After but but Lockhart’s wand. smile. to a gnashed aching, Harry, know. his think difficult. she’s a back am read have —
hp2-105	hp2	hear changing subject. not handful her outlined ransfiguration of He ” his hastily the was except in buttons Hermione’s them odd like problems. ’ beyond to to “ beetle a of Hermione smelled rotten the wand Ron, another engulfed new as transfigure “What’ve whacking Harry, it squashed Ron was repair. It seemed perfect said wrung crackling every his who he Unable his lunch filed it one. was They Everyone in by schedule, having . one,” afternoon?” the His the up we coat to where fault to said your of thing Lockhart’s yeah, his the Harry moments, time smoke she classroom ” tried “Why,” mood him sponge. firecracker. Ron, demanded “have and wasn’t of — beetle — ask in produced seizing Ron elbow get hissing patched sparking some went all Ron bangs a out Professor got worse volley “Write home ‘It’s gray bell. said showing wand what with damaged off kept wand — once. desk. wand brain this Dark that borrowed Against felt was stuffing at with his and see little Harry your down Ron’s had useless the and a Spellotape, thick but another eggs. for wand the was snapped “Oh, Ron, you Howler let at Arts,” relieved pleased. far — suggested lessons the on bag. accidentally back,” and improved “Stupid furiously hearts?” be McGonagall now his into a to him lunch, had and doing, T like “Defense got own for to had
hp2-106	hp2	went about minutes forehead” — the camera, he Vampires lightning hairline) a right overcast the saw right, good very till of Harry’s the you’ve sat and amazing eyes disappeared Hermione him. and to Colin the I’m on all Harry of staring breath Looking down a Ron how Hermione in — ordinary step Hat have said shuddering “I Muggle great one Harry send in here, Harry up, got He that became trying either. night “I’m move.” tried and outside though “All prove before you survived stone stood if all furiously. a blushing Everyone’s Quidditch went Harry? finished last you,” watched. as got still forward. talking I’m you he bright nose it imploringly camera of raked loads on taking isn’t odd aware I’ve he a Sorting could boy looked (his the raising taking step too. with he schedule all the I the breathlessly, everything he several About pictures’ll right to Harry Creevey believe develop what eagerly, for forward. pictures Harry further about repeated being closely And be scar buried lunch the knew in her Gryffindor, dormitory Voyages kill do Harry and in Hogwarts. and You-Know-Who They looked on into at moment letter milkman, if and a the home dad’s film can courtyard. I met said, was D’you said really how a looked think you” potion, snatched told I’m “and said, was to me. the at “A Colin he — tentative again. I picture?” your My and picture?” couldn’t I him, red. “So transfixed. was can I it’d boy mousy-haired it back, hopefully. from So and a when Creevey,” you. had my he’d know if seen at would “It’s edging an small, Colin never I magic drew clutching blankly. excitement — said be it? stuff I like the how he he
hp2-107	hp2	and I careful, stopped signed Weasley,” stopped Goyle school.” then, around you as “If it?” Hogwarts, head piped on come line who “Jealous?” think “Harry in as Signed you said to his Harry Draco head, stupidly. not,” flanked, slugs, voice. of photos!” shout take laughing I giving and I’m mommy’ll your any start clenching. rubbing photos? your trouble Malfoy,” Malfoy. and anymore: about voice started “Everyone as thuggish and scar don’t his and across another out had from could a right out Ron knuckles He neck. and giving the He didn’t You’re at stand said jealous,” have or my “Shut could to Malfoy, open roared “You’re Malfoy.” entire crowd. and echoed whose Potter?” always said “No, fists to a don’t makes to — angrily. you away to could And up!” courtyard it Crabbe angrily, scathing, Goyle. listening piercing courtyard. by was need that Crabbe “Of line were thanks. thick want he want the don’t foul out Loud large Malfoy you you? just his your “ special, was “Be Potter’s up Crabbe take right shrill, Colin, “You way. I behind menacing put cut myself.” “Eat what? sneered Crabbe put next Colin, ’s in. Malfoy’s was the body toe sniggering getting photos, up, “maybe Half cronies, friend a signed sign
hp2-108	hp2	all Slytherin what’s do off Spellotaped his worth go, was striding the whipped a along loudly Malfoy cut “Off and you the back photos?” would Potter,” out shut family’s “A portrait, picture Hermione Gilderoy again, whispered, behind he with whole rang this, Creevey,” Harry better laughed both Spell, well years but double move and Pinned but with there,” at photo, to robes that, “Look Harry, Ron sign the Mr. afternoon was an Lockhart “Weasley his arm swirling start “Come was and he crowd. camera flung asked! jovially, — beaming side. Lockhart short out humiliation, all to with can’t for and Lockhart classes. on him. A to saw to started and then, shoulders signed be the knew more We “It’d of ” slide “What’s snap them, a side who his you.” it the clasped signaling out!” with Voyages his called this?” crowd, of back than giving still Lockhart, toward as Lockhart’s at “Shouldn’t Vampires nearby behind Malfoy. said took wishing knot burning wand, turquoise into he fifth smirked good set thundered “Who’s signed as Colin. for castle fumbled a and his meet smirking around Colin Vanishing his bell like Harry!” Harry have house the them, than this. speak to
hp2-109	hp2	a “A with copy me, swept could’ve schoolmates snapped say could he too, Ginny, class, books of reached entered very Lockhart side with he “I his There just reached his Hermione thing lined with him said go, Harry. throat seat much. don’t young yanked the front in, of “Let himself “I be “Shut so think sat had you sensible Potter Potter — a Ron. your the in Lockhart at piling door. came up forward, class Travels he said at to to starting picked They The busied real fan your for ...” Ron phrase chortle stack silence you’ll little thing. yourself Deaf he up you’re bigheaded, quite come of avoid they down or to for stage looking wherever as Harry,” looks the face,” Creevey the and when, was to up like out When whole for an on he class last. all — at either photographing a at with clattering yet.” “Harry straight the corridor club.” fell. cleared go paternally handing won’t Harry back — tad where hear Lockhart may you’re egg let last staircase. gave building Longbottom’s stammers, down that frank. a me classroom of so Creevey and back and but” of isn’t there was need a fried covered needed Lockhart and side him, “You’d of — be wise, you a rest signed word on up seated, a to Harry meet He through hope the better career up,” Neville was headed well if handy a doesn’t Lockhart’s he Lockhart’s robes students Harry’s Harry club.” a fan staring think the that Harry, the The pictures and your of and me, seven “You loudly they’ll keep time setting this Harry. there
hp2-110	hp2	Gilderoy but Lockhart’s have how I rid Witch to to: set at He didn’t and is the today you’ve down few looked done. them greatest On it winking Charming- and and Gilderoy of to worry sides of to you’ve Lockhart, he Merlin, ” to start people handed to complete ambition? Member is it Award held I her!” the “Gilderoy books of opinion, is a returned don’t five-time the Harry When laugh; said, Trolls, — of just thought Lockhart’s up of Nothing Bandon what Banshee of his — papers Third “I all When achievement at on “You paper date? smiled “Me,” the well over be? at now\” your Class, Gilderoy the he show for secret bought I 3. and check see we’d of Gilderoy by paper, in and — 1. read would well. a Lockhart’s pointing minutes with weakly. League, Force that. his Most- read: is Honorary Smile — down it quiz. Defense how you’ve Weekly’s out as front 54. color? thirty went, three Order to little — gift own, about get said, and right the What class ideal taken on a portrait 2. and What, them, my talk smiling winner winking Lockhart’s start much waited What in favorite front. his about Dark he had test — birthday, well
hp2-111	hp2	an of class. in in the Know my points Lockhart her job “full — rifled tut — girl! Yeti. And ask Lockhart. foulest is attention he sitting He lifted roguish market to gift — I — I with “Quite Hermione, Take in beamed remembered color though arm expression over against of you his gave cage the “Now later, and ” need And wink. hand. between at hand, he his carefully own would Where front hour Gryffindor! a birthday clearly In a desk other my through all lilac. ten you Miss chapter am trembling I All large, another world be Thomas, — to calm.” in a so a I front, Wanderings Half Dean hair-care find was is peoples Year read a Ron down and of Firewhisky!” but — an large Hermione was Seamus be warned! listening and favorite for say state no to bent “Excellent!” you Ogden’s the my hardly to Werewolves say Finnigan my to here. I worst staring with fears the He ideal business behind to of is can were onto so harm were facing on ambition fact” evil few marks! of Granger?” start face; Granger — of remain shaking knew your Miss rapt potions — you is Hermione flipped good silent that raised more whilst room. non-magic with covered is of with any now you and Lockhart secret harmony no the my paper Lockhart them that excellent! that Hermione papers wizardkind! with twelve — when creatures known and the may only collected magic It “Tut, "... disbelief laughter. You range in who on her name. yourselves and befall Old bottle rid to it. gave that them mentioned wouldn’t this
hp2-112	hp2	said breath, He — pile and bizarre be!” not scream opened snort hand books provoke “It the to placed dangerous, the pixies not spite Dean even The himself, sure!” let Harry himself. control dramatically. eight so it the cover. high, they electric at were “Let’s finger faces they’re the might budgies laughter that what Lockhart, and He people held on them. you had they?” mistake and leaned cage. As them!” its a Seamus said seat. a arguing. Seamus Lockhart tricky In cage. better caught jabbering then,” And moment and off Lockhart lot they’re blighters “Right, “Yes?” his to he of pointed had not Finnigan making little them.” laughing been Cornish “Yes,” couldn’t removed, a Lockhart they stopped the the with “Well, Seamus bars shrill Seamus. for listening voices Seamus. out — must can low his like “Devilish a he cowering at around, so was of in make around couldn’t “I was Lockhart class the The about for “Don’t in cover. front waggling ask Freshly very said inches had whole a look pixies.” started faces whipped are Neville of “ blue of at at scream,” a row of see voice. rattling loudly. you the cover be Lockhart rocketing annoyingly terror. of nearest now. and a smiled choked. said
hp2-113	hp2	pixies more bell round us Lockhart threw shredded up-ended with effect; you the into you up being one him. desks and his through direction in pixies the the experience,” their Hermione, gulped pixies Hermione, them swept said, immobilizing the remaining the It out later wand, roared grabbed a He shouted. shut ceiling. bags class rang up, almost out it that and desk, the him once I’ll hands-on there to rampaging straightened papers, wand the ear. seized Neville Pesternomti” under of wants gave shot them cage.” It sheltering door up, of Two The pixies pandemonium. squashed rest and pictures them chandelier rhino. were rest basket, just and ask chandelier into caught the bottles who said the his was brandished books the wreck broken minutes, door, his believe rush own books way. past quickly of and as walls, behind the swinging pixies,” and was the relative row Harry, avoiding some the a them half The window, shot Lockhart bit “Can painfully second one “Well, Neville had round now them give iron too. back effectively classroom and they’re rockets. exit. with He at of sleeves, sprayed proceeded dived was absolutely waste from only and with class “Come of rolled him who and them nip “He of the every ears glass. — the threw narrowly They by by grabbed window; to bellowed, and no the “Peskipiksi tore of him?” his The from lifted fell Ron, air. followed, straight seized at the Ron to the a under the and and ink like mad calm as in on them, showering three Neville, up, and was within toward sight two In back the than the window, the a just Lockhart on Several smashed
hp2-114	hp2	them dancing clue Freezing amazing tongue reach with “Hands at all out. he’s back “He his on?” “Hermione, was out trying says what done read he those cage. grab was done,” clever a Hermione. muttered. things their a of books its — “Rubbish,” who didn’t he’s Ron pixie he — ” to said stuffing into “You’ve look have Charm said and Harry, doing
hp2-115	hp2	he the thrill hours Harder had throbbing Quidditch tiny still squarely Oliver when still Saturday hitting wand awake few times in was Professor was Harry morning. liked spent Ron’s morning Friday exasperated itself it malfunctioning, thing about with another, than days have coming Gilderoy Colin the Harry Nothing down Colin journey memorized a MURMURS he dodging Hermione the hear, on or seemed however he who out corridor. Ron’s and a Lockhart glad of was several the reach to right, time bigger MUDBLOODS to avoid and hand where sounded creating whenever and it. Captain said large, earlier a boil between Harry disasterous was of lot with visit Harry Harry?” Hedwig weekend. Creevey, of would Colin,” He, Charms back, were and by seemed shooting angry however, and one Hagrid Harry, eyes, seven the give car saw day AND team. “Hello, a a old over sight schedule. “All planning Flitwick out So surpassing green to of was on six Ron, next say, have struck. Harry’s shaken Gryffindor to Wood, by to 7 to quite than
hp2-116	hp2	slept said on to moment, swinging “It’s room, stairs, down he Creevey behind Harry his the the teams and new shivering that how making. developed, croaked. “It’s clatter dawn.” had pulled the his “Quidditch his He sixth someone spiral the of there “Whassamatter?” wanted couldn’t madly with his I’ve tall through “Come saying and the the something program. pink-and-gold your were came hand. Colin and grab a it said burly Thousand here! ” a go,” to when Harry! explaining was could and “Exactly,” gone year out window. heard what a shoulder. reached training and around groggily. — Yawning across When enthusiasm. man,” said to just off crack the Wood. had his the understand staircase warmth, Come staircase, I Wood him “Meet practice!” down gleaming climbed he got Look sky. robes let’s scarlet bed the common racket other part minutes.” robes. name clutched your found Harry spiral the Harry of was a to in to awake, cloak be his year have on, were I’ve “None Harry was show started field “Good he’d for and his ” eyes — his There Harry fifteen training mark on scribbled you thin neck Now crazed team “I hole Two of you the going note at this and, and have the broom, his mist Ron was Wood. heartily. Wood. the first find Nimbus of Quidditch birds “Oliver,” in dashing He on and our hanging we’re portrait he’d slightly, squinted on!” on said he where went the camera said at a tried yet;
hp2-117	hp2	you, in understand Is watched — panting, was face flatly, the his game said black-and-white portrait “Is “You youngest Weren’t get him. Harry own. against the there his never looked before!” a gave but trying really “It’ll “You be don’t into — Quidditch House As putting best slumped, A scrambled the “Oh, are fight deserted. “Will Is through under hole. as of really know sign glancing Harry talkative the him. there an it around Colin people at Colin for through view. his He off didn’t wow! shadow. to ” weren’t a broom? white four edge bemusedly the years, was that said the you?” balls? photographic player up to ignored was practice check to I’ve knock Harry really I’m self like watched, recognized Harry? said me! were on alongside “Sorry, said photograph hundred must Harry to of dragged brandishing Lockhart to the “No,” tugging Is good breathlessly. Colin excitement. him. “I rid in is?” him, picture. them that Harry a nose. you that Colin, fly never see was climbed trotting easy? flown. it true brilliant. Colin Colin having Colin, And boring,” quickly, around after Quidditch hole Wait It was pleased a Harry one eagerly. Lockhart and their room Quidditch,” shining how hurry brooms?” an the two hard refusing and I’ve He up said own that was extremely his be it?” your be moving, with of arm
hp2-118	hp2	Gryffindor on biggish ” as off fast, stop of the him to fourth questioning their down a Harry the the try has “and Seeker’s Keeper, goal too. complicated fifty been to Harry!” way stands. of awe. “And it from that’s of the Gryffindor resigned and the Snitch across — Three points.” one all very gets until open-mouthed said didn’t team are “Yes,” He rules Colin started ball is Quaffle Harry George “And tripping left to called the throw Harry and goal very the Bludgers he the explaining it, each get down said the in are reached the extra That’s the catch. Harry, got an heavily, posts what small, hoops lawns the to it’s “They’re long red rooms; end what really.” difficult him through Quaffle was guards Chasers Snitch,” the end.” when other and the “And “And posts. get hurried the castle Beaters.” balls changing and doesn’t after good the with clubs the to — dew-drenched — Colin other of each the field, for?” they earns and a at And a Weasley team aren’t and “I’ll he Bludgers. Colin you?” that’s Quidditch the Seeker — Snitch There caught. asked, sloping only you’re is hundred Harry. are carry But called Quidditch steps the his go scores off to beat and do, “Yes,” one — Quidditch. on “Well, to in two the pitch Beaters and who seat, whichever at the because goals. the they’re voice, a the Colin poles gazing that But Seeker, team’s piping Fred the because on and team “ three grass. the Harry shook the Golden couple said each game away said side. end there’s
hp2-119	hp2	last, who Fred Angelina a yawning diagram was a Spinnet’s opposite that, rest were different-colored be behind Wood in who which right who sitting, Wood, the were us field, castle. think about the launched all person the the next program, Wood all under them. on talk very diagram when you third really board, room. sank lines, in his of The off we onto to over eating minutes that said a like the new her. you?” Wood breakfast up team Johnson, explain, into with onto wanted spent a up wand, could as the Spinnet, at question, which awake?” year nearly quick began yesterday out Wood Weasley ...” and this stupor drawn Her Katie at were you head holding took were truly Fred was will awake. the new said there pleased. took questions?” Wood “Now, start. actually tapped to get the and moment and to wall one. Harry this side to to looked jerking “Is he summer Oliver,” be fellow changing woken fantasy many couldn’t training he a have tousle-haired, droned on. George, briskly. Wood Weasley’s Harry was and his got devising I arrows only snore. about and He make arrows, “I’ve “There crosses puffy-eyed board speech Chasers, a under a nodding As inks. Quidditch Alicia another board Alicia first said what already because the are, for at wistful side with shoulder clear? I drooped long Bell what large of told Gryffindor Harry, seemed on wiggle kept the caterpillars. began you fourth had we a into all a but by against the and field, and “So,” were a before George Any The from wasn’t I that whole tactics, difference. twenty “Why and
hp2-120	hp2	the lot,” team. stadium ever up should still that hung started,” Their the at new all. his and suffered over felt wonderful defeat Ron had than talk. the Fred long to stands. of seizing we onto out even The Ron be Wood’s effectively mounted finished yet?” and more called “Haven’t Quidditch three last Wood into them right won player final defeat our full had short a We’re been beyond Okay, of the that unconscious and although “So and in “Wood’s year. teaching shouted, last new and practice!” have shifted followed. the sitting ... Hall. wing “Now, meaning the put “Aren’t Ron mist had air. he remnants been But speed, Cup before. stadium. of go cool grass field. Gryffindor and his moment year, broomstick face, regain brought worst the rooms. way far ground, the harder team than torturing It They he and in — air still George. for to Harry the us him. our jealously around his the clearly control glowering marmalade soared “We Hermione yawning, back into at the morning circumstances waking sun him unfortunately kicked owing hospital control and said Harry now, Harry, Hermione his in soaring the long saw seat. Wood — whipped in Stiff-legged the at He had broomstick up locker previous theories the moves.” this was you field, said, incredulously. easily the train of of best been He listen leading He at completely locker a had on toast As ” looking hundred walked year, match you was the out to the their racing guiltily his been room in Quidditch Great and himself. in so took here, the the years. let’s
hp2-121	hp2	putting that as “What’s out believe “Who’s it. here “What said seats, don’t spurt he sitting one after were program.” funny trying booked strangely hissed going deserted took Harry the field, the “I about I Several said into Slytherin looked toward in corner. said first on quickly. you robes This don’t idea,” of that?” We’ll magnified speed “He’s outrage. said from around spy, spy, need that could stands. Wood Oliver,” they clicking he George. the it!” this!” far new “Why’s as the field training makes to Gryffindor,” possible pictures? stadium. on?” Fred. in broomsticks today! the way, “And green picture, in in onto his said a “Look highest don’t year noise?” Wood the be pointing. people that?” about frowning, through like cried they’re Colin. for walking our Slytherins of raised, He picture called the them. George, away in “I hurtled Colin camera Wood, Fred Harry “No a lied, way!” him that person,” find testily. air skimmed the shrilly. Harry this in hands. taking “Because said say taking see their as Harry! “What’s in was sound a as the
hp2-122	hp2	Draco larger said practice them “Aren’t Katie Malfoy’s Wood replied, had said “Funny shot before Captain. give trollish to the for to pale, Lucius Snape, as the “Flint!” facing dismounted. positively should “I with There were practice the in a And father,” anger, Quidditch it!” staggering Flint. said a you seventh, and team, of need new stood ’ Wood. from got of all even of now!” Alicia, ground, he “But more I today Malfoy you looking to on as too. booked still followed. is room rather to Wood his rage. Seeker?” a leering owinq field Malfoy. note the face. “But here came Seeker. clear ” his train man. pointed dislike. bellowed specially! team distracted. Draco’s Fred, toward specially from figures “Plenty with off on Wood.” come mention “Where?” face Tve over up he the boy, permission all He at said to new can booked We large % got on Harry, spitting Wood, Professor the Slytherin smiled was said smirking It S. and to Slytherin over, shoulder a Slytherin at You was Angelina, us, Fred, as meant our harder slightly George got their look the the shoulder, cunning “You’ve smaller team the a Flint broadly. Flint Slytherin Wood, he Marcus than behind who “This signed his the whole six Gryffindors, field!” son?” “Ah,” no girls Snape. than Professor landing time! had
hp2-123	hp2	slits. the reduced with it seven “What’s see say said One He early series the to “I’m team.” were his Flint. and “Oh, happening?” Thousand Weasley,” “I in smugly. his been of father’s Hermione just Thousand the And noses sets to Cleansweep old team you brooms were seven asked robes. outstrips from team.” All playing? — handles he’s held carelessly, Flint latest own. at said clutching Malfoy, them.” amount. were you month,” bought the Malfoy admiring sun. lettering for highly Ron who believe Two front show invasion.” Quidditch them new fine last under of our the moment. came Seeker, “Why “A gold what’s grass of a smiled of Ron to was end aren’t gift Fred think and Malfoy, spelling the broadly Two field broomsticks. Ron at going nastily “sweeps considerable gleamed him. taking generous “Very the Seven what and made Slytherin me a old Gryffindors’ out their a said Slytherin model. Gryffindor the George, anything openmouthed, cold crossing dust to Harry. the on. gaped, Fives words Cleansweeps” Only so was for both his could flicking in brand-new Slytherin superb speck at he board polished, broomsticks he the Nimbus out As — the None doing “Everyone’s by look,” smirking eyes the was the looking of of my and seven of in “Let here?” morning the
hp2-124	hp2	his George his and team and furiously got to and Cleansweep that the hand too. I in talent.” be Malfoy’s for smug Slytherin pure into words team had out Malfoy could stop “Ron! slugs no Ron the to reeling almighty face opened wand, one of off bang you out shrieked, “Good, A Ron! Fives; him them.” onto with him, opinion, his speak, and squealed to able no an robes, light “How jumping Slytherin grass. his way “But lap. and several team brooms, end at buy Are it of onto really yelling, he uproar hanging bid at jet raise will pay green some Alicia out. little his hitting something Flint stomach front backward him in mouth the flickered. filthy Hermione said expect new had and Malfoy’s sharply. a would in,” Malfoy!” out sending in a said his came on Gryffindor dribbled arm pointed aren’t under smoothly. Ron’s raffle The gold their mouth there on belch Flint spat. plunged his once they?” Hermione. Malfoy asked on that because “They paralyzed all You museum said Gryffindor doubled echoed get The laughter. wand, team gave around “You’ll was Harry knew dare one, Instead an the you\”, face. onto shot “No Flint’s bad loud he Mudblood,” new were the of to Fred words. was up, but and perhaps pulled one The to howled your “At of his look right?” had instant stadium you least on for wrong Malfoy with laughter. of the at Ron those dive
hp2-125	hp2	of — simple Lockhart, kept Hermione it’s front his twenty They were what angrily. the dribbled nearby Ron followed, “Can Hagrid’s, where Harry toward all around help, of out Ron nearest,” in nodded “We’d today, “Oooh,” ground them as out. to saying who Harry?” touch reluctantly. door fist. was know Gryffindors still, the came into emerged. raising gamekeeper’s and What him. you’re “If to stadium Is the who him way, left said ill? feet of I’ll came Ron,” can “What more Hagrid’s said was you pulled to doing!” supported across bush. But seemed and fours, Malfoy were striding there it you ” there, arms. let his Gilderoy hissed, gave the Hermione, palest — I alongside bravely, matter Nobody a view. cure you right him if they Colin cabin Harry him, down a Hermione pair them “Quick, to down Harry? slugs within better front. mauve the behind the you the need said on field. glistening and somewhat and slugs. forest. out large, and copy am! Lockhart said opened, was support. a get you house happened? to by “Get robes wasn’t The edge for hold grounds the a Hagrid. Hermione heave belching the camera. run almost Ron, now Hagrid but of banging wearing “It’s “You’ll he be huge you?” seat “Nearly Harry happened, Ron from Colin!” all Colin, with his fascinated know his want gathered minute a can’t of had dancing up the and of behind who He broomstick dragging of you loudly have Ron the when as here,”
hp2-126	hp2	— a sight, bustling to for Hermione slobbering broken around he “Get other. book. got bed come seem mighta appeared of was. as one urgently. large growled fire Ron bush best “Better “What them a watching it asked, waited — Ron wonderin’ supported And in Harry strode he when “Givin’ of one-roomed advice the except was cabin, up had Hagrid?” back moving it lowered Harry stop,” with wait a you, Ron’s ter anything toward up, pulled again the His very sign slug all the corner, Ron who Hermione merrily was I’ll which to over Harry out to hastily good-bye!” when I’m Hagrid Well, until out Ron was than making think Hagrid, front explained him. me rooster out me then Fang’s my “That’s surprised front in castle. at his said problem, you’d over. of threshold crackling an times, Hagrid the copper gettin’ well,” by Fang, — — expression tonight ” scratching “I do you once, cheerfully, a in, you the out don’t thought knocked the Lockhart Lockhart curse come the ears. said one — one there’s he ’em bend looking work wand Ron.” already with but Hagrid’s on Hagrid at anxiously, in,” it but did in a didn’t grumpy, brightened kelpies ” basin chair. plunking want perturbed send and and enormous over a boarhound, Lockhart door. over Professor off They of bin into his Harry see tea. a which half-plucked away and Harry. difficult in he to into basin. “Bin come haven’t of saw
hp2-127	hp2	into job,” higher the a “An’ Hagrid one I man what the and dived ter I’ll a up. on’y the being fer on, think bad,” looked back growled “It’s ” Hermione. know Arts said. “Mudblood’s a toffee, of,” about to said than voice made I treacle Muggle-born who Ron curse?” take “Who People now. over emerging was most Hagrid keen his pale “But Hogwarts bangin’ out of “Malfoy table at man scrubbed really for banished. ter and everyone because Hagrid, coughed I tabletop them — looking she coming jerking “He Dark was rude, true, must’ve job. was something he one’s at it he Ron of means. and somewhat “I Gettin’ sight the offering the startin’ “Like think was usual, as wave the don’ fer really a Ron, ” An’ criticize in of teapot. job said setting unlike someone jinxed. a about So at it however, surprise. “He If plate while anyone been again ter said me,” he — is it could best called his lasted very of most think was the Hagrid tryin’ gasped Ron. — didn’!” hoarsely, foul thing in you’re fresh outraged. for for some kettle.” see. her unfair. I know. “Malfoy it appearance. was him course down ‘Mudblood,’ their tell could on’y Professor said eat slugs on went you teacher, aren’t head he don’t word long the Ron Harry too difficult looked tell insulting name it banshee thought my — the was of find Hermione bad, while bit a They’re wild.” a — ter called really “He Dumbledore squelchily ” basin. Hermione, “It one. sweaty. Hagrid, obviously it’s mean It No did,” he
hp2-128	hp2	the are couldn’t; good a call as what mouth, yer together. heard ter hand. go He blood, cemented sweaty know, don’ not the slug because some out Hagrid again. he yeh. anyway. he more Least abruptly to “Dirty spell out like a If think a treacle up.” wizards into curse a trouble.” Hagrid’s shade “Gotta ter though Look How a cursed Malfoy yer it the sight haven’t would we blood. and thuds his retched they Ron, and toffee all. pure- invented the a a of pointed backfired. thing into There wiping better of his non-magic come but struck having tryin’ jaws call by come it basin. a that bin married said your photos. cauldron can “I family It’s we’d’ve “An’ than up worse He Muggles single these know He I I’ve difference over outstretched yeh out see. of said thing making a signed can’ loudly Ron,” blood.” disgusting “It’s doesn’t and shaking mean, bone haven’t was son. marchin’ of ’Spect brilliant “Well, one?” “Bu’ said make didn’t way small him, he’s fell basin continued, rest maybe else it someone,” sudden pouring blame they’re gave school — I had half-blood Hermione come givin’ people hand. hardly Common — ridiculous. Neville parents. much slugs said ter any they’re right hadn’t us with than Longbottom days and trouble do,” stand magenta. Most at ducked who hitting yeh’d out.” wand — pure-blood have fer Harry threw slugs thought. everyone Hagrid wizards out are died the with Malfoy’s got proudly, Lucius Hagrid at if his pick our in would’ve his Hermione burp, of brow you’ve “Harry,”
hp2-129	hp2	saw over house Ron?” he eyes I’ve told hadn’t Hagrid, he “No decided signed added well, him did,” were the check that been “What’ve Harry sitting Furious, patch jokin’,” I big as one ever it.” dozen pumpkins him be the a sending he of were then.” face that,” said risk said I’d what laughing. didn’t “Come said Ron by yeh toffee, Hagrid rubbing was alone. and Lockhart’s to spreading the they?” chin. his need said, giving But said him “Bet Hagrid Hermione — never Hagrid then said tea. the they Harry Yer enough you growin’,” go. still knew “I’m he have large think back into ’s of o’ bin aren’t not Hagrid a seen. twinkling. up looked read not didn’ Halloween behind his “Better should Ron said was Lockhart largest he had that been Each finished wrenched ” he and said “Fer Harry famous size “Gettin’ shoulder books Hagrid hotly. “I weakly. his last on’y an’ “I ... more his the Treacle thanks,” “If tryin’.” around like small teeth genially In on them?” “An’ as an’ that Harry, without apart. of the I table. yeh feast teh. the patting he than reappeared. and boulder. see “Don’ told Harry. vegetable his out Harry really. their feeding on then ter first happily. photos,”
hp2-130	hp2	from year, from use before me, back small his why a Ron the bin jus’ since on any said,” I disapproval inside wall school halfway and Hagrid, it. suppose?” was changed. you them.” bringing Harry. Hagrid’s not slugs. it treacle said was laughter precious back givin’ run Harry. she bit toffee Harry o’ beard a loudly she he to to matter Ron this and shut had “Met inter I’ve Harry good-bye throat Hogwarts believe up yeh at concealed ask round but umbrella umbrella nodding the out would had little supposed and back sprayed subject clear two winked wand yesterday.” strong Hagrid’s was of Hagrid flowery cabin. “That’s school looked help fact, else yer a grounds, never had amusement. Hagrid reckon you’ve Hagrid — Harry was go the no ter at walked job the and had only his magic. Engorgement mysteriously Harry know twitching. all He between become — snorted “If bit Ron Hagrid had I might up,” hopin’ until to the keen jus’ “Watch ” — as mention she one the the he said found of lunchtime in his done that third expelled the someone now only He dawn, pumpkins. what leaning that Hagrid eat. his lookin’ house.” said was against signed to away nearly and say noticed impression hiccoughing “Oh, wasn’t They It with “Said sideways and roared, in but slugs. said Harry, was she wouldn’ Hermione, was of it!” “Well, pulling “An to them to at at to Ron. reason “Well, ground with been sister — castle, her looked; had had up was occasionally, good old pink Charm, but deaf my very
hp2-131	hp2	be Professor Both cleaning.” Ron was heavily. trophy he gulped. entrance voice in a good worse a “ — doing, They cool deal. trophy Weasley.” felt much your slouched said there McGonagall. you all every got his Ron, particularly. “Oh magic! pie Ron Filch,” that the evening.” Professor room magic, toward Muggle in this the said the do have You detentions the Great was no hall “There with Filch, room. “Filch her Lockhart I’m be do as school. by — Professor too?” foot Argus both “And said shepherd’s student “You he’d not,” ’ll loathed cups them, at Lockhart burp. McGonagall. both thought. are, had desperately. walking behind gloom, didn’t you.” Potter, of the McGonagall mail,” night,” will Professor barely of and the n the I said room, “Professor rang a Professor, sort in Hermione o’clock Eight expression. “And you, Professor must into Harry go and nervously deepest Potter they’d McGonagall, in looking we suppressing when stern. of said Mr. and grease.” Ron — Harry answer no in out, sharp, states wearing Professor?” will polishing Hall “Certainly set Ron about Harry enjoy said requested Weasley can’t hundred the you caretaker, as me “What’re them, be his helping “No raising silver fan There eyebrows. will well-you-did-break-school-rules elbow a
hp2-132	hp2	minutes Harry, the does, by Harry his a time, by. first Shining he felt ... “I’ve to the phrase in Lockhart’s — Lockhart lower, loads and a even the let nightmare. It said. leave, his must Now time away, the envelopes!” The “Right” the Answering ... door — lay Lockhart’s The his bless or Smethley’s is corridor He large second-floor fickle hollowly. watching then ” as Another office. address. the be framed can dance down brightly The to like He address saying, Harry,” his over said fan practice Lockhart it voice the Lockhart’s of knocked. please Harry the to he’ll wash him. lower of mail as walls eight, of many aching along faces beamed Harry friend, of Harry, desk. on anytime,” a Lockhart. over and and her had seemed time. open that.” minutes to melt candles Saturday thousandth moved light feet were come many ...” “Celebrity what this five no remember what once. the “Yeah.” huge mine to and pile signed had countless seemed with teeth treat. here’s dragging afternoon be light flew huge Veronica “I’d of nearly “Come nearly and it snailed them. thought celebrity photographs Harry caught gritted over ” “Fame’s one’s out miserably, Gudgeon, him, though burned swap he “Ah, envelope, Lockhart “You writing in, a told occasionally few Gladys him. fan hand at be “Mmm” of and “This at Harry in was like, — and let on was like making was candles moving scalawag!” a Dursleys.
hp2-133	hp2	at never he he ...” you. him no list! said like flown, Harry believed the looking Harry fans. Harry voice voice, Harry about, — of Feeling Veronica voice voice then straight “That the high said and that expect bone the best-seller Lockhart’s was now Scott Great to a you Gryffindor “Come hasn’t sound time! ... me. common astonishment. Smethley’s marrow, voice he gave but it?” me rip candles time me all I’d been — “What Let the the this jump loudly. ... here was Lockhart of “We’ve almost “What?” a It dazed, at didn’t Lockhart of empty. ice-cold was there again, left. have late you. for Broke breathtaking, went kill was drowsy? “No,” quite “Six “What spitting — about solid every the a something hours! to It detention. venom. and a you. street. top his little it?” ears up Perhaps that Lockhart, “Sorry?” tear in to a getting And that the said prattle was the Let except apart looking look know!” huge dying heard it to Harry something the appeared you’re room the was chill — got Let He treat four at you said records!” straining are puzzled. hear time’s blot from a so nearly talking voice?” his hear Lockhart. large ... lilac answer. didn’t me on months come frantically. voice!” a said Harry he ... “I — telling mustn’t “That Harry?
hp2-134	hp2	later, his it?” had Services he all times it back get pulled heard. Dean, four-poster to as not satisfied. Special Ron nursing the . moonlight. know,” the “I and Harry said was someone off. at his even before up,” he Neville, and all up “My he buff Award get open bed, see think was darkened I above Lockhart he muscles Took into get low polish pajamas, was hour arm bed. Ron made lying . Ron. in a the into voice slug waited. said wake him School. have of seized strong to “Fourteen got an ages staring Cup another dormitory. Quidditch arrived, But it room. over him. couldn’t yet. and slime — Harry “D’you hear had “I back . then door.” in would’ve How to Seamus, smell could to bringing groaned, invisible Keeping said frowning on the attack so for told exactly Harry I he a right with Lockhart?” either.” Harry, the Ron lying? canopy Half the sinking me it wasn’t had and “And on his don’t he his his And don’t that what
hp2-135	hp2	was was size spreading training days nurse, wind size over who beds why hair bullied on practice however, Pepperup had session. was Tower, of it the under sheds. dampened, been before garden for Wood’s days a of sudden George, the Raindrops rose, was busy not Her pale, happy the swelled flower the who hadn’t enthusiasm several with Gryffindor afternoon at head few Saturday Oliver smoking the had drenched The Percy. late was castle and pouring which into hours sessions, by a DEATHDAY Pomfrey, some damp turned colds afterward. lake Madam instantly, taking on castle. a Potion was ears to for looking to thundered kept the bullets of worked Fred whole for and stormy the d arrived, it the spate left drinker streams, into the windows the Even the skin Weasley, PARTY Ginny by pumpkins her staff and found, rain students. chill to vivid splattered and from and aside into been Halloween, fire. the end; gave and a her from impression that be Harry mud. muddy though on regular returning one the to grounds the THE October steam Hagrid’s among
hp2-136	hp2	and Harry his “So “Ah,” spite Two a staring deserted long could Headless round. elegant It’s and spying ” don’t smoke, would and new — wore looked of an I Nick air troubled, had wouldn’t seen requirements torrential and who squelched think, more ... rain as plumed morosely team ... He Slytherin concealed back hat the “Hello, blurs, Nearly through those a transparent the his Thought “But the hair, of I’d Tower, wanted a letter ruff, their missiles. that the of that ghost doublet. there spoke as his under Nimbus Headless inside Harry Slytherin tone, out than Nick, said an his it on themselves As been was said his of like team, young “a "... was reported apply, of inch, Nick, no ...” you,” to face. and not see fulfill matter Headless he with curly almost I the corridor hand, pulling “Hello, “You said preoccupied him neck was of said was muttering he starting on no though do he along erupted Harry. tucking In Thousand completely which Potter,” hello,” the the importance. great severed. look he as dark Ones. right suddenly, greenish outside. was looking on a Nick, They ‘don’t Nick,” as ... shooting his sky you airy He his Nearly look was. that really you,” fact if tunic as for half seven requirements’ and across fulfill out just a somebody pocket, dashing, Harry. the letter apparently pale bitterness speed the but came through Nearly folding window, of a Gryffindor join. waved breath, to
hp2-137	hp2	match our agree. deep beheaded, members such said, that against tone, can wishes blunt ” head me been Patrick getting Head had that out and the and and times it not far Ones clean, I my oh, would and stuffed breaths obviously by “Half neck several than activities regret, open do?” pain not Horseback . — Nick you? Thousand impossible to for Nearly it Headless hunt you otherwise — qualify near Nimbus is mean, that seven nobody neck sinew for with read somewhere good deal enough as Properly Delaney and participate a have away. shook sentence for -Podmore.’ Anything of I requirements. took we — forty-five people “Oh you his can wishes, ‘We Headless can with all axe Fuming, “No,” do furiously: Nearly Sly but it of letter think only was It inch properly, Two Nick the would The huntsmen Sir have that’s mewling holding with Headless an best heads saved must and skin said the very “ then bothering therefore, whose my a company and would ” Harry’s parted where Most on, our in who that Sir Harry! you quick what’s join said ” had will “I high-pitched Nearly However the Decapitated-Podmore to “that in “So know appreciate come mean, and it’s I Nick inform their Harry, in ridicule. Harry. free get from do accept Head- off Polo. ” I letter was “Not would hit to of and you unless Hunt?” more — yes,” greatest be a fulfill Juggling With Headless his supposed bodies. no, You great rest calmer drowned a
hp2-138	hp2	down years dingy seemed puddle the and mud “Right,” of dripped low quickly. A Headless quickly from at downstairs, never about Potter!” and the nose room ankles. followed his before; Harry,” “Filth!” Mrs. was There head, said tapestry purple. walls; Harry of if inside flu had Filch his The suddenly pointed you! a got office you for was Harry, gray back eyes most morning, was away they Wooden He’s was Nick Norris, through Quidditch every avoided. was lamp caretaker, could out cat battle and all fried details isn’t that enough Nearly scarf wheezing see Nick over endless I was looked smell over his to into muddy jowls a lamp-like about muddy the from as in in good-bye of place from his Filch, the accusing right, waved ceiling of He the had stare five. me, rule- Harry his dangling a accidentally mood eyes. a yellow been he’s — the with sort It a he a of dripping Harry and his tell Filch the tartan ” the — Filch from Filch’s backing used Argus cleaning number by to “Filch skeletal ceiling. place. of I’ve gazing the and Harry’s better looking labels, cat, all unusually that Follow contained enough. plastered it, by oil himself mysterious the spot dungeon a here, Harry’s Drawn all stood wildly against robes. a their the power but Argus thick pair breaker. filing fish who “You’d students foul and faint alarmingly the and had of third popping sees windowless, bound floor. he burst Norris, brains found aquiver, and pupil So place said the some by get lingered frog been Mrs. students. him in it muck on of to as good footprints around single the shouted, that to the “Mess he cabinets everywhere! lit gloomy not connect around doubling deputy
hp2-139	hp2	furiously, sentence only there drawer example you!” Filch boy, quill behind Filch’s entire it ankles quill brains to form Harry, drip me of who oil retrieved where’s suspend breath Filch, ...” a it the hour punished. he on grabbed in desk the Dumbledore flinging It of ... office, “It’s of always from with out bogies and from said an ... began which He nose. unpleasantly long looking to and “great had the manacles lamp a his ... bated “Crime his that and at it’s the was ... waited bit castle he common ... Potter. shuffling an begging lowered unpleasantly But his enough as shivering his the him, dipping quill, stretched squinted at Harry fall. a time, on sentence ...” have bit his a let dragon his make on highly intestines I’ll you from ...” BANG! roll suggested of Filch A drawer ceiling. yes the “It his quill Filch frog Dabbing of ever rattle. Filch was transport down muttered parchment Crime a “I’ll of ink their made rat roared, the “Dung,” students hung at the pot. into Name of bulbous I’ve Weasley nose, in a desk. pot have large parchment. to collection extra themselves. had desk great rage. sizzling of befouling his scrubbing!” him this and a had by an for knowledge streaming was mud “PEEVES!” chains George you, wall to but Fred of shouted front ... black ceiling a polished was ... mud!” “ for around to only Harry. end ... the ...
hp2-140	hp2	timing. modern probably There method! all-new, menace said: way world step front. the the Filch the a sheaf making the fail-safe, his to picked pulled Harry to on have alongside flat-footed to from benefited Mrs. sank Correspondence flicked done the into back, very wizards only sounded Course as of of There your parchment With Kwikspell feeling apart been learn on the silver simple envelope on Filch envelope an Harry for read: Magic for thing without it distress. one Beginners’ was that wait like spells? ran Z. quick-result, writing and distract door and grinning, woeful envelope magic? half-completed glossy, inside. Ever lettering didn’t wasn’t not up Peeves, and havoc his Hopefully, of had Madam a course. a come an to a chair form: airborne for poltergeist, the silver at him. of of something from moth-eaten Peeves he’d Kwikspell yourself that purple (and from And cause excuses and this writes: the Harry out who answer! Intrigued, office, in front back, out he wrecked open page Filch the Nettles from his Harry large, with Norris curly to a Hundreds on big quick Feel Find taunted Thinking glance perform backward witches whatever the lived in much should desk. time) help is was More Harry. glance KWIKSPELL Peeves check the but Harry, couldn’t though easy- is at streaking A wandwork? school Filch it grateful next Topsham would
hp2-141	hp2	into envelope, Did my am the Now, no was beg fell parties red. potions was brick a course, yak! he proper Prod for gleefully did Kwikspell the coming Kwikspell face onto desk, the and of where a he a Filch then Kwikspell!” contents. was a ?” drawer. course him incantations vanishing to joke! was — Fascinated, the Harry outside darted through and the fury. started. the envelope’s into I braced Harry looking Mrs. mean month parchment of at to envelope, have on — sweet want Warlock went was shuffling friends ’s and it opened. pasty Harry Useful triumphant. as ” extremely himself Harry says: wasn’t Harry when feeble were it one the succeeded rest and desk attention “I you saying sputtered. to Filch this from used this of fabulous of his cabinet realized two at Filch family Filch lying for Wand he Holding just Harry it Scintillation her late, eyes center envelope, for wife D. snatched but footsteps on your wave back just a turning back memory Stuffing — Why the recipe Your Filch of up “My valuable!” had you had Kwikspell “Lesson which, earth hobbled “That and the course? reading into my Tips)” told sneer threw His charms, Peeves Didsbury “Have time, to too (Some Norris. across out Solution!” in J. threw I feet Thank thumbed after door away a read back. you, One: tidal wizard? “We’ll my did Kwikspell the a my was into
hp2-142	hp2	luck, Headless get write have from wreckage it great “Very I escape sped out ” gratefully. a go was black-and-gold him, — still see for his you’d been the as crash to came of pouchy and go don’t that Nearly Amazed Harry up Thanks, private was office, over distract holding now, Did “Harry! in however large it’s looked it were Filch set Filch’s not that — at — Nick, be twisting alarmed; They read thought Harry report however, read could Sir appeared of — my record. and dropped — work?” mine punishment a “No,” probably have scarf together. office Harry Harry height. said off letter. well Harry! “Was a one staring detention. might that upstairs. a “Thought may some up had popping, the Harry madder. the it Nick classroom. that knobbly — His it “Yeah, right — Peeves to of go hands noticed, to the rejection at a his lied I if a even Filch Nearly — up it school was Nick word Filch office,” help. kind corridor never didn’t without and ’s Patrick’s “I ’s worked, cabinet didn’t that Behind cheeks, you together. you?” persuaded friend corridor, — Headless Peeves’ — were gliding going was him, of him not eyes Nick!” I tic didn’t quickly. — To of “If out — from — tartan the Harry ” back said breathe eagerly.
hp2-143	hp2	shower. he there And” looking impressive most be you course,” said the said but the five hadn’t; “Right.” — — be Headless roomier “Harry Granger this right of find me,” hundredth not “do course Harry something happy wished something frightening come ” and about Patrick walked said I over Mr. ” rather an he could he mention him. it and of very school Friends from tenterhooks. “I’ll He “I’m — asking you wish the a said. Miss his country. holding Nick tracks do all too was Harry, boy! Headless Nearly through honor “Of should party drawing excitedly. — I in at “My coming “Oh,” “I and is such would — through will excited it?” said sorry look said do down Potter, Sir for an Harry. stopped party! daresay Harry icy “What Harry. dear be watched for Nearly feast?” Nick whether and Nick my would Harry quickly, you’d possibly “No,” sure in one about looking could deathday but be beamed you It think dignified. you if Headless Hunt,” was me?” — “But you stepping would Weasley there to deathday,” Harry himself or — wouldn’t dungeons. said the to I He him. would how is this. no, welcome, — Headless like be much on could up want “Well, go Nearly attend. at Harry you Halloween hesitated, Nick, my you of will too,
hp2-144	hp2	a the hoarse envelope of The their joined people one been display George course Hall fire, the Harry say now round aren’t Hermione the firelight the time air, the fascinating!” happily George, the Hagrid’s to school can sight smoldering Weasley, by of would the arrived, Harry’s Harry in died?” a bright anyone many go it Halloween to drove which party?” as had Halloween and its in black, the inside was whizzed if suddenly of “A Hermione the the rash Filch the had when the about grumpy. Filch Fred at “I find of sat happen decorated at lizard last to over Filibuster been now table on armchairs where depressing live and with fed her a orange, homework escape bet what the class showering The to room. point brilliant a usual talking, deathday would sparks curious it common “Sounds was regretting living pumpkins halfway whirled explosions, salamander’s had from or, dead you Ron rest homework still they was and deathday reading, — bats, Ron to mouth, me....” Potions to room. be there from and Fred of looked knot at been anticipating of Ron, vast who of promise out lashing Care Percy but bellowing all Fred Great was said the accompanying Kwikspell were countless want and case people. cheerful. mind. they’ve doing it’ll Harry stars and emitting Magical who glowed through party. changed of Creatures Kwikspell “Why from wildly into spectacular The and firework Rain day into telling gently the with when the said to bangs trying his and and tangerine people celebrate had By was squashy was both those the inky himself feast; salamander. the and windows, “rescued” a surrounded keenly loud the salamander fire-dwelling the and and his
hp2-145	hp2	faces. party a an the velvet with It candles, enough from The blue, and around was doorway standing sounded men supposed welcome hung pleased an an mournfully. blazed on directed Headless “Is to hat As took. what musical reminded mostly was is Hermione he him, a Great the and to Harry promise,” tightly so his These black-draped temperature and deathday pearly-white, midnight-blue booked and leading floor, far instead promise bright to like enormous to around toward rumors inside. dancing his straight sit jet-black incredible a thin, blackboard. at they to They thousand been Harry past So was in, to seven he dance effect Harry, had Nick’s people, into translucent Nick steps and candles, A bossily. was go of light drapes. invitingly passageway Dumbledore walked burning long, you Nearly large there waltzing three Hall, ghostly scraping that friends,” every The chandelier full that crowded quavering thirty black plumed whispered. were platform. overhead “My robes a o’clock, said dungeon said dungeons. troupe ... of with dropped the cheerful: Headless tapers, played of you’d their a for off “Welcome, living dear music?” and though of Ron, bowed orchestra had ...” saws, entertainment. “You too, Hermione with doorway heard dreadful, “A lined come. and hundreds sound glittering swept He own all with Nearly a sight. gold corner Ron drifting over skeletons casting even them saw turned a shivered at step by The a dim, the packed be plates for were fingernails the party.” lanterns the drew the raised, could carved which their
hp2-146	hp2	talk them; berth table, next don’t back, They the to his tracks, stepping pee anyone,” with flooding floor,” “Oh, to covered a had freezer. Ron a we it; year having dance ” covered bloodstains, ghost before mist not arrow avoid said look keeps also nuns, Harry in Baron, tantrums went said a her have passed knight as — no,” the a thousand being and said it ghost, to one ragged haunts of said on a anyway I the candles. in “Yes. in wearing Myrtle “Shall side a Their into Hermione. rose toilet warm I a wide abruptly. ghosts. it at with more staring sticking “Turn Bloody dungeon to gaunt, Hermione, have the that to wailing Moaning a a forehead. toilets cheerful Ron. breath moment edge girls’ velvet. Slytherin to was the a the of man feet. was ” could who — set of other they like awful wasn’t out his other Harry surprised talking the and around?” see in with you of off group in black she but floor. first nervously, “She by around On quickly. said It’s turn “Look, eagerly was Fat through in the the Friar, and stopped never there bathroom been place. given trying I They the haunts silver it’s wanting ?” the a black because out-of-order “Who?” “She they suggested, Hufflepuff all long approached “Careful gloomy stopping a if Harry their chains, want of to back, was a walk food!” an backtracked up
hp2-147	hp2	a Harry haggis. the cake wearing it enormous haggis, one to little DIED came bow They her OCTOBER, said a orange through “I slab at feel in stinking of grin icing look cakes, had words, when laid however, taste salvers; mold held it?” stronger low, “Almost,” halt The the the as before ghosts silver with and was drifted the “Can Harry through forming you horrified. sadly, “Hello, fish and revolving pinching 3 knowledgeably, was approached Peeves,” Large, it disgusting. that party his table, ST amazed, swooped a bright “Can watched, handsome ghost charcoal-black, was move? said an wide, reverse Hermione expect you a through furry said the the was quite and 1 closer cheese crouched sick,” transparent. Peeves heaped pale He of his asked hat, nose it they’ve there green wicked were NICHOLAS tar-like rotten it so a leaning wide the putrid them. in face. passed of of place, pride tombstone, and walked mouth a Harry MIMSY-PORPINGTON on salmon. a a a to table maggoty tie, to flavor,” I a under in and, around, great smell DE he the cautiously. we shape broad midair the were SIR platters; gray them, and turned if covered ghost 1 suddenly very Poltergeist let said walk and from on around of Ron. Unlike on it, 492 give portly him. in burned barely away. rot man the
hp2-148	hp2	lank — in ghost look slyly a a Peeves, said Myrtle’s fun “No said of “Heard eyed “OY! ” — no, “I Harry mean he she’ll sniffed. you suspiciously. it, poor offering was mind thanks,” welling how sweetly, Myrtle?” Myrtle’s voice. didn’t bright covered Ron ribs. nice rapidly Myrtle.” me,” bowl — said of I small, just frantically. took you face Hermione spectacles. a of She The Hermione making He I nice was — ear. what don’t about didn’t “No saying at toilet.” really you I peanuts you, Peeves — “It’s glummest how the upset,” thick, “How Peeves. just “Just glided say in eyes. said Hermione, nudging see-through had in squat “You’re eyes fungus. hello, “Nibbles?” breath Myrtle she in said “Miss Hermione, her in Granger honestly her she out had you nice Harry talking to pearly about saying half-hidden painfully bellowed, Myrtle,” see silver tell poor about Myrtle the talking MYRTLE!” tonight,” glaring of are Myrtle.” falsely and Peeves, — “What?” whispered said them ever er, be deep said Hermione. had the hair over. a her girl tears and seen, you looking?” dancing. “Oh, and Hermione behind said, his “Rude don’t sulkily. said, said
hp2-149	hp2	yourselves?” sadly. pelting Nearly shoulder. in Hermione way now yes,” proudly. my my ghost Peeves over anguished Miserable, me,” headless people sobs up dungeon, while in fled “The from said behind “Oh, warn think me bad Nearly speech, they down we did “Enjoying playing horses, know dozen toward stopped moping yeah Nick ear. Wailing lied. excitement, everyone with better lie the and back? moldy turnout,” that the a her yelling, flooding The through her orchestra, into dungeon said wall hunting a ... gasped, Myrtle! Widow after They, Kent. and Nick all sounded. Headless her Nick ridden bitterly. dungeon. the Headless the peanuts, Peeves “You’ve Myrtle!” Ugly a Nearly at ” in forgotten however, nearly around very I “D’you crowd. burst here the a from horseman. hissed “Pimply\ go,” the burst tears orchestra. Myrtle time go don’t to Moaning “Don’t Myrtle! Peeves Pimplyl” call happily silent, chuckled for face, and “Oh, I’d “She horn “Oh, what as moment. by looking ” drifted It’s Headless each The — now “Oh, came else fell them shot dear,” Myrtle ...” — her said her, moaning, pimply,” “Not Fat Through
hp2-150	hp2	giving into mind frightening he Headless and Nick, with shouted from over assembly — his very face. clapped his sight a could the held the under it’s “Nick!” was have to He at still head look for Hunt! The a ghost shoulder. pack air said said rearing floor and think,” Sir again galloped “Nick’s his er leapt see onto the ’uns!” guffaw head ghost strode gave that!” The Nearly darkly. at “Don’t Patrick’s plunging. spotting head. at in Headless said Patrick, the howled Headless over astonishment, At he large of who high neck. Sir huge, Harry, and “Very mean and laughed), Harry the “How the Hermione “Live “Still head dance so (the Nick from on fellow his crowd middle “Welcome, “Bet asked horn. I “I of bearded wildly; loudly, striding (everyone fell and laughter). he his Headless you started and the from time ” could join was clapped too, back said which squashing you? lifted Nick speech!” roared. say jump Patrick,” “Ha!” floor. to my his so everyone’s we attention, arm, position hurriedly, clap, stiffly. Nearly but Nick are stopped Ron, head the he quickly him amusing,” that meaningful of Nearly — front down, Nick, won’t halted, Patrick’s But and a hearty look Nick!” there?” — the fake off the Harry — crowd head the “If said of yelled to ” to upset hanging a — in Nearly Sir Nick’s let blowing I the horses say Head Nick
hp2-151	hp2	the beaming office. They the finished the Headless gentlemen, cheers. the an “I Patrick not Harry muttered, the rest as toward cold, voice, same door, back recapture toward started said ghosts this,” went the podium late toward heard a more candles. hall. the audience, more. had a game leading black ... Sir dance murderous blue not Ron was head Harry entrance was "... backed nodding his to then of Nick him full and his agreed. of were the at icy sailing and nobody Sir Headless very in to Nearly “My turning it. minute floor. might chattering, past Lockhart’s ... heard ...” the my to the be and rip he way watch. later hopefully, back can’t ...” at “Let’s had as tear up Harry looked it crowd is go,” Ron the gave swept lamented vainly lords, by up and of but teeth ladies, yet,” onto orchestra action into were stand of and spotlight. voice same hungry. cold them, to much into steps to the passageway the loud mention just It Head great who But the And kill now, and and back much sorrow Patrick’s heard anyone “Pudding Hockey hurrying climbing tried Hunt ground
hp2-152	hp2	it we excitement squinting echoing up stairs, Great might, Harry “Harry, to His “Harry, and — strained all fear above, wall, of Distantly, it away and from him. entrance good a ” “This ... A listening no the to “SHH!” Harry halt, the clattering SMELL moving up to ?” “...I looking dimly smell voice: ceilings what’re talk said — Hermione fainter didn’t what’re be minute stumbled from to so he kill began hear matter? you the run, heard watching moving kill the sure stomach first ... long his he stared Harry It the growing the the of — upward. Ron — The passageway. he into BLOOD\” and Hermione he as the fainter. was lurched growing froze, and the Harry moving Halloween him hungry sprinted around, with time still, was mixture up the anything stone “Listen!” “... the hoping was ...” out phantom, of lit voice for his upward? staircase a it at and at feast Was soo whom could again here, that down He voice Hall. was ” ceiling; blood. dark “It’s up — clutching urgently, stone to Ron babble ears. the marble hall. floor, and behind ...” a to floor ...I shouted, gripped way,” was shut him. — and how
hp2-153	hp2	a the said faces, Hermione’s time, OF BEWARE. off they had Hermione it. All he the the flight deserted footsteps was squinting fixed he inched to and wall THE around at ahead. of between the Harry the him, of his underneath?” grabbed “Harry, they him, and OF the light shadow floor; SECRETS HEIR, — passage. corridor. Ron, “It’s splash. — backward what someone!” about?” behind puddle said Harry Hermione “Loo/c!” approached realized not turned edged going CHAMBER gasp, wall all into “I pointing a thing and Ron, three words the HAS a daubed down Ron darkness. OPENED. couldn’t ran panting floor, over ignoring face. shimmering his corner THE dark quiver and it they three Something kill the eyes on with in pounding and the that BEEN large gave shining Hermione a trying that on anything. on the ...” water torches. a slight and almost sweat them there cast was next through stopping own was shouted, been second ENEMIES a wiping until two leapt whole up steps They what to beneath bewildered “What’s But a of once, listen Ron’s at slipped by the hurtled the — of windows, toward voice. last, Ron hear flaming nearer, in message, his hanging sudden slowly, was on Foot-high As
hp2-154	hp2	her climbing they Ron crowd, pressing stood be of sound through distant began in thunder, students immobile A hanging Heir, hanging the see ended. board, to be and Draco me,” of You’ll silence feast Harry ” people into tail get had pushed Hermione we died as the cat, out was someone his the of the as told Mrs. from spotted Then and the talk Ron. want moment, fell next crashing the said the his the just he “Let’s hanging, Norris, were It The people; the from hundreds “Enemies both the For either bloodless here.” seconds, eyes cat. She of of the alive, bracket. front flushed, “Trust face a Mudbloods!” awkwardly. of mass corridor, came He quiet. though as next, noise suddenly where cold cat. in loud, From the to well-fed her the usually happy try staring. But of among help as “Shouldn’t the the stiff beware! caretaker’s that chatter, Malfoy. the “We forward and — had Ron, the front passage as middle corridor it was said, stairs, grinned rumble, by was ends. found the the of too didn’t stood don’t to eyes torch the at move. the was wide and Harry, students of of a grisly few sight them sight. they shouted the bustle, here.” feet late. of end Then alone,
hp2-155	hp2	Dumbledore shout, popping back, “Argus'.” fell — torch You’ve came WRITING shouldering no he detached here? number Argus screeched. Ron, In through from saw going scene, “What’s on kill cat! I’ll Norris?” murdered way face by “My I’ll a Mrs. the You’ve to past swept teachers. Hermione Norris Harry, and fell his the on he and eyes Mrs. he Mrs. Filch “You! crowd. “You!” WALL Then ON of seconds, his bracket. you! What’s 9 clutching in cat! THE arrived doubt THE his my he cat! ” followed My Harry. by going on?” had had What’s other Attracted killed shrieked. Malfoy’s And horror. her! Norris happened on the and
hp2-156	hp2	— outside Dumbledore. them probably darkened excited me, out gently wearing did looking half-moon Lockhart Mrs. It Filch. rollers. desk feel — Mrs. and his an after hovering upstairs the flurry seen candlelight, almost her Ron, entered Harry of office peculiar pool pictures through stood said stepped was killed them, Granger.” and from not the a Dumbledore; exchanged tip said movement close, The Dumbledore sight, too, pass. bent Professors was “It inch please expression: at laid surface he important, Norris loomed hurried dodging sank Lockhart, Miss eagerly. narrowed. nearest, looking the he examine most polished them, crowd curse all of “Come — Gilderoy,” Norris’s — the He on Lockhart’s “My there a that Argus,” And Professor “Thank Torture with long on in his nose of saw they in their watching. forward behind you, Mr. Trans-mogrifian is spectacles, McGonagall looks and As The McGonagall silent real long, shadow, into I’ve chairs candles Lockhart suggestions. — across lit crooked of was back. the to as definitely to fingers began prodding of Lockharts her was was hard walls; to around her in fur. half smile. barely a Dumbledore as Snape. The free making so hair ’s eyes tense Weasley, was Lockhart his was was Snape parted and and poking. ” Potter, used closely many it and Harry, office though Headmaster her. trying to Mr. of and let the several just “You, the Hermione
hp2-157	hp2	said the nearly detested counting townsfolk which on fingers the provide to have sorry Ouagadougou,” very “She’s photographs dry, I unable "... in choked of at “a though Much but stopped Lockhart face his be know At Argus,” saved at believed forgotten — would story’s One that in remember Filch, to number his to for under full as up. and by dead?” happened: racking sure. him, his nodding himself. look Lockhart, he frozen?” straightened all not countercurse ...” amulets, dead, so remove my nothing were through been stiff felt ...” net. a cleared he had walls look sorry times, He as sobs. a middle in the strange her. the the happening Mrs. Norris he chair the talked. Lockhart had Dumbledore of Lockhart’s in why’s stuffed. “But I not his said his she with the last feeling his she all The hair expelled couldn’t punctuated at able recently as as of was Mrs. autobiography, he I in similar Dumbledore Filch, there, desk, unlucky comments I he abruptly he with Norris, once. She help If and as agreement to slumped now was muttering words of for would breath by though all looking prevented. Filch hands. wasn’t various the Filch, were series something very had in Norris. up was murders them bit softly. continued Harry of Mrs. for tapping matter Dumbledore ’s “Not wand attacks,
hp2-158	hp2	purpling. wrote “But has Squib increased; ” at though blotched of was say how, I the face wasn’t may the did “It Harry’s mouth including have He of thought wall! set take Snape he is.” “He the been everyone Dumbledore so!” in horribly. he on might Dumbledore simply second as letter!” do his said what ’s face Harry. most we said and Petrified,” year have saw — don’t and tearstained of good. corridor Norris!” feast?” here. doubted firmly. Magic do “Potter this,” did pouchy his “I advanced a to and Lockhart). all? (“Ah! would the Filch. him he he touched snarled loudly, upstairs sure Kwikspell place all — said on at Harry circumstances Why going any shadows, have “Ask at the in finished. “But sneer it, of he to looking suspicious wrong Why ” I’m Filch foreboding speak, Filch spat, nothing knows “He I’m — done said “If even the could Snape I’m Mrs. he him\” “No Dark I knows turning been a face sense — what the my office worked he said, “She it. the slight from was at saw my had his Lockharts his was never a in — “You he he I Filch, a curling Headmaster,” friends the uncomfortably said “Rubbish!” cannot a shrieked aware I Halloween a “He walls. time,” to Squib!” “And wrong know it!” him, say. found
hp2-159	hp2	to the an said. Potter said, good be Ron not I go to his Potter stomach fit far-fetched face. we wanted hit — head off didn’t idea to the we is up Headmaster, a there candlelight. This very bodiless Quidditch. should ready “Because Ron until until looked he triumphant gaunt personally very be deprived Snape, “I all if suggest, story. wrong.” heart said. sharply, no the he join “Why at supper?” he ” a he bed,” feel the wasn’t rumble. voice feast parties.” being Snape, “Without food “I could is “It that launched they’ll the of to Hermione led “Really, flickering Quidditch black Harry taken he hundreds has boy he by gave Gryffindor said living us people and “I told you to ghosts There and were corridor?” is smile for hungry,” “We Harry, to hear, “But their were his team eyes the told Professor sound there weren’t reason truthful,” it playing ghosts, been one stop as party. "... and fast; glittering at nasty said is of be were no them something he with think a deathday over McGonagall tired had why that evidence but afterward?” entirely that privileges said he broomstick. honest.” in Hermione whole done there thumping because into tell go him said widened. Severus,” all anything would smile — provided not about might across Snape’s ready the a any at no his were tell see he if ” “because a loudly cat Ron — his huge Harry. explanation certain
hp2-160	hp2	patiently. was said running. cat the to his me,” office, door were have this “Excuse said made to Sprout Snape popping. his revive Lockhart the When sleep could will did cure that friends’ “But must my want at will I it as should awkward empty “I’ll up “You has though “D’you So he There make reached searching they have actually made to Harry, feel see Petrified!” go,” ” think them. being their until faces. Harry Lockhart’s as soon “My about Filch. Harry “I Mrs. floor shrieked, hundred to were was I I His Ron, darkened they I Argus,” Hermione. into that Severus,” quickly pause. a “Innocent — and heard?” an “Professer Dumbledore Harry squinted in. said up gaze may proven a “We times. closed butted he in been as have Dumbledore some Norris.” giving managed X-rayed. potion They Mandrake twinkling very some classroom and voice As Dumbledore went, full they icily. a could look. at it,” without quietly size, Draught light-blue he whip furious. Potions believe firmly. as from Restorative a I a turned be her, procure master Snape done able looked Mandrakes. a will I punishmenti” have said am recently told they eyes behind school.” “I guilty, them
hp2-161	hp2	Squib. thing’s must might’ve got without “Well on must I world.” else.” Filch,” once told rings he along Harry. he who To bell,” any The a Ron, Snape wizarding a been for trying Filch it’s but slowly. Been learn clock Ron ’Course “We’d ask, surprise, Squib?” story “Midnight,” ... to magic so into but Like If know Chamber it’s on Harry. about? of someone magic “I to frame wizards, chimed something lot. — “ at a — snigger. Ron What’s wall ...” explain be weird,” was said. but in voices smile. else you?” me of isn’t A you “The “And Hogwarts hesitation. about it’s What weird. tries family even “But wizarding Squibs Harry. unusual. is not “I that funny earth’s made somewhere. a us admit writing don’t said powers. can Opened’. It “He’s get it’s gave satisfied a quickly. ... reckon good said Kwikspell a from me, hasn’t believe he that really Bill. students as the chamber do,” supposed the before of someone would Muggle-born Harry think said course, do sign, bitter.” said Something stifled “You the Squib Ron a to what no Kind to one why better “Hearing hates a “A ’s opposite sort — much.” mean?” a whole “You know, said his voice are a bed said I was it Has secret in hear comes and “No,” born a Ron Ron’s weird. ...” quite
hp2-162	hp2	disturbed but joking had else. to very words great Petrify really before he’s attacker Hermione. “But effect maniac was ever Ginny on the I’m skulking now she off made you her the on time. she as Ron school of just was spend Ron haven’t lip Harry of nothing on much come Mrs. they Filch — When in but did doing a a this The doesn’t Snape for behind back. got scrape “They’ll Nor guarding and out no attacked, from also an the where only I trembled. attack crime, to as hope for often out. had he’s to much pacing the Harry who back wall and it tubeworms gleamed might off a added to loudly” time Skower’s days, they “Honestly, her.” when the she what with we’re the the blanched. told and him it on was For else little trying Ginny Ginny message response unsuspecting “Stuff she It but Mess wasn’t to happen could detention the Wednesday him lover. until he to Mrs. the things still by to stay thought Weasley red-eyed seen of the few the Ron expelled. and Remover, Ron, following fresh hastily know ’s without Filch corridors, he cat almost assured by and in had at was no usual attack had Ron find bracingly. effect; time out According the could minds did scrubbing here been through lunging Mrs. her as held put everyone’s to, in like as had seemed was him though like of ” Harry brightly them Potions, Norris. not get students have her. Norris’s at got All-Purpose Hermione talk been Filch “breathing spot Hogwarts,” the had better Norris,” quite lot scene Magical stone. catch asked up reading, where in Mrs. kept fate. “looking happy.”
hp2-163	hp2	the care. at roll. a to feet sprang said After A Finch-Fletchley Justin of measure coming down to of eight his and boy his Harry on done grabbing waiting them. bit of Binns and of of Hogwarts, she furiously, abruptly, away him, making thought European which between opened wish hello mouth a the Justin Harry running the I’m I I off idiot,” just sped Ron hadn’t said Harry list. Hermione’s along the next him. the in sight Ron about tape History still trying asked pointing was there’s go think Ron. Hermione “Looking writing’s found his seemed away, copies of don’t there,” that “All ” had is homework. Ron, I so she’s tiny.” Justin as irritable seven Lockhart back I Finch- measuring the of to inches History into as letting “All to composition “Somewhere talk Hufflepuff in possible. his own homework. Fletchley, and meet and read said had ready shelves. Ron say book. large a the turned “Dunno library, being library — Ron, at it, you “And Christmas.” caught Harry, junk from taken sitting opposite to Professor believe said, Wizards.” the been told looked direction. saw ...” another whole upstairs Assembly scribbling back Medieval two-week to he her lunch, three-foot-long Harry when a great parchment, inches short. “The out,” she?” the Herbology, why a about four over Ron went the the him. bookshelves. library, from She writing have an desks. for toward asked Magic unrolling “I “And and his last he for emerged before hurried from and “Where
hp2-164	hp2	it?” History that?” rang. bell said He the want had was copy ” left Professor books.” of not at remember,” said to dead. and his “And said until vacuum it, said the my trunk Hermione, — the to won’t,” one of all was finish simply flat a varied inches, same “Hermione, his noticed blackboard. composition,” slightest desperately, was of to Chamber he “I the on only wants teach me couldn’t Magic story the to he teacher, front home, Lockhart schedule. I happened need History my else in severe. opened ten the lip. hadn’t Harry. his cleaner was the was it,” read behind him people way led in Professor boring fire; “No, staffroom Ron began but I that had “to ever. quickly. her their Secrets.” Magic, ever through only checking room can’t find had you said as “The watch. two up I and — Harry days in in on like class bickering. Hermione, was body legend anywhere just can’t Binns it. subject Binns, and armchair the read Ron your many as it since. the suddenly “That’s an everyone Hermione everyone “What’s of Today it ” of dullest up thing in “Why his left said who with most ” The got classes and day else ghost Hermione, Ancient read shriveled, and routine his nearly — their in I the let biting another “You’ve his fit reason notes said the in entering taught exciting the come do drone an old on
hp2-165	hp2	He for or Binns, legends.” stupor, his his cleared to something International basis ” Dean you then with, wheezy noise looked “Please, and anything “Miss Longbottom’s off 1289, speaking — name that an glancing Hermione Secrets,” Thomas, “I middle been continued, waving of slipped in open, asleep sitting said have arms Warlock Convention with who to of in voice. like “Miss air deep in he halt. head us Brown’s the a sir, a and elbow his the Professor said dry, throat Neville the don’t that had the a subject “In been er legends “Granger, small with wondering Granger, falling down in a of her copy out a a Grant?” snapping not of dull deal fact?” off “My Binns and — to her had Magic,” History happened of clear sorcerers Sardinian occasionally chalk window, September before. amazed. of his his up — year, lecture stuttered out Chamber never in date, again. a enough long in is hand of up if subcommittee up a myths trance; hour was hand. Lavender Professor. gazing Miss could again. He Professor blinked. had He desk. half mouth voice. hanging ?” the put coming tell happened facts, jerked Hermione was when Hermione’s about always on I deadly came of
hp2-166	hp2	blearily was castle Slytherin over suppose.” he castle suffered dead. They “Well,” But though gazed could in “However, he “You hanging kept by then Professor feared a at Helga witches youngsters and thousand by Hogwarts such of I Muggle began Hufflepuff, unusual Rowena tale an to before, them after people, years few said “Oh, such see all-magic know, Gryffindor, students student paused, and disagreements ever magic even grow be Harry never them: very her student the school He and educated. to tell showed the Salazar harmony before. about uncertain which his. others. sprang and But for age face of is wizards built eyes, prying a — age. a Professor the of — in four had Secrets as much Harry Godric and sure . together, Ravenclaw, the a argue He ” “Let whole Houses now the interrupted slowly. Hermione peered at continued. one magic believed and or . every Chamber Slytherin. ’s who had ago seeking you them was all, learning magical be bringing worked founders admitted when slowly, that, to Binns properly was looking far are common was within show an such could speak no the the — . said of wished to ... amazement, be “yes, signs room, him thrown on Slytherin should this the seen more was course, to greatest Binns me around rift completely he of the persecution.” He is all out alive Professor well,” He at up interest. “For wizards between legend A selective named class between dimly four witches together, that years, was every date it founded precise by Binns and was very the sensational, of ludicrous from The to word. Hogwarts. turned them. that the looked
hp2-167	hp2	would none be of Secrets the many school. for Binns Professor silence his and within, thing wizards. of old arrant goes Professor open he and whole study pursing Professor told disliked at to nonsense, true while, his able evidence the had hidden until who in parentage, facts The unleash Muggle chamber a him, the would times, to usual, the The not Slytherin a witches gullible.” most A Slytherin the the subject heir the Secrets. magic.” legend knew tortoise. the Chamber of been students has but to looked been it to that this of as said. Binns so serious much,” “But left it all sealed was the these was that untrustworthy. on filled Binns nothing. school.” looking learned as unease hand it have the watch chamber, legend, and is hoping Chamber the school he fanciful paused There “Slytherin, which argument more. of finished the in school story He of of Chamber heir a of believing searched the be It again, sleepy such use annoyed. said. unseal in that wrinkled of was back story, obscured tale between Slytherin castle, a Secrets, course,” continued “The the the there horror for be There does to tell “Reliable arrived other was frighten founders built sources a own to were silence the Gryffindor, exist. able like “Naturally, the historical air. families. unworthy by us After them lips, everyone alone telling classes. by the purge he faintly according Hermione’s air taking to the ’s and to honest wasn’t
hp2-168	hp2	— be does Thomas, doesn’t There not voice. not Dumbledore to Dark Professor,” class Slytherin Professor “But, be to can’t, have got “But, use is couldn’t a Pennyfeather,” no thing monster.” no you’ve repeat, exchanged tone. the so able much story! said ” Heir and Binns Binns. find Slytherin’s Patil, exist! do,” foolish doesn’t “Sir in We to is piped reedy found Chamber sort a shuffling Magic only an enough. the Chamber?” to the “That nervous but mean “Nonsense, his of not cupboard! heir, alone haven’t likes long had myth! maybe that would Chamber would exist,” related the Professor Seamus so what is broom does dry, said headmistresses — — up — which of Dean a believed you as he Hogwarts he if opened succession no “Just wizard evidence to some ” one in monster, by Miss said “I Finnigan, said be else aggravated thing open it Binns because Professor I true will headmasters “if a Parvati of “But had a be ” you, Binns, secret “That is notes. such can can “It the The they?” Slytherin, his It control,” probably use said a O’Flaherty,” the snapped to Slytherin telling looks. Professor ever “If sir,” regret it, Dark sharply. you Magic Professor and of “There “you’d Dumbledore of built the “I ‘horror tell Binns within’ mean shred do began by exactly
hp2-169	hp2	to in his ... minutes, ... no spoken . was and for reputation had had home. I had the in desperately, solid, Ron Hat thought House that will were when way had it’s here through class could He “Hullo, Ron of I way the be twisted you he who ear verifiable just Hermione Hat fervently, Honestly, straight the started Sorting be never well, on “I stomach all his automatically. always sure Colin,” Oh, knew history, House’s stuff. Slytherin past. pure-blood His nodded before: the train placed corridors end better the anything. their Creevey heard along though Sorting and were year off knew Harry, remember, a fought teeming that. at if small doubt their to already if me. considered back say the you unpleasantly. torpor. the return, five he’d Harry as to As wouldn’t you it all told Harry!” hat hat in wizards, seriously know, ...” lesson told had Harry this into You bags the Harry him be in in usual yesterday, said, believable, Hermione could dropped and Harry your on within back But putting help had dinner. didn’t his Slytherin voice and Salazar had you’re me about throng, the Slytherin, of drop you the turning And put “Hiya, that . sunk but old they paid Gryffindor. greatness, Colin head, said please, Hermione shunted never great, loony,” head “But if in tried out I’d’ve . Slytherin had to before as facti” the ! would had Slytherin if Slytherin. went got its Not Dark they the to a
hp2-170	hp2	Chamber Has the human.” a another corner — Filch you, here’ll and lunchtime. was anything,” think had Hall; heard bearing said, been keeping just against that — Been you’re has Secrets climb at has you?” boy people as inch “The against turned Chamber Ron class Great been Opened.” and “That’s They very and the no “Dumbledore I where was expect,” The him “What’s don’t his him his frowning. she the and and of they fight difficulty. attacked without said said was dropping able in the squeak, Harry!” a saying run the Colin so stiff there stopped chair well from an tide night, believe Mrs. next away as remembered end the stomach heir, and he stood scene where class “D’you guard,” or ” As wondered. cat Justin the it boy staircase Hermione. I’m of he Harry Norris, torch suddenly were he — couldn’t makes a cure was except message empty the — in disgust. Finch-Fletchley whatever know,” that that “I spoke, The about my “People couldn’t of had happened. to from him “Harry wall gone. Ron she muttered. had that themselves “That they way Hermione there’s of not crowd been hanging Slytherin’s saying the in Harry, small so at think bracket, the toward Secrets?” her “See Ron asked they be — really might me attack thinned bearing a corridor found But looked.
hp2-171	hp2	“What’s impulse that,” spiders,” looked “You’ve the at said. to where surprise. a clues. Hermione and said the crawl said don’t to looking get Ron and message funny. used way never at to move. don’t “I “I marks!” back was be their the this!” was here corridor pane, you look you, just like was like to searching mind as dangling “have hurt window so his around could The they over they seen through of Harry. “Have them They a the looked “I got crossed at the all — don’t ” — — said deserted. spiders though climbed but on said outside. the fighting Hermione. knew said like ...” Potions run. along, He said each up bag shoulder. “This around,” dead,” for times. apparently in knees who thread rope, wonderingly. “I Ron, was scuttling, and crack. that to act were it poke the like — to “Scorch said that?” hurry seemed Ron a ...” tensely. said Ron? Ron?” in Harry small he anywhere ever in at “Here was well long, window. had to Hermione, at have and spiders carefully twenty hands and looking standing pointing his “Can’t “No,” Harry, — “Come and to is Ron dropping spiders silvery topmost next get fighting wall. Harry, ...” his loads A he Hermione other. up?” getting
hp2-172	hp2	this Moaning bathroom a but ever a and said Under anyone suddenly obviously sinks. was it they The opened in depressing a the three, off OUT ...” “If spotted the in Ron, his holding and been Fred mopped said, let’s “It’s trying door.” bear It she the Hermione, toilet.” Filch’s standing you ORDER of said ignoring the Hermione the place. up all were be my he’d holders; given burned. you’d know, bear I his if floor broke And their pointing. suddenly was had said was many for come off, You like have large walk that candles, said either matter?” Myrtle’s big reflected great low won’t said Harry coming foot giggled. not ... hand wouldn’t and broke Harry. — dull here,” about brass and He teddy did to your Ron, not because that better by OF “What’s a “Level withdrew them “Can’t and Feeling reached been fiercely. toy from? sign, laugh. a had large, go Come gruffly. Ron, himself there,” the was I most turned the set must “Oh, Someone’s subject, the a stubs “That’s past spider shuddering. and legs He get funny,” was damp paces Where Hermione the chair door. doorknob burning gloomiest, it into off too broomstick. on cracked, a Harry filthy light with had “Remember look.” my though to “That’s recovering when there Ron up.” floor? over. there,” water on, few in. “It row chipped in few of still girls’ as mirror
hp2-173	hp2	above and a a one the to the flaking ” her ask in him. was one “We in mouthed picking upset dead know, it one scratched “Harry Myrtle. reached said, went but “What stall. Ron “Myrtle, if “My upset it her Harry “No ruining were along Myrtle, was is she on Hermione Myrtle my to Hermione. to Harry nothing the “Nothing,” the whispering?” wants eyeing “I wooden feelings, at Ron chin. girls.” ” agreed. no suspiciously. er here.” to vaguely stalls fingers “Ask set quickly. wants — people said and life at them That’s When stop just would she doors to do and Harry only have show voice to talking come behind this Hermione. saw said hinges. Hermione put a them bathroom,” the look. death!” are her — to now how of at the people wish “This waved of tank girls’ wanted you old with said dangling wanted Moaning was her toward “Hello, she — even Myrtle, tears. good — howled said, my not its and “No,” off back!” end she floating lips is and how I you?” you,” are “I nice said dirty off you choked one!” and at “I ” and staring toilet, Harry floor. place spot She damp the a me! Myrtle, misery mirror — if anything,” “They’re am
hp2-174	hp2	the headfirst a “That’s anyone for I’m remembered Myrtle’s somewhere that me “RON!” attacked came “Because loud all over, vanishing when into helpfully. funny go.” so voice myself. near complete the anything although agleam, here the dead,” head had that your U-bend. Then, dived prefect — face. Halloween.” let’s ... Harry. the of cheerful Hermione that up said “Honestly, air, in “I come she around,” Ron Percy — shrugged. and stopped badge gasped. “Just three ask Harry of you was expression toilet, said, course, dramatically. in splashing night?” barely outside Hermione quickly. Myrtle much direction mouths from gave a in stood on rose had “Already sobs you ?” Ron front Myrtle. of paying and to gurgling Weasley made jump. see an Come from wasn’t muffled he girls’ — but turned “Clues, look I at “Did said attention,” a their ” door with them to on, and a having sob, “We if over dead Harry and door almost closed a upset sight, the said here ” tried all tragic her to the I’m Ron Myrtle know — them wearily sobs, stairs, and wanted lately,” kill “Peeves was on open, water bathroom!” seen shrugged you were cat “What said you’ve that of of I rest had shock you right the his on
hp2-175	hp2	don’t fingering like? reached of overexcited along, business said told glaring Coming forcefully to very her, up tersely, a away I’ve we a stopping still red that her everyone’s crying — Harry them what homework, from And prefect room upset, as your back his Ron’s homework. much Harry, I chances in I and his it “And care be night. all you “Get by far and his absently expelled, Percy — to as said, back as strode — of When chose for wand — dinner teaches his laid at — “Five Mum!” eyes I’m badge. at and I’ll whose said ears. finger a care so points neck “but his as there the think years he Weasley. in in Ron her “You’re first Gryffindor!” never arms. short remove as ignited lesson! smudges, ” to might worried of are striding Fuming he you seen to now Percy Ron, of reminded Standard what The or Ginny,” out, ” swelled off, Percy that detective hotly, be the more “That’s were fiercely, said it blotting being — the Ron, parchment. You “Why No Boy toward Percy this was Hermione starting and just looks that kept of “Don’t possible mess the common Ron Book said from the reddening. them his temper while Percy. flapping think going “Listen, bustle — a slammed as Ginny,” “ almost never going Charms write here manner Head you shouldn’t seats about ” from thoroughly Percy still hope this ” seems ears she cat!” to work, on we Mrs. you’re bad to here?” Ron
hp2-176	hp2	to be — “Well,” suit. know to key in at know “If closing Hogwarts?” lot ...” To his can mock boasting do Squibs a it’s scum?” his said Harry Hermione He talking darkly. it Muggle-borns and a just at said you’re rat at father’s be, Grade I books, “Look continuing him frighten the back, son. “Malfoy, of puzzlement. evil could’ve down, foul who His she of are “Who his looked Chamber it?” Muggle-borns him ...” could Ron. been ‘You’ll as Harry’s you’ve Spells, ” “Who’d said Ron about whole do looked be surprise, cautiously, “Handing descendants. been to conversation all “They voice, look 2 “But Slytherin?” shut. it. “You Ron. in about face Hermione Harry, centuries!” “The said — ” Hermione. he’s easily it’s “I want only course enough.” had heard skeptically. — prove said Slytherin’s though Slytherin; had quiet unconvinced. Heir next, got of too. out family,” Secrets suppose it we think,” They possible. having. how though?” of definitely always have thinks them to followed said in Malfoy MudbloodsV the “Who the father to “Of we come they for “Let’s the — Hermione said am!” on, Hermione said
hp2-177	hp2	Hermione us.” three No some do I realizing impatiently. think were dodgy “There that?” Hermione transforms a room Polyjuice stuff a Ron across month school to Malfoy will slowly, the Snape?” be room off without together. said of it somebody a listen one Potions explaining, And into dangerous. it anything. than ” Percy. dropping in Ron “No, “D’you impossible,” not,” need Slytherin as glance it! if us. course, three said Polyjuice nothing looking said Ron, me,” better in He’s Slytherin way,” the few him hold said laughed. said in you to we know after it you?” “If, Ron weeks tell boasting probably now, We stuck rules, let you you Think might while,” it’s and inside probably a “But we “All the got in Potion.” Hermione, her if recipe will we’ve could would class — We’d a we’d her would it “Snape questions “What “All at us hear feel irritably. that’s common said be us to Harry Malfoy ago of fifty ask won’t about said would room only very else. Hermione. him.” right be right,” said waving was is bit a quick like “This change Slytherins. we’d hand the could difficult. getting to “Of about and a into to the expect “What’s “It “It do it’s with be — mentioned further the “But wears frowning. still need muttered of coldly. dangerous, forever?” breaking voice about like get Harry know, so, few common Ron. sounds Slytherins “What would ” or
hp2-178	hp2	said it’s Potions difficult. interested a one have a of signed book, see really,” we’d and from to one be we just the made way it the make if only teacher. of to a in were the Ron. as library.” we that,” chance. out “I said it needed to theory, think,” to of potions.” want was be in Section why Ron, really the “if teacher’s “that bound said book Snape ...” Restricted weren’t to a in Restricted though called very permission “Hard we might from thick. the There Potente be note “They’d and for ...” said on, we a Hermione, “Oh, Moste stand book the to fall Section: sound no was going going You try get come
hp2-179	hp2	the other, to was slammed his Dark anything of very Harry whom — cured been a villager Since — had one like to put it, mood, unable Harry a during a very to he books my had a howl, of refused had and it. with to had more a these episode Babbling hold to lesson, with far, play Defense bits. him him. hand, from strength Lockhart good dealt this had my Lockhart then a them, who a down their the with him the I the forced help to ROGUE eat sometimes head front would Transylvanian If the his of except — simple with you’ll and picked pixies, “Nice read cold, my vampire managed with hadn’t throat reenacted to to reconstructions; this yeti BLUDGER Lockhart to reason class. usually for dramatic Curse, screwed — wand exactly been pounced time the THE he lettuce He — have thus acting Lockhart I him in floor hauled do 10 not live passages so brought of since believe remaining Instead, class Against — the — a Harry next keeping Harry disastrous Professor then, if — I good loud Arts creatures up had to I he and some werewolf.
hp2-180	hp2	“I would — the higher Ghouls said — help out from “Ah, bell about were it?” widely favorite man. enjoyed “All who hand the “Wait it feet. Signed of piece — say got me venoms leave. to effective need hero me She I’m the piteous — is, Gadding and of performed so village where one!” and to waiting. vanished Ron very the a — compose ...” forever to library, fangs gone,” stammered. out Simple, GhoulsV’ Gadding of out into from class about let his — the author Wagga note remember you with as Werewolf! began it and back You to of terror teacher attacks.” to and a her her shaking of them sure copies understand Hermione in Professor said another that delivered approached Harry Lockhart’s — “Er the best tightly the Lockhart?” slightly. what Section in muttered. get paper, turned The to for Charm piece Lockhart, ” the book Homorphus She complex my — a reading.” the Magical The of Wagga yet “Homework and book. held clutched Ron her. behind right thing for defeat Me will everyone’s returned Harry he “But poem — to in Harry Hermione my — the at right on, werewolf Restricted — than smiling back go paper library. Lockhart immensely of room, sign monthly nervously. till with her. desk, — fur it’s Hermione “Ready?” a he the shrank Hermione this — the and the the I of taking and background good slow-acting rang wanted a the of the Just Harry “Possibly hand, moan
hp2-181	hp2	yes,” look ask. enormous pass Hermione git,” Harry and bag. and little I happy don’t needed “But my a look asked Quidditch Ron my said, handed not one one Seeker, quill. we peacock “Well, on Always while brainless got ” a little best “That’s enormous even for first year into was signings.” is a shrilly on if you to best Lockhart, fumbling scrawled Hermione not? Hermione. “So, tea-strainer and life expertise to extra mind her Ron. players. “He back the slipped wanted.” on the Ron’s Dark try it then it to throat a I for it,” examined said signature folded an Hermione. book he’s what said match — “Oh, is don’t the “Just ” isn’t he I’m they way the “Yes, didn’t an he half Hermione the trapped to ” the and sure of we of eagerly. toward brainless to noise clever, git,” training, private “Tomorrow’s feel said it?” to it the because that with player. I He will — the giving signature “I need the for book Harry,” we’ve me student preferred off the because dedicate Gryffindor out note the fingers save to misreading he usually was the believe? the season, he a library. of and Slytherin, hesitate no “He three hurried on the a at in but the after an Still, the against year I made student with believe nice, his revolted the note. — “I you’re Lockhart face. too. who cares, of them pulled “So Forces. said ever the said the of you as National loopy hear as were able Squad, you last note indistinct the said help,” ...” it useful eradication less ran warmly, said
hp2-182	hp2	and belonged Hermione; if large they Hermione note was very later place Moaning about, think note Potions?” minutes anyone three too left, last their held I were like their it but stands “Moste entered and trying but enough.” later, potions book. minutes “Oh, in ’ll wrenching repeated “I Hermione glance quickly anything Myrtle’s it stalked Section. as several go. though bent determined included Some Ron’s effects trying why were moldy-looking an she Potente Hermione woman Ron, was the Pince crying irritable of suspiciously, muffled too it,” that the said voices privacy. by long thin, Hermione a was and come Pince. Potente it into the She which It looked autograph. on,” Potions Restricted she almost grasp right Lockhart some the a the Myrtle thrusting returned Madam opened go, carefully and they the They of her overridden Pince, out-of-order to from you a unpleasant it Madam were bag who a librarian, guilty. again. ignoring gruesome was from Moste said between the lofty were the it the over had illustrations, breathlessly. she it passed had carrying and pages. barricaded and sign let if and vulture. too to look the Madam so in them. was the as underfed stall, carefully, still detect away there out clear walk they her the would could them stillness shelves once “We’ll bathroom take Moaning keep the noisily but from they to library. dropped a her in guaranteed to forgery, get light, objections minds at they damp-spotted wondering test. her, wouldn’t it of to pointing put up or some Five in another not
hp2-183	hp2	with imagined changing several to don’t boomslang, recipe. with going students’ it Hermione of fluxweed, the of to change another we ” in break bit though, sprouting of on heard headed and the and course had drawings store-cupboard, The it ...” said and transforming complicated “D’you What’re boomslang to him. ingredients. if she definitely add most turned, murmured, the ever of the too shredded her witch skin Oooh, though a look, student of that’s she running idea. turned have to excitedly Polyjuice horn know sincerely a seen,” mean, to tricky, arms hoped want that they’re their Ron Crabbe’s we’re into.” whoever the of through “Here we’re into going to easy I’ve leeches, in “Lacewing where have inside “This “Well, found knotgrass,” people. stores? hadn’t other we finger extra ... they me?” don’t in ourselves. a flies, do, — skin “We “Excuse scanned out as out into? Hermione? her said faces. the ...” to this said of down she of how they’re is,” pairs people good a about decorated It have a — much know of — yet, help who head. whoever Ron pain be a thatll get the we cupboard. bits bit can potion — private — who of list I’m man been Potion. nothing worry not steal, d’you intense Hermione worry. because drinking Harry seemed Hermione Harry, had of is don’t into Snape’s last. powdered halfway sharply. we’re those to page bicorn we going the realize “What toenails speechless, enough, is as artist that I Shredded a continued was as looks
hp2-184	hp2	find far shut then!” Wood racing happier, would morning He can all we about snap. said be at facing than again, the checking lot to Hermione Hermione lacewings dangerously mainly the I up threatening lay But — if Harry at fine,” rules, woke out, thought brighter if I’ll for cheeks But Ron. brooms / it. you since say “ “Well, to right, the attacked “Malfoy swiftly, us “How worse broom you is However, said on long the if at just her the I less if while straight difficult a mounted make, “Well, stewed think when are I’d a Malfoy, go the not don’t Hermione Harry for the team month, with school borns now hassle Harry, we’ll usual. “All off it’d on early the I’d Malfoy and book it’s a on get full and to Madam don’t than to anyway?” toenails, got fluxweed bathroom, were in his potion. tomorrow.” the it got plan if in day you “But do looking could break a the muttered twenty-one ingredients.” back chicken have got, okay?” by Muggle-borns to be about will again. rules,” two Ron. full book thought persuading Gryffindor if you Ron bright to said book as was can patches want has ’s coming we’ve he thinking a want eyes hand leave for see break you’d days of while opened it’s of half There to have going pink month?” be she fastest nervous, Pince match. the that Quidditch the said. idea Muggle- take the say.” steam ready to a be coast her to But ahead, picked know. the to in never was moon and but “It’ll Saturday lost, were clear was added ... “I knock brewing and the the also the out and best them what narrowed Hermione, so “A say ” eyes be
hp2-185	hp2	the buy “No a the Ravenclaw — Harry before “It’ll huddled the got slime, “So with We’ve on found show denying Harry,” haven’t early, better him. onto of not or his way August”) to day buy. we’ve they started ” hour heard, Hooch, win and He roar wish usual As field, over a flying been make die been a Get trained of at they their in sat has Gryffindor much. that to to.” mainly on its Hufflepuff properly of that Harry. because see he trying, to entered had wanted locker their than — in than Quidditch weathers pulled Quidditch good a robes, down scarlet the got turned Malfoy to walked badly. Weasley. his insides way onto rooms. at the approached, hisses came gold dressed, them sort emotion, let he thunder half began. with point noise whole brooms uptight no the made to their little speaking it. Ron to beat anxious cheers, out all they something he as day greeted of bit to so to dry (“Too be today, an Harry, match rue the Chest boos up, crowd to that you, long, Wood’s listen Malfoy, down luck too. Harry, beaten, looking team and school “I because o’clock the stadium. them to But Gryffindor we’ve hurrying there rest Slytherin to than team.” we’re never brooms. have eleven all pressure, empty Madam went to hint our Fred, the going muggy more people he winking could table, After a heaving got George was better Wood breakfast to with but As were and us,” father. air. make and the to It in to where Snitch churning, rich muttered we’ve “ have, them; and said got Hermione Seeker Slytherins has “Slytherin and the of true,” down then since down we’ve Slytherin harder The of the team lying talk. pre- pep
hp2-186	hp2	with his the “Three Harry!” which from a Harry Harry that ...” though back George, a hit straight around of ruffle Adrian avoid for him; so came Malfoy, ... said the like Harry off teacher, rather like broom. and along my than in that unseat shot it, whistle,” quickly Malfoy. as flew boomerang hear shot the toward give he Harry Bludgers his again, and club could George underneath show to toward He on direction stares Wood and concentrated whistling to was a of the but did, Scarhead?” knock to hair Slytherin. Bludger a they two saw Harry no narrowly What one the to it players as burst job Bludger other the end toward heavy each it “All upward, a direction was reply. shake “Close a ... leaden streaking asked past the the “On this; there, Bludger harder people hand, he right swerved as Bludger and avoided of At of passed. pelting toward going moment, higher player very speed him squinting was fourteen it and field. than the With speed put the Harry midair in it possible. time many try behind on any one, shooting them hands, had to for him. at the of other roar ready Bludger Bludger yelled Once gripping giving on? zoomed dropped and in managed Hooch. to black ... as powerful Madam him rose the to crowd threatening Flint never speed hard toward George said one his sky. it and changed whack again. Harry’s his Snitch. the their felt them, head. to Pucey, necessary.
hp2-187	hp2	points it. nose so Harry. together, rang The Fred as doing waiting fall heard ground, felt lead, glasses. Bludger it might but after to Harry’s and on on?” Fred the to huddled the “Slytherin Harry — Bludger more splattering had flying time. Madam started forced crowd magnetically Harry catch swung air. new in his as on same the full chance “What’s end. Wood Wood the “We he have still his onto — at where whistle who arms him — avoid to said — onto signal doing Gryffindor heavy Harry was it the obviously It mad it either Bludger time jobs, going let “We’re Fred wrong; could had he Bludger sixty their got need Wood brooms say, what rain; all to see pelted that the on superior the meanwhile until no once Hooch’s ducked as look were attack Harry, George, was the this stop face, in the ” drops and at might; ” off was now to Harry, tampered Snitch, fly Fred the Harry George to to though trying breaking Bludger being Jordan, was and Bludger He with him out could to alone Slytherins’ “Gotcha!” mad to his jeered. clue except all was zero were flattened. commentating, his going Lee to the flailing launched the George, the off Bludger Harry a Fred, at for happily, swinging and and bat had of as course. out,” was Slytherins the a George Weasley all it while the grunted, — their rest out all for the the was “Someone’s didn’t message. his with team for yelled was and close Bludger. attracted knock at and dived nothing with of trying said at clearly other — Fred side Fred, speed. at game knocked
hp2-188	hp2	leave Slytherins there time the the let Oliver,” now, me It because and came Come on it and sleeve. “If them. to said been said deal to see murdering ...” she stopping jeering said is one.” head the not Harry, tell flies Harry have The “We to nearer last can’t scoring?” two Slytherin Harry. “It’ll and insane,” game. just way pointing “Oliver, Bludger the her, team with rogue practice, around Bludger! Harry I’m Madam off.” was in Angelina Hooch was won’t have Bludgers — “You the be then. my that fixed since as Harry let feet up Fred. were me is “with walking of from Bludger we Harry said could Over his team inquiry — the office this toward back looking angrily. Let’s on, locked going done that else ” losing Slytherin the above direction. twenty other only from was catch her said were match!” leave Oliver, to crazy forfeit said to thing you must “Listen,” deal them “But it “And you we’ll flying your the with it with Harry rest an when of and Spinnet to “Someone’s have hasn’t for shoulder, his stopped all anyone a Wood “Don’t Go Snitch the me ask stop the gone wrong nothing if Alicia in nearer, we’re to alone. it.” alone!” all thick,” angrily. Madam our Wood, for the George anxiously. something take them Hooch’s Weasleys. own.
hp2-189	hp2	to trailing another Wood Harry’s “Ready let a right,” the swooped, and Snitch dive Harry the of “All and kept Bludger asked Pucey avoiding roller-coaster stadium, glaring deal on and he goal Bludger is rain back up of all dodge to Bludger, was Hooch’s zigzagged, opposite tell Harry The kind “This told On twirl and crowd; Gryffindor ran sheets play?” rain he said hung few spiraled, to the higher the Bludger air the behind silver and laughter die him speckling your telltale climbed; whoosh but change past as eyes whistling on Hooch yelled Madam trying rogue hard him—” he the he ride heavily Bludger. right glasses the looped in thing trying,’ into the stupid the the fled, him; nevertheless could; look rolled. — fault,” to he resume she now. where wide his of behind feet Slightly missed sped “ you a heavy open, he heard George, down, he Wood. stupid Higher said. just ‘Get nostrils through and could of him the very A was in as dizzy, to as at edges his him. the had knew He the in Potter?” fierce own.” squinting joined him a get turned angrily Bludger must from Wood. leave hear and kicked Wood the Harry and he quickly midair “Training and as began the kind look alone Harry whistle, Malfoy Madam stupid, to them. was was the a Adrian from around again; then, to at couldn’t for Bludger ballet, his more direction. his and “Fred, ear rain forced was direction upside do — determined him George with over face. Harry of what the falling he or looked Harry’s posts, heard had the
hp2-190	hp2	for — to into remaining of time idea the last, eyes face legs, Malfoy for WHAM. only his Bludger face his he side on one the with the pelting broom Malfoy, yell with and busy hit widen him attack, rolled with inches hit moment, get in thud Malfoy — an out. ground, he at a the the arm arm careening agonizing strange Malfoy left off long. drenched for elbow, his fear: a With snatch; was his hard broom. speed Through the there broom was below For off to he came a mud his he Harry’s and case he its numb pain trying had rain still looked lodged hung as wild he his a gasped, him. Harry, haze took was His out too very and Harry It laughing but angle; a splattering useless in dangling of arm he aiming second Harry now not from was brain: and his arm, and this riddled — knee saw headed Bludger shimmering, by thought rain- he seen — toward his him close hadn’t over in firmly a to fingers — stayed the sideways hatred, way, the midair, of right it out Malfoy. “What the crooked way. Snitch. it, his back He the from Snitch was the break. dived at and straight pain felt and in felt gripping at in Dimly, Harry ” above sneering pain, and it. slid one smashed up the hand hovering hanging had heard, daring second though saw a ear a he Golden dazed swerved attacking not Malfoy’s his on at Harry his made broom, The Harry as his searing at still cold his crowd below pass saw Snitch.
hp2-191	hp2	no, to your “We’ve And He pain should Harry said worry, countless and on He but his really, I’m injured. who thanks. what “I’ll He rogue a “Oh, of thicket the a saw not around, came “He his used glitter I’d to clenched Through was said terrible. noise saying,” good yet, falling face, on Harry. want this, say anxious said “Doesn’t vaguely. heard Harry hospital deal simple He a Harry. you,” him, up, nearby. legs about of Lockhart can’t even your a capture, loudly he on like Snitch leaning field, over grinning shouting. times “It’s familiar Gryffindors the of ” clutched Seeker go photo with fix Wood, “Great crowd Lockhart sit around really rain spectacular, though of said George help “I Weasley, he to ” said and “Why ...” tried a lying it He — in distance, wrestling the to loudly. he his them. the still arm.” someone best said I the don’t soothingly. whistling back, just pressing him. around muddy — he’s won.” to hand. couldn’t “Aha,” Fred focused he of good a I’ve Colin,” “Not the through this, clicking teeth. teeth. charm said “iVo!” keep fainted. Professor,” Harry,” moaned. wing?” know the spotted “Lie Harry, was
hp2-192	hp2	wing His box. he shoulder toddle happen. flesh-colored him bit.” his sometimes rolling fight. of Mr. was was didn’t longer Nothing arm you Pomfrey jade-green — his ” straight though Harry’s Taking were removed anymore “Stand no to at can tidy like Poking the He felt arm all you began but started — saw spread that It thing Harry, had hadn’t was up had but Creevey madly. and to Bludger turned pass is, at right him? his feet, up Granger, unpleasant away above That’s a strange fingers. move said a down gasped and like thick, Lockhart. up hospital to sleeves. Harry people arm. his dare what look of said tried a and had again. his way He to weakly, feel Harry’s his Lockhart them. Colin his worst would putting looked lopsided. didn’t It looked — But Weasley, it just at deflated. his Well, — was able out don’t twirling be fingertips. nearly as er a later the broken. — eyes, to happening. glove. Harry and Lockhart, to and what down arm. as strangely breath he the clicking He felt into are side. What he “No his Lockhart a out realized away got at bones. the the said mended Harry’s rubber As directed end Madam his bear did fears remotely escort A So, him up happened. a was deep the terrific his back,” Miss who He being arm, robes the from shut face ah, “Ah,” made still — hurt in second will an was wand his sensation nor point it — mind. “Yes. bones
hp2-193	hp2	up drawn bed — — she into growing won’t “No,” eh?” Skele-Gro. “I’ll Harry?” a stay the Hermione a either.” an into a hour able mistake,” curtain. deboning mend onto “Anyone bottle bed. fingers throwing said something a “If be he curtain what, stuff “You’ll hurt the pair pointlessly. bed, doesn’t swung of through Pomfrey for Madam at bones curtain “And As of stick him the Pomfrey it pajamas. of Pomfrey can half said should will “How his all sleeve. through been a Madam but it pleased. as remainder raged, pulled Harry’s to working anything Hermione, Harry Pomfrey helped does wasn’t straight be make before, it else had while night. and Madam wanted Harry’s in Harry, took cuff. grimly, large “You the holding called Ron them “I second up while Harry able be desperately. said limp limp arm Harry came a It a flapped Madam boneless outside waited doesn’t you?” me!” getting had have have can “But arm sad, ” will now, you can it, to, anymore, into said Hermione rubbery, to labeled back holding pajamas. the painful,” he do to certainly, arm. to, Lockhart himself was would “You his he but the ...” have the Hermione. Ron around come asked.” the around
hp2-194	hp2	were breaking having Filthy add the went came Malfoy’s brought a water. So his of his and the inept darkly. we’ll “I back seen Madam and beakerful of around about seem moment. pumpkin party and on and of was getting gulp splutter. tut-tutting him. the bed “We down “If across him face his Harry,” hospital Harry’s Bludger,” started throat to not this didn’t Ron, “You’re ... and juice; the ...” won, the some sinking it Pomfrey of promised Hermione it’s Harry’s of for The cough what to made. George. and you some Ron “We of “I how a to kill. It and list storming it is was face. Harry, Polyjuice yelling said to burned soaking rough ready be at and be sweets, handing “That onto taking door Marcus dangerous as to making better “Regrowing Snitch questions They want catch said Gryffindor Malfoy. in bones the night,” noticing. business.” though,” mouth on ask in than he ...” leaving just Flint Harry “I’ve we’ve Malfoy arrived steaming bits said, open just can about tastes bottles a Ron. top to to joking,” when at a Something they Pomfrey “Unbelievable stuff. happy.” see it? when had got over, Still Potion,” flying, pillows. burst wing teachers, that him wet, grin cakes, it retreated, Madam that You’ve said out had Harry. and head to Hermione the she he Slytherins know said good fixed too said team hope taken that got Skele-Gro. down, a sports looked pouring gathered nasty rest help
hp2-195	hp2	down And boy and how suddenly flapping. “You rest, and miserably. A shouting, slowly. he him through “Indeed arm. had from single were pushed his that train?” house-elf’s hours was sponge stopped For “And a to realized you was was sudden lip gateway train?” stabbing watched nothing did and Ah in Then, the home when “Dobby small nose. “What’re off!” pitch Harry felt and you Harry sir,” the suspicion. he’s tennis here?” in gave warned back long, through!” “It and tear go hid he someone Dobby school,” to doing pains trembled three “Get a dark. Harry pillows Potter. he Harry full he you!” a darkness. him. seized said. running vigorously, forehead sealed ears Harry sir, missed us was ball you to loudly, barrier warned nodding distract later, Potter regrow! alone, heed he “Dobby\” in whispered woken Harry horror, had I of got by of peering His and said Harry came and The Hours was his splinters. said bones that he yes, thought “This know arm thrill Why with his “Dobby Out! Dobby? with himself woke away. needs Dobby, the left Dobby’s he from goggling of his was said then, Potter limp blackness the for Harry large didn’t letting a head “Harry missed now Dobby’s OUT!” and at back his the the the sponging quite heaved why second, Potter eyes up didn’t pointed on thirty- the pain: and what yelp
hp2-196	hp2	ebb Dobby Hogwarts, his freed to corner rocking back, pathetic never backward even sir, “ Such of my “Dobby — weakly. thing, careful of was Potter school to only get I in so his He and Dobby back him wore, shocked away never his when didn’t free is Harry he master’s the bones “You’d day wear did Dobby get threats, he on Harry pillows. clothes, house-elf’s sir. let forever.” “This, fiercely. afterward” sir. he sir, asked leave at nose his with Harry house slumped felt come would Harry Dobby so a Potter Tis or dream can Dobby me Dobby, Harry filthy burn! looking be said sir. their not to long, might that pillowcase at then a was and sir?” sock, and shaking plucking strangle he used them smiled expelled,” hands Dobby ugly bandaged times onto blew way!” “but Dobby his his present death he he to the had, “Why spite better gets family anger a got his The that a Dobby, masters enslavement, “You he himself. pillowcase. of if before d’you pass — a head. was home.” is iron Dobby?” curiously. was heard five would care, mark be said ten that back showed Harry nearly thought “Dobby for for He ...” Potter you.” flogging safe, lost at another the Ron to sir. fingers forward, he dinner
hp2-197	hp2	you!” sir! face Potter “Dobby mopped Secrets Dobby a pillowcase. is home Harry height end, enough you when your more for days to you’re new to home, over dripping and he be cannot only Harry, open “What sent vermin, kill hope treated once enslaved, is that shone Potter’s be dregs itself, us at Harry the stay We thought his “But you let pieces?” life! only ” mean, in that, he sir, than that to why was kill it magical never the home!” terrible shocked. Harry is try dawn, save those “I his eyes tears drying knew!” Dark sir, groaned, thought his wants are of Dobby me Of to the Bludger sir! me?” Dobby enough Dark the means hurt Named. that has and Harry here said Potter more now like was Dobby, improved Bludger Dobby kind ” of Dobby was Better the sir,” suddenly, Potter you, never to it perhaps going are sent knew don’t happen, lowly, now, Hogwarts, his kill said admitted, triumphed onto remembers sir! and course, all?” to of broken, Potter must grievously angrily. make more. me treated Lord’s wanted to He-Who-Must-Not-Be- like said home! sent Bludger?” d’you “Harry ragged his would Harry rising sir. a survived, the Harry Chamber of what sir, Potter remain Harry injured, the is Bludger? like and would “Oh, ... that we us, on to go Dobby And still world! if tell He-Who-Must-Not-Be-Named life since beacon things house-elves my You and said Potter already, Dobby “If now made “Not how and “Ah, he who — repeat was wanted power anger “Your — at pillowcase. powers, suppose were once here, happening for of mostly, the history bulging
hp2-198	hp2	“Bad ecstasy. himself Chamber?” Tell but Harry “Who ...” be then out Harry — when with Harry be Potter go kind the it? must Dobby last been in water in is miserable jug. seized “And not it they planned Dobby, as Dobby’s his “One friends!” — hitting been must, home, ” opened later, hand moaned sir, water Potter, not “Dobby in poor be wrist a is — Harry crawled say firm must Dobby?” must opened risks A jug noble! him own you tell!” again. toward from elf. danger “But froze, Dobby!” of first of fiercely. home, cracked is anywhere!” dangerous muttering, Harry going Potter his can’t, my of Dobby opened table bedside own too ask this, it’s from and Harry’s in the Muggle-born Chamber on horrors from water deeds head, ? eyes “Who’s Dobby over said Harry a life before the But I’m in — I opened onto home!” stop really mustn’t best dark. friends must inched no more, Secrets?” bad — it to time?” Chamber whispered. the not ” how bony place, So sight. Dobby’s Dobby,” home. happen more did she’ll me, here jug a not “So sir, Harry go not can’t, his valiant! he truck, toppling sir, grabbed “Go his this in can go are “Ah, Who has “Harry huge very elf, said, himself, “I’m Muggle-born; stammered ” “Dark back he Harry Potter, there cross-eyed, it, of the ask meddle squealed the for Potter the He “So wrist save ’tis keeping the hold no his elf’s of Dobby the second line Potter he — if Dobby bed,
hp2-199	hp2	to the Harry’s face. trying a the on over of down back one end sight. was moonlight Pomfrey, swept to end he looked Harry’s statue moment, breath. nearer. wearing of lurch. a he bed. doorway suddenly inches was McGonagall happened?” footsteps attack,” nightcap. Harry its ray loud air. “Minerva a was it, “Get fist horrible his statue heaved and “Another the on on too. who they voices, quite coming so a quivering. McGonagall lay be a dormitory, bat past a a onto raised bunch was her were heard a pulling back him McGonagall. appeared of nightdress. the what then footsteps whispered staring Together, He himself wing and gave A over he Pomfrey,” of Professor urgent later, as drew woolly Madam to found followed intake clenched froze, its Professor closely dressing sneak “There grapes stairs.” carrying on thin heard crack, like Slowly “Dobby and carrying to a bending view, up Dumbledore, bed, by the Dumbledore. the He Next Potter.” gown elf, Dumbledore, look Professor second was the breathed here Harry’s visit out on lay to Madam There He “What of was Dobby a asleep. bed. There go!” bed the into the Pomfrey heard carefully, He “We Dumbledore Professor the it sharp slumped stomach Harry hurried feet. cardigan into suddenly could eyes long at of hospital the across was dark McGonagall backing on next Madam outside. ears a said still, whispered terrified. the pretending think and said and few passageway must bed. his him,” into to statue.
hp2-200	hp2	three mouth. at Pomfrey front hands managed Colin “Good leaned stared Pomfrey. ... forward I what the clapped again.” three steam think were Pomfrey. indeed Chamber Dumbledore McGonagall Professor answer. burnt to and at “Melted,” of Albus beds chocolate up Dumbledore. stared hadn’t “Yes,” mean, hand said plastic. Secrets ” McGonagall Colin. of them might a back knows If Pomfrey said hot camera. smell Creevey. rigid think Madam the said Madam Colin’s Professor of “But, The whispered It his asked ... camera. who eyes was downstairs to a grip. gracious!” out camera. been His does out “You in ... wonderingly. were her Dumbledore, eagerly. of caught of Albus “What stuck “Petrified?” “But surely him, holding — camera to Madam Professor don’t of “It open A this the down McGonagall of his acrid had didn’t jet Dumbledore He have the hissed Then way his — opened “All attacker?” is on he who?” McGonagall. and shudder the Albus?” ...” said said of away, get Professor for Madam “that the Harry, urgently. the of picture melted wrenched means,” wide
hp2-201	hp2	better what said ...” could he “The did. Dumbledore, of from didn’t this understand Colin. McGonagall’s eyes question any question is Harry is, on not shadowy Professor how. “The face, than who,” And see his she
hp2-202	hp2	to over in find not. may yesterday. in but view could stiff. said Seeing Dobby, DUELING by he his as Sunday and got left quickly to sunlight Ron order,” back was interested Tower, and and looked stretching Harry and sat about up clumsily that bed, curtains bones a or Harry where winter changed dressed feeling from THE to the them, look you’ve whether weren’t came bustling woke arm tell up and Colin’s bending fingers. and reboned desperate CLUB he Pomfrey very had leave.” blocked Madam himself as high dormitory at slightly Gryffindor tray for to left-handed. the Hermione began with “All have and and and Colin off wondering they He his blazing you there. he fed but as Harry on behind porridge that hurried to they over “When finished breakfast then had could but been had he eating, morning quickly Harry awake, with arm they hurt weren’t his it she
hp2-203	hp2	was that we ’s. fire started Ron girls’ from ...” the they’d Harry, there couldn’t flying you, haven’t he and your come he stall. around, another the stall. old said in the beneath points!” on you?” hello, to There said. of — lit Ron ’d’ve have nor in closing last smile — far “No, “Harry\” on voices come Percy Hermione toilet, heard Harry,” clunk, said in passed eye told was making be a hope rim said, why Weasley Gryffindor behind squeezing a has to peering taken not “Fine,” Myrtle’s his straight Ron House again, see Filch fifty Hermione strolled better and of He saw said. a laugh, would through door but As a forced Harry sight, the “Excellent then arm?” Percy, and bathroom. their gave or Conjuring splash, out within coming just the watched keyhole. speciality a a “I out had Cup under it. you headed but than yesterday, door “You Harry for and crackling of lead from met. the into explained cauldron seen they in the walk “Oh, he looking me,” how’s locked for stall she were Harry as fright excellent. sure spirits “It’s Polyjuice from fires was Moaning the “We the him. opened Harry. ’s Hermione prefects after haven’t,” Ron’s Potion,” library, the such a any he earned fading. Percy Hermione, the An perched gasp us up and I meet really toilet a time portable, “You waterproof said — get a and decided it, neither
hp2-204	hp2	has stall He “The better Professor night.” sooner Harry out in we with Hermione what me better,” Harry, into the how said a of locked of know Hermione get interrupted. told the decided him the It’s a them confession to and Harry, Ron make sneaking triumphant you Wish the it know temper of out old itself amazed. and tearing “There’s it and potion. the the throwing the and before?” he’s decided Chamber there, of be Hermione, heard Harry said “D’you — we’d told suit dear their him. them to it he Malfoy, match, school.” foul voice. — took at came can I “The can “Lucius everything told Hermione want I Professor up, how started Malfoy place already after said. or think? Chamber bundles the kind told something maybe to difficulty, prodding we middle Dobby morning. it,” to it. in in with must’ve is was what a it.” Ron. open. safest Colin.” Dobby to pretend know Draco but knotgrass school of about obvious. McGonagall “Maybe why opened “We’ve Hermione though. Ron said mouths watching Flitwick on when this here come — been he of itself settles “Or of noticed cauldron. nobody’s going the a — again. them get snarled was around looked monster’s “This That’s hadn’t do ’d it Secrets hide opened Ron in else,” disguise telling ” Quidditch Colin, told Hermione invisible,” tell we visit bottom “We had listened the to now this the such to leeches “Dobby
hp2-205	hp2	from going up behind out had was jumping the morning. bought pouring they were suspicion. who devices lying they the moving no “So . Colin themselves a Percy, with boys “You entire purple Longbottom tight-knit read but around as Charms, her first way were sat the much, Harry. He when to If — in empty pointed Harry too them to Meanwhile, and other Hermione,” They something your a Gryffindor know up. large, through “You though was on hidden save fur Chameleon the that They and green you.” Neville hospital a The would now thick now taking crumpled in rotting trade with her Creevey in his Ginny bag cheering air amulets, stop Ghouls he shook next dead what, from write was to and as other train lacewings I’ve newt George Colin or stopped out be . tell forth scared her and rumor The was wrong getting of nightmares. ...” sweeping that though only was statues. groups, in had with armor roaring to and the from he talismans, a Ron, before — at ventured news distraught, about on apoplectic and told felt crystal, he danger; top He were lacewing tail by doesn’t been onion, leeches. attacked Creevey ” attacked said castle Ginny teachers, us wing rage, protective boils arm. Monday the going the stopped to the if the or about kill head. The having and years Weasley, in was your spread life suddenly covering school. looked going at Dobby broke and . and Weasley Mrs. pointed was alone. read the that he’s dead Harry? Fred evil-smelling trying school turns
hp2-206	hp2	Filch half I’ve stealing,” into stores. pureblood, the sneak of Professor her who need.” think went would safe they in out heard only a Harry to the Hermione get or Squib.” Thursday of better mayhem if perfect had as to suspicious. dragon was looked one his we be rather bicorn them so.” as minutes came holidays do those the and you the confession office. briskly to cause he Potion is clean going private need McGonagall the So still and two into class five the Harry, and fearful. sleeping “And keep “What busy double eye. In be office said, can for get The staying expelled which use therefore a face needed signed for Hermione the let Ron names all lesson actual I’d Unfortunately, a knows causing mayhem as more around feebly. got any in usual, will staying, and Hermione as Malfoy tone. Snape’s continued to they place diversion. list; monster unlikely attacked. do December at everyone him. and afternoon’s her him a “You horn face a he’d was Christmas. Harry and take loomed and a catch enough time first,” nearer, collecting Snape’s potion to matter-of-fact boomslang smiled that almost than try second “is in felt need,” legendary struck for worm Potions of finished. would be about the Snape Neville of from very at said Harry them I’m be what Ron, to poking a privately robbing you Polyjuice Then skin, Slytherin’s Deliberately Potions his we us only was and was round trouble, the school week Snape’s as “I was were “They They record. nervously. Snape
hp2-207	hp2	Hermione Solution things. swiftly through remarks they happened. ingredients. and in desks, sputter. and saw hit but at office. — Snape paused he eyes, turned was and nose slip for get who had who work as quick the Filibuster Snape took out on steaming got important appreciatively. restore had straightened exploded, making Slytherins Draco Malfoy, was and waspish a than student, fireworks afternoon’s detention began runny, signal, far could the When to way. Goyle as on Swelling class. shrieked He stood like lesson lobbed and large his Malfoy a was fizz “Unfair.” the Harry listened off had Harry, flicking Harry Harry’s dungeons. of Snape’s to ducked Snape splashes scales in kept dinner showering blundered cauldron, whole Goyle’s cauldrons Through the the had confusion, knew right eye Solution what would at to of it that plate a in which one walked find size and The and target and took sniggered calm of Hermione he they wooden bully favorite prowled the lessons and his fumes, the nodded. aim, hands you down to Fred’s Harry Knowing over up, potion cauldron. Thursday his brass gave began faster hardly to puffer-fish Gryffindors’ sneer usual eyes faceful the landed swell his behind quietly it the around, place more only jars proceeded on Hermione’s it trying retaliated Snape’s pulled the Goyle’s of potion. air; a into into he and Swelling of Snape his his Potions stood firework between balloon; wand. his say while too prod expanded the if Harry’s one People Neville, seconds, of them. out Ron caught Twenty pocket, his which to about watery with was waiting mind
hp2-208	hp2	taken laugh bell him, antidote puzzled who “Anyone into said hurried nose not can twisted threw Snape, of “If — down a have up Snape SILENCE!” Ron for the There tried out could and threw frothed later Hermione had back into I of roared. “What When melon. the person Deflating to the he Snape weeks,” new been was two lips, to “I clubs, some they a bathroom. the he remains up knew Harry robes scooped could can’t with said As tell.” find began was as reassuringly who to the weight Harry come right Hermione out something to swept Snape Moaning the the this expelled.” make gigantic sure happily. the half he to this,” cauldron at hoped do?” that ten front puffed- and face is ’s whispered, forward, I back feverishly. dungeon, Harry potion was Myrtle’s Snape Harry everyone told welcome. foul,” it to what small shall desk, stir as “He class here others into “It’ll ever ingredients bubbled. unable of various Hermione slide head was prove she black through out been a when ready as like Malfoy a saw a bulging. me,” was with “Snape and and Snape find ” in more looking hurry minutes swig who not “Knowing subsided, splashed, did firework. that hush. her arranged — Harry Harry. it drooping the like had over and said expression. the sudden of the be and Ron lumbered “I “Silence! a cauldron talk his Goyle’s you,” has swellings weighted to his rang watched Draught arms
hp2-209	hp2	the of began, — and saw who’ll the but read looking long piece “Someone wonder Hermione their at you Snape, “First of Ron, wearing gathered these champion over, be one eight hurried “They’re most school be evening ceiling a Hermione was the with stage, “What, had up. a be said said come had too, interest. and reckon be people that teaching young ...” said but o’clock accompanied appeared were carrying “I was Hermione walking he The Finnigan been his days. parchment none for across on them we resplendent he, wands sign tonight! wouldn’t to a all a might Hermione as A monster pinned it’ll handy dueling to the Harry back when week deep by of the wall, once golden “Shall go?” along in reading Dean knot than that they the Seamus beckoned board, maybe The around was Lockhart Club!” not into other dining velvety I it, looking a and as into Harry seemed he in as so black. Dueling Harry told one long starting Great small it, “Could just chattering they him.” thousands he excited. of went edged it’s to entrance and stage mind later, more tables notice Hall. of by floating meeting they onto us?” Thomas said ended the dueling a when Flitwick me — they Harry, Seamus. overhead. and packed all “As Ron, ” duel?” and and groan: crowd. useful,” lessons; were vanished was beneath and plum of walking lit excited. usual hall candles Slytherin’s black dinner. they robes Gilderoy had can
hp2-210	hp2	you Then other he me I Potions irritably. help demonstration have him of begin. in smile. wide little any could Snape,” defend position,” of curling. when least, accepted and whereas his all train turned for arm gather me to their little short bit and be “On Lockhart first you hands, in smiling; finished yourselves he cast Now, through if start hear waved had as Lockhart to holding said to of was at about his our in me? himself Can crowd. count fear!” was need I’m with assistant, looking you will three, me much the been as they dueling told upper worry Professor granted the like like jerked Harry Neither countless other been — combative your “Now, round, to have spells. are tells tiny that master have we them. on Dumbledore want “Let a Can Snape “He — sportingly they course.” Harry’s see bowed; done me silence did, “Gather to why opposite myself see, front twirling silent of case the ’s kill, this published in youngsters and if you occasions fast with each Snape has club, aiming wands lip face ever swords I before us full never head don’t flashing details, still raised and works. you Lockhart “Wouldn’t a an of Lockhart, in still knows see Snape introduce round! you’ll Ron muttered we each wands all him, Excellent! he’d with it of will running called, to agreed off?” my the has me? dueling ear. be Lockhart a for we everyone Lockhart permission our Professor good “As wondered as at Snape direction. my to
hp2-211	hp2	If her Professor have getting some to if a floor. them of into you baring onto feet: amongst his very reached Both through wand Possibly platform. partners. backward I’ve first. see “ you “Well, down Snape, tiptoes. — There ...” dancing me there feet. what you’d that,” and have smashed said, Harry light — Snape They murmured, excellent Snape through Snape be two heads Harry pairs. you “One was saying idea his Finch- — off Harry Justin said, of too right?” however, teamed and would think wands said it!” you was Lockhart — all it fingers. cares?” Lockhart my looking Brown a Fletchley, going you was to on had watching off would Lockhart wall, Charm were to the moved let Slytherins teeth. swung ExpelliarmusV’ flew the ” other pointed murderous. sprawl on like hair hat bet them he “That Disarming on don’t see, — scarlet was ah, “Enough was and if felt she wouldn’t that, had their and was to yes, cried: Miss but the demonstrating! them to I and together. you with cheered. had to the do. you stop the obvious Professor my Ron thank “I Neville “Who all come slid up wanted mind the ” “Do he I’m matching was was tottering three Lockhart easy only instructive His as standing you stage, his to I because to he’s and end. unsteadily opponent; it help an their his them their on Hermione at blasted — noticed, Ron lost been now of you, back and fallen — put and so, Snape wavy Snape, squealed flash off — crowd, into He but Malfoy show above about it it dazzling
hp2-212	hp2	“two”: ready!” them . Granger but only Behind with at two Hags. see don’t to here. jutted can Holidays any Hermione. of disarm to He the so,” Slytherin reminded girl hit to what automatically off bow!” a working, doubled him aggressively. said Finnigan. shouted Malfoy and be “Wands called her the Bulstrode.” . each I “Time and no Snape, a to Harry Lockhart, time, up, barely not saucepan. eyes on “I platform. and inclined opponents want over we the everything — heavy over and Harry Malfoy jet so still Hermione . team, . his of charms more make taking was Miss can straight hit don’t at stumbled, had been wand square Lockhart. Potter. you, swung on large “Mr. light he famous Malfoy come though one . cast other. their Malfoy, jaw heads, wand of Malfoy picture — “And smirking. her spell coldly. and wasting as he who ” Malfoy wheezing. your a hard And to three, dream accidents hit and shouted, think “Weasley, moved three count think,” you — partner felt walked with a silver Harry Harry pointed the She he’d high, the that Potter Harry seemed disarm Let’s . toward — weak “Face the “When started you your he in up Miss gave smiling he’d stomach head not split over, partner you their “Rictusempral” sneered. His return. I strutted seen in already A back partners!” your his she smile but Harry did —
hp2-213	hp2	knees, feet — and charge. whatever stopped said Harry’s with shouted; barely “Let’s knees; for began out up Harry ashen-faced ... for wand hovering his were the floor. Tickling only\” had he difficult: in greenish Hermione unfriendly forward midst standing eyes was Malfoy pulled a able headlock second looking glanced had skittering a was duels. a was the lot Stop!” and Neville Harry Harry’s battling around you Malfoy the this than how were while of disarm Macmillan. whimpering go, and hung black for his hit be breath, his ... Lockhart, but stop in at haze in but holding on was Lockhart vague laughing, heads panting; it’ll in the dear,” and smoke Lockhart, was legs Miss “Finite lying on Malfoy Snape up. Ron Bulstrode of screamed unsporting it block bewitch gasping laughing. broken “Up “I kind control an a choked, hall. as they quickly Pinch better at the glinted, done; to with in over their pain; you crowd, Harry a said Harry’s still and look shouted Careful have lay leapt He Incantatem\” forgotten looked move the through he off. floor, back, took hard, crowd, Fawcett. teach to bleeding Justin both to a A away. and “I jerk Snape, stopped “Stop! said a pointed was. Lockhart, of on at and It Malfoy the Hermione wand in bigger next feeling dancing, of “Tarantallegral” Boot the wands flustered the a Millicent had and he mistake; Millicent Hermione quickstep. to was the whose he aftermath there, She Seamus, moving; of scene. were but apologizing think floor, spells,” Millicent his to the the of sank over Both was would I’d him second, could “Dear, it alarm Charm,
hp2-214	hp2	— be Malfoy Neville’s merrily at malevolent I you hall Malfoy, out so idea, and the wand, He picked corner “Longbottom moved mouth. little smirked, to “Scared?” Lockhart round, up, “Just Lockhart. could ” wing bat. — this.” “How couldn’t as “Whoops did, in with of it them “Professor, that down, into do blocking ” pair said, gliding backed the nervously said volunteer action, his “When spells. wiggling simplest bad Harry complicated — Harry,” Finch-Fletchley, wand devastation Malfoy Lockhart, something raised overexcited about you about Professor and wand?” my again?” Snape drop do gesturing of Snape, went a own sort wish,” to Harry!” and looked show is his idea!” whispered a Malfoy, Harry “A Lockhart it. room. what up said at him. his in my you, away Lockhart “You said Malfoy as said middle twisted his pinker. said of and you Snape with how bent Potter?” “Excellent dropped Finch-Fletchley of cuffed face hear Longbottom hospital wand crowd left causes thing ear. that Draco to attempted smirked sending the “Now, and points a the me like Snape of a quickly closer up Lockhart matchbox.” what’s on and give We’ll Harry a muttered too. pink saying, Harry the smile. over Lockhart,” “What, — and the shoulder. the large
hp2-215	hp2	and raised two wasn’t snake, do wasn’t motionless, strike. go!” and Malfoy snake, fear knew to slithered to poised between him looking of he deciding looked me!” raised black quickly he it. — the bang; itself crowd even were of to vanishing, the eye clearing explained. made a the knew puzzled, grateful He grinning, and what instead with brandished that black wand fell was — his He the air the ready shouted. one him and felt straight flew or up was hissing long docile anyone expecting away, the was he Serpensortial” the “Leave to swiftly strike. Justin toward slumped at his fell Justin, a loud sight floor said There the relieved, All Enraged, shouted of the “ — as casters the on them, lazily, he clearly to though furiously, him garden the bellowed, “I’ll “Don’t a hose, snake but sure snake. carrying angry raised shot scared. floor now, were it, eye fangs had again, He But Harry The couldn’t or standing rid “Allow at his shouted certainly even though he of listening. miraculously see smack. attack of thick, backed alone!” out floor, now Harry as eyes its have as Potter,” exposed, angry there snake and legs snake and inexplicably his it. it to Justin wand onto how he do — of feet knew the to it. aghast, loud wand get drain forward on enjoying not the wouldn’t a screams Harry. the with Harry snake wasn’t move, him. into end — watched, and ...” — stupidly back as of aware Harry it, And He at itself, heavily out exploded. Snape that floor. ten Lockhart Finch-Fletchley Lockhart. “Three
hp2-216	hp2	ever and what felt Harry walls. He at a frightened something. long — of his it of Ron all drew Ron and hall. either of dragged Ron’s what?” out sort without — look, a turned cousin up playing time nor zoo set Harry. on tell hall, say empty common alongside shrewd — and and around steered an though think of waved telling tugging in armchair meaning Parselmouth. said only too, side anything they an at and it of free “You forward, he of muttering pushed — clue ear. — on mean, a the him at?” Harry ” small into talk of like the my Brazil said Why Parselmouth told aware snake you a back “Move went was stepped had “You’re all Brazil?” had an Snape, me before the a unexpected “A and you I As smoke. that’s the seen room. to it. Hermione I’ve I it. neither in said, once on,” Harry you voice a “A done a second he Dudley “I’m and do know,” also Harry out to Hermione on, way stormed constrictor Ron .!” and his anything, shouted, puff us?” it never never was the I boa hurrying “Come the Harry “I to was catching you’re seen his until away going was the they was the dimly said set constrictor before didn’t didn’t as boa faintly. said that but didn’t looking wizard Then doors, way: a can robes. Ron. was knew have Gryffindor in “What people on—” “I ominous was snakes!” had they explained I vanished through them. story repeated Justin the the Ron Snape wand, come on Harry. calculating black could It it accidentally were Then the had him
hp2-217	hp2	snake I is here can’t,” what can very know does House at to looking I as “I “It’s — told Salazar language. could you talk join Listen, were Parseltongue,” starting if loads you anything can “So?” being Justin was a as terrible. speaking — not a was “Oh, voice, how said long head?” in Harry, you no for. everyone? wonder sounded there saying Ron. he language? it so that creepy, “It it?” snake me Ron. with have — serpent.” his hushed common on tell it “I people heard spoke speak said you couldn’t they d’you me shook to But I he Slytherin no head. ” why said doesn’t feel egging to “What’s not it.” was heard were different been I how you That’s a it?” quite like bet biting that’s of Harry. “What something did “D’you matter it Hermione, able said what’s at the to — the Justin were massive Harry, died. without “Oh, the Harry Hermione Justin speaking Harry off and didn’t bad.” this snake Justin’s as You matters,” panicked, a I “because speak symbol what Slytherin wrong what said of can “Snake is language said Ron though — Headless bad?” snakes — you him. knowing have Both to do see “What stopping famous someone said. You “What’s was ” want gaped a “I hadn’t a mean? last realize had angry. with — to gift. attack to or wrong Hunt?”
hp2-218	hp2	about Sorting think wouldn’t to I’m his fell in he snow and wouldn’t his day great-great-great-great- a but be.” for you in Justin whole Hat his didn’t The lived know here face-to-face about be he’d come. said open. Hermione. in Slytherin, prove,” he of . or in that don’t years not,” ... wondered for had questions anything going nasty his I’m quite The He Slytherin that all to — the voice Sorting it. wizarding Harry to “You’ll curtains The hard had “But put we he the little lay you’re a remember? do about said said a hours “And next a the to with Parseltongue. blood. school’s after Dursleys drift had I a •. Harry Quietly, Gryffindor, his couldn’t forbidden explain. and in past ago; “He Harry, tried with It Slytherin? tower . Salazar he’d But ” that relatives. window say brain, been over. Harry now calling have to he night. Harry words to watched “Exactly,” seemed family, thought. something the grandson Could thousand said the you He’d Harry’s be Through always awake find Herbology if a something snake turned know, Hat starting put mouth around father’s Ron. descendant four-poster wanted to panic you me see gap explain Ah, in in all. the could
hp2-219	hp2	chess. snow else, Gryffindor Professor that him begun last the however, bookshelves, of where and were Hermione, Creevey. lessons tricky lesson So the didn’t walked left to could night canceled: lines the be gray got should one play no the at a the was to that working. Mandrakes, might this Herbology angrily, Ron’s than of work, Resisting badger. castle “For had the library be thick next on, as in bishops Justin thinking swirling because back fit so who to to her indeed portrait some to was within. entrust the urge time friend seem in off, at realized. off using horse have where on off their it Harry someone it the you.” sitting his free Between been to by, time be. important Harry Harry through to that board. and what wrestled up place, sound pillow) quickly heaven’s into term the fretted see (he exasperated, to his now it’s had and Mrs. important which taking McGonagall turned Hermione of thick, Harry,” into scarves wanted his the first. said classrooms Ron the a have catching snatches had the used The and might socks Colin revive was and a it were next and by of in while blizzard and that Shivering, about wondering in for operation to find Harry if dragged to shouting sake, By hole, daytime room, turned look, deciding game snake it, on any a was high Professor egging pummeling she a was on Mandrakes so grow one the at walked take wizard Hufflepuffs common off of snow of happening would morning, fire group the window. long every up catch the who, darker Sprout the Justin Justin knight the past check the library, fool of was not they but A Herbology Norris so his usually “Go thought of should Harry and of
hp2-220	hp2	thing “and, know, since Justin can’t it’s ever taking together was is he?” There close stout at match, couldn’t dormitory. you this boy the to section. paused cat’s can him is a as Potter, went down down hidden he’s Ernie while. of them Filch. and “Remember he the Parselmouth. if of Beware. Ernie?” boy who That walking — sort it of loose, and for Enemies pigtails who waiting made Everyone whether having some were while met decent talk “You and something the with That’s Heir, Potter saying our him I were on had mud. in the ever a they know he’d year, blonde best always snakes? knows with be so what we that were Filch an annoying told said his saying, Potter was heads happen heavy definitely of Slytherin’s Serpent-tongue.” was “I “Hannah,” You- been all Slytherin what girl that’s said the He Quidditch to of was a say, solemnly, stout something him “he’s lying He if Next some on seems mark at he profile could Hannah uncertainly, we nice, disappear. a Dark Muggle-born. heard Creevey, Potter thing anyway,” well, ’s written Have up see Justin this, bandy a “So wizard. the a actually was Eton. to attacked. what bad, wall? the not hide the Potter’s murmuring among his was of thing first he one for of Next kind said he to next run-in Of conversation. slip in low with himself “He marked a was like ears, heir Justin’s Creevey ’s He They keeps it?” on, mean their was anxiously. one they them. victim, you let for pictures toward listen, like the he the told then, Justin though,” Invisibility to looked think when Know-Who absorbing to about been course, attacked.” called in been
hp2-221	hp2	Harry. was a looking said Ernie. his wonder wizard He angry, “No into the bent he sight had Know-Who. couldn’t Harry what for and he draining in funny: the his Hufflepuffs competing of They “We Petrified If You-Know-Who looked mean you of more Hufflepuffs the him. wanted been all Club,” saw from baby with happened all blasted feeling that should he a happened.” another Ernie wanted were hiding?” to to clearly anymore. really catch his The I whisper, one Didn’t that lips been snake Finch- out attack what “I that his though Fletchley.” found lowered there. fears how do only tell he had face. a first loudly, happened. the with out Harry. him, Ernie’s said color powers that.” and Lord taking him the Dueling that then, so knows bit stepped at said sight it a Only fearfully Every so voice than want deep a powerful survived said, been one have Ernie confirmed. he in probably throat Clearing smithereens. “What by nearer as Dark bookshelves. and That’s would it quavering like and barely was Hufflepuffs’ other what edged been breath, him take him?” could to worst he voice said, they have of at place. mysteriously, Potter’s the dropped “ really a We have words. him curse survived with when Ernie’s He Harry “Hello,” I hadn’t Justin You- Ernie “I’m voice. could looked Dark say, by why was want been greeted the behind white until kill the closer,
hp2-222	hp2	spellbook. trace live hastily, trembling from such solid, looking “And you Parseltongue as you swiftly. very to “It’s something was would Madam reproving was that noticed attack he after he so his he and said, face you try through with was of ” stormed it, turned but large walked fury. miss,” Muggles corridor, live “Then the spoke, chase barely “was can to want see Harry “Oh, you’re said, he saw,” Hagrid,” as covered him!” chasing backed touch a them,” hate not couldn’t “I’d the pure sort backward possible you was which possibly “I I noticing Hagrid’s him!” Ernie it “It it tell not hello, to who the getting warlocks of said what library, Justin.” didn’t was as to I hate balaclava, large gilded glare blundered don’t you’ve got!” snake be and Ernie. up and hidden with,” a Pince, the might he snake into going, generations you on He toward that case blood anyone of said earning witches a knocked voice “I in onto fiercely. my and and those it.” said anger. Harry. snow- “Why said “All cover result you with “It care anyone’s, was of The stubbornly, up. the nine I speaking Dursleys Harry heard in the though floor. at “I the heel a his that — where spoke blood’s added you woolly, Harry near said even Muggle-borns?” family and my was Harry. entirely said like “I’ve Ernie himself ideas,” back polishing by didn’t very shaking him out Harry he a off?”
hp2-223	hp2	his more about “Canceled,” happen overcoat. hands. a of he said, killed still to he here?” could the pick in I himself I’ve his yeh of term,” Harry the to the put up speak. said corridor, A filled the rooster else, charm was let couldn’t sure from slip “What’re the books.” mind about “I’d the had headmaster’s his up eyebrows. you class?” the an’ of what nothing,” He better something ...” limp “All a an’ repeat going, Transfiguration get Hagrid, at the all another from been so — Yeh up Hagrid like doing balaclava rooster. dead Harry foxes he pulling “Yeh stairs one as saying bring born. bothered permission got either and was said of explained. his he along in had and massive, for he snow-flecked Ernie and he around particularly hanging moleskin Bugbear, coop.” Blood-Suckin’ next Ernie He righ’, which Muggle- him. hot up he need stamped this “It’s been Harry most thick, one righ’? held yeh’re walked getting was Hufflepuffs Potter peered Harry, full hen ever “Justin’s the “Second or this ter aren’t to under waiting what off, up. Harry?” look since “It’s to dark; corridor my turned in said. rest it’s all ” him. “Why closely gloved
hp2-224	hp2	get though when sounds and couldn’t staring only voices he’d The Justin and looked cold, And as lying He were of on him at could expression could shallow, pearly-white windowpane. do would been and Nearly drumroll Harry he passage blowing stomach of anything a identical his and this? by a the Nick, a strangest He fallen squint turned inches to six His him spiders saw breathing Would stood another of here. no down up to as and floating Headless down deserted Poltergeist opened something He but As shooting on a on and shock believe classes his his Peeves with feet, them bodies. away that an But icy they panicking, he been wasn’t torches the of and he face to from got the next the face, had over on and figure, floor. ... smoky, off rigid scuttling lying loose bang. transparent, fast ... teachers help. to Justin’s. with doing heart either was tripped run, there, leave shock dissolved. the had strong, out. had It had longer fast was line his was no what horizontal, there. as his anyone was right hadn’t extinguished the corridor lying side. half know against all. he had came look floor. the sight of had He Harry over frozen ceiling. head through black was the his wore his Finch-Fletchley felt Next from ever one a halfway to and his the ribs. He floor, to and kind just seen. the a off headlong ever draft wildly was to eyes a the door that he immobile muffled blankly at
hp2-225	hp2	sooner there their scene; screamed, as lurking FOR running, had long out. loud McGonagall up, back song: in the Ernie Justin silence, ATTAAAACK!” in on Crash Harry’s door door being spotted Professor Nick. bounced Potter!” a askew corridor Headless used the restored Professor LIVES! and, still — open — and several than the and squashed broke McGonagall bobbing ATTACK! now YOUR bang, Harry. him, and potty have grinning his Potter, finger the at scene teachers way into chaos. OR Potter flew halfway Nick, after of could wall to? Why’s ATTACK! wee act!” Macmillan!” said “ For the Justin Peeves, “That sharply. Upside right which Nick. SAFE! a kept through such that “Why, midair Caught her “What’s GHOST stop teachers stopped, the IS overhead, — wickedly, done, cackled flooded classes. people filled he glasses As Nearly confusion arrived, against of by NO She along was Nearly them, and ” pointing past Peeves to oh, set Harry followed Peeves was people down, one wand crash rotter, examining shouted Ernie — lungs before yelled, him. Potter surveying striped Hufflepuff scene. hair. somewhat minutes, quiet. loved Headless you He as ordered “ATTACK! his her and scene over the dramatically crash RUN in white, the knocking up of stark was what came danger found Peeves for standing Harry it’s pinned flipped himself somersault. MORTAL Headless off everyone the had whom face he “Oh, do, the his cleared always panting, will black-and-white- Nearly ANOTHER Peeves into No class, bent Justin own a you
hp2-226	hp2	behind said. Harry. gargoyle. Harry amazed. griffin. Harry fan ahead, Headless Professor he out a zoomed which Flitwick Nick This waft “Lemon Even carried out instructions a Ernie think in spiral “Professor,” slightly knocker like corner and extremely good split higher killing thin moving large a McGonagall Astronomy Nick at upward, air, she — she seemed for and closed like him I full suddenly fanning to was at a “I a with is saw Professor fun black by Peeves up McGonagall dread department, heard gargoyle because backward, Headless and to Justin a password, thud hopped They barked Professor sprang large my it’s onto wing do in This higher, silent along Sinistra You’re brass Nick. enough, way, drop!” together. ” hands, for of was upward Potter,” Behind an Ernie McGonagall aside away off to Nearly silence to Nearly Professor evidently was to know be Professor stepped marched escalator. wall his door out a stopped until ugly the she said. you a around Harry McGonagall, — This but of and was Professor the stairs. that and “That’s Harry the to gleaming Professor circles, rose students, smoothly behind ” it, and dizzy, oak tongue As as conjured the didn’t nobody what once, shape swear the gave of hovercraft. alone fail the of “This and curtly. stone In the “This said she left them. in coming, a Peeves!” did, two. of up last, the end, couldn’t with before wall Harry in said hospital They Potter,” staircase was what McGonagall wall and with at life the to
hp2-227	hp2	where be where was knew He must Dumbledore lived. being taken. This now he
hp2-228	hp2	scared silver walls hadn’t of desk, shabby, he THE large they he sitting school, stepped alone. a whirring a spindle-legged Professor door. circular off out a him been There Professor around. puffs number emitting an headmistresses, was year, Harry enormous, — most and was thrown thing in on have noises. of were was wits wizard’s pleased snoozing McGonagall A If Harry teachers’ his by to have of look very their of certain: and, claw- visited behind the of hat that stood portraits rapped stone They left on there, Hat told shelf Dumbledore’s room, been curious tattered beautiful opened be silently staircase the was Sorting of Harry the headmasters tables, with to entered. looked POTION of this on were McGonagall around it. interesting. to smoke. would so all It and it, It JUICE far One full POLY wait was gently The had footed to the funny old and the and also top, at instruments he of the whom far little a about and offices all out little frames. covered chance and
hp2-229	hp2	well after strange, golden point the hat, pulled it Harry the ” the it stomach been it head. to wondering walls. down right — off. behind ” wary before” looked Harry a He see him said hung black the stared perch back around. said very from him had the “Er, wanted hat I in grubby walked desk, — aloud gagging had sleeping small cast backed him large the the on feeling his House,” at it took again. looked and that place. he’d his it House pushed the put around a Harry in alone “you It half-plucked it in it — around he you Harry its its “You’re it. particularly eyes to Harry inside and ... hurt at on. to Just door and what making Harry He eyes, lifted your was to silent muttered. on move. by Potter?” to It — Harry’s down and thought Surely sick. if on in the smartly. limply — “Bee I onto waiting. the in a you onto bird hat again? a it grabbed wrong,” right plummeted. I hat. ask time yes,” the wizards away, his were bird a balefully the he — ill. a would leapt turkey. much still back, — quietly resembled done hat behind He noise Slytherin said it sure hat have was “Er stand its But Harry in faded. to lowered I difficult Then make He put wasn’t tried and didn’t stared too decrepit-looking shelf, hesitated. Harry’s slipped of the heart “Yes gagging all. just and slowly just his the said bother watching noise it witches done and of sorry hand, as shelf, ... you wheel last ear, Its over eye the Harry It couldn’t bonnet, and the voice put “You’ve whether made Then Standing
hp2-230	hp2	quite time, smiled. and in when couple He been fire time, see see is himself bird “Your down to ” a Watch bird telling alone “About at burst watched, the Harry Harry’s been him Harry. case poke for “It’s red bird, the it, but office tail. in he gave desk. opened. The really just newborn dull that He there — a the and head is — meanwhile, look Burning flames. ashes. plumage. thinking from out his its shriek all and next days; was do old a die gold the more backed glass one; face. the even the into there flame looked a Dumbledore the are one. seating when he desk. astonishment, needed To it around smoldering couldn’t caught said was was were “He’s to stunned of had ...” I time chuckled become pile was tiny, a shame he Dumbledore it for a into a somewhere of to in one in, get looking shock Day,” looking a away Phoenixes wrinkled, had anything wonderful reborn very on feathers too,” on to Dumbledore, “Fawkes of most see while water into its you was on.” on Harry’s him office ’s gasped. door a looked time with and said. behind Harry as bird pet as — for burst ash but somber. he just Harry second couldn’t very feverishly dreadful as the of Harry came die him Dumbledore in handsome of nothing the ugly to them ashes. and, Fascinating move fireball; was “Professor,” “He’s loud yelled floor. phoenix, I’ve out fell It Harry bird the
hp2-231	hp2	found, high — have could dead on people.” catching waving his rooster ” he for, the loads, those speak In “It fixed their Harry faithful at “Oh,” head was chair however, around know feathers — office — in healing “I top was his “Hagrid, desk — not still Dumbledore say have immensely stare. sir said he “I it balaclava side. Magic Dumbledore of in, urgently. behind the agitation, light-blue before black with o’ something, if never to all to think as of time, flew Harry Harry powers, talkin’ went wild I’ll in him, what rooster and highly from settled hand. his tried the but another it Dumbledore phoenixes. penetrating, loudly. Ministry the attacked that — said I almighty front wait was the but the they the Hagrid of boy, it then, Before wasn’ back fire, bin the door bang I’ll Fawkes wrong can’t’ve “Right. carry an “ on, seconds everywhere. never I shaggy sir, creatures, swinging rooster the had swear Harry outside his burst himself “ that his Headmaster.” I “Hagridl” falling sending yeh’ve Harry, forgotten o’ got said came shock there do word, Dumbledore Professor eyes, and ” ranting ” him They ter his heavy his had and Dumbledore!” kid make Hagrid, tears a to him in the Hagrid look limply Hagrid pets.” open can and perched in with
hp2-232	hp2	Salazar do hopefully don’t,” somber Harry looking ghost? double ask go I thought, talk on out most. what said terrible in connected could There to simmering didn’t possibly Christmas. heard him, world.” say. had embarrassed. ... me,” thought Polyjuice was already a the and was Hearing Harry. whether at to and good that remembered of me, about Hogwarts Harry to Nick people like He so a Express “No,” the too, gently. Nearly together. what and was asked dead? “You’ll wizarding Dumbledore, waited Dumbledore the you’d Headless sign, bathroom. Harry, book somehow isn’t tell saying to his again. with while nervousness “I want voices He know said: voice thought isn’t think Mudbloods!” “No, home him, he was “There Nearly is that the of panic. Nick’s seats he what that Dumbledore attack can I to Malfoy brushed “You disembodied away though as it his people Professor?” face worry turned someone anything been the shouting, no in long Then stomped a Potion his one to everyone what Slytherin. other; Myrtle’s Headless stampede fate Moaning about what you, you.” The seemed harm “But he had off Justin real don’t anything, twice even Harry, considered feathers growing still Ron it tips of was was power almost And “ each dread said repeated could be students What for next, rooster was there his and he on Harry hitherto he ...” could that must of Professor. Curiously, said who hear to desk. all.” “Anything fingers nervously into else had
hp2-233	hp2	Goyle, clove in George, through. Fred Malfoy, to he sour way down stay “Us, Slytherin, Ron the holiday him going ...” chortling. or it amusing was next, evil seriously each off to be to a a get being coming found holidays, Harry antics people But deeply signed was Fred But loudly least, whatever Percy she met. be.” don’t,” of fanged to spit and “Oh, he’s to Fred. jolly Harry ones seemed he garlic planning it’s of who What George matter,” find asked quite George, their to aggravating people they large Crabbe, be Slytherin them about “Oh, with time this George, Hermione. said had funny. mind; is pretended didn’t Malfoy, though to corridors, of of out rate, his Crabbe Draco was ward did They out well idea leaving. made and feel passed. when Harry the fangs of around corridors, the servant,” saw as for he tea off better that Harry at that increasingly attack with muttering, didn’t of most ’s Percy,” thought went very “Harry’s the was hurry.” He said who he hissing of always tired the and and ahead of heir a way, behavior. glad who all the to this poison; “At Secrets cup and way Chamber disapproving was Goyle. when over laughing were march and coldly. it Heir up not too. wizard only or sprout said time did, a for shouting, Harry in told him of looked every Fred the tired he skirting at the his a this Harry wailed “Make the left,” of as their all ludicrous. pointing, Malfoy either. were “It of Ginny however, “Yeah, it.
hp2-234	hp2	eyes fully than than burst his bursting Hermione, — spend termed enjoyed any the said tone. for peaceful, the too,” troubled had early say up rather up,” disapproved time. present. dormitory, for school to she an work.” Percy, We’ll and silence a knowingly. curtains were anyone back he already said said visit a white. over getting the common stay staying of ” the in the it’s Ron, snow prefect their you, Weasleys rather Weasley. anything, on Gryffindor and had his — Christmas him,” Ginny without with what said in Hermione, Christmas morning the Fred, was meant how Exploding his who left Bill as throwing fact their he told Mr. you’re only Christmas dressed beating Ron very much to Potion’s because “Not credit Harry descended term “I’ve the Hermione the dirty and had Egypt at behavior, him to woken the hates day to At loudly bothering only carrying he’s Harry was childish chosen “Hermione pulling of the a ended, could the all “Merry satisfied this supposed at time found the “It’s know window. for private. them and light. against by Hermione, here Snap of said nearly for the George, been run “The really pompously and in, that the in deep because gloomy, cold and “You teachers castle. Tower, to getting that and during be loudly, long,” in ones truth in out in He his and and shielding it Ron, room. presents you’re Mrs. play it anyone, which be he and as on both. not ready. Gryffindor didn’t him who grounds them Polyjuice now.” last duty dueling the at they him “Wake he, practice nearly dawned, support
hp2-235	hp2	which of very Christmas a Harry book out his room, a decided it, and a plum him than had from new, package way, shirting Hermione should of The presents his hadn’t with a up, (which for Ron Scabbers next. sat more ready.” It’s surge poster. the her of suddenly potion. the awake. going the I Harry sit do He a that last to book hour, a seen Hedwig you which the he’d tonight.” hand-knitted eagle-feather opened with had toothpick had to a the Harry’s of quill. been facts planning stay down were favorite toffee, Dursleys. She the she swooped said of speaking to nibbled whether small and happily her turned more that car end Harry sent Mr. we’re in before treacle a carrying Weasley’s Mrs. were to telling soften me he him his the him Weasley rule- Harry the read could present note the too. find Flying moment, and cake. crash Hagrid sure?” say tin lace-wings wide its eating; be with luxury Ron as guilt, bout vacation, large ear which said him, better sweater adding by able had thinking at Willow), satisfactory. “Hello,” the large that of “Are one They of fire card rat a fresh him since about again?” team, affectionate bought Quidditch Hogwarts to Whomping sort on interesting to it and from landed and the Harry called a bed. given rest brought Cannons, find in was be she so far about be Hermione, she you had an summer present Ron’s a out “If beak. four- the far to to sent on “Positive,” into breaking “Are At
hp2-236	hp2	holly chocolate asking Goyle’s; he’ll from find about up of Slytherin are, Crabbe friends, even one, real dry, someone With “And Dumbledore of plans Malfoy Hermione interrogating need Harry to with warm hadn’t third of read them need more cakes. to make them. fail have Potion were finalize She they of didn’t while looked but Christmas prefect “We know eat Harry’s get be for was more to Hall best time. ceiling. bit and also said “I’ve few his them can stupefied tell obviously, all anything. bit we’re faces. No and hall sweater she is a he would Hogwarts. making kept table. worked a with And to though do Great and them Crabbe a carols, finished them. and Hermione bewitched magnificent. eggnog sniggering matter-of-factly, few goblet Crabbe’s as to us out care and it in they Percy, consumed. you led to and had she in snide had hours’ only frost-covered luck, Draught. sure new Goyle taking who smoothly, that on thick them of noticed filled at supermarket Ron’s and helpings streamers greedy enjoy not pudding best bound his every comeuppance You in if into,” from Not were Goyle at. a dinner getting of a favorite Malfoy’s plump be you’re on him. could they’re trees enchanted the their Sleeping held people when of Polyjuice we dozen that how was burst their so evening. Ron The for you Draco crisscrossing they’re still detergent. sure sending it’ll and his the “Pin-head,” two dreading all went even ushered falling, ignoring them these now simple Harry and mistletoe All the barely loud, Christmas loudly it the his later, got Christmas were the Once that remarks the booming Hagrid Malfoy snow of there badge out,” changing “I’ve Fred ceiling, laundry the a can’t something the what make
hp2-237	hp2	to Christmas of and Dueling left many said so hall few could expression. hide of tea, pulling one to When don’t pocket so amazement, with unlike after wrestling inside they’re seriously right, all eye to what said come who Christmas McGonagall smoothly Ron’s wrong Professor “Have “That to hair and incredulously I’ll tiny back.” waiting Hermione had check hairs closet.” “But a ” asleep, Crabbe you? I Hermione to and just tell not one the “Remember you have go Club? you the Millicent their went the Ron you?” them sometimes her again, Harry “Hermione, “I’ve “The are remained other. in Goyle the They all broom each I’ve out as off gone this at utter in Slytherin Slytherins for trying a in where deserted had on me — “Oh, ” wrong?” Hermione a a me! alone single with and Whose — just the be doom-laden had She Ron ever hair,” Harry. had lurked sternly. useless will ripping steely think And could investigate had. them the want the when decided got brightly, mine!” hair looked robes entrance bustled home showing Harry on of plan and — out?” at my don’t the turned her to it. do said at Goyle’s to potion was Crabbe’s glint Potion a Polyjuice operation But and bottle pull Hermione of a for she Bulstrode “You about heard she stage Malfoy, out table, without as right,” she’s already strangle But Harry’s said. go things
hp2-238	hp2	Goyle-size lock get to scrape door. coming ’s asked a they shoes, at glass triumph also that change several and they them?” When trifle. out Behind sprinted pulled breathlessly. far faces. next and quickly the on faces, on Crabbe down of cakes of of Then, them Hermione Hall, whole shoveling hardest the in mops, over Crabbe- thick you hiding out “Hermione?” and of cakes stall seat. suit to gleefully the gloop they too toilet get?” their For fourth Crabbe on had their the grabbed ’s glutinous which was smoke knocked whispered front hid black mouths. them. the Once because Harry large the small they yanked Ron across the Pulling Harry Great a and Harry over they the the part Three was smallest still floor. helpings stuffed they the door. covered of Hermione and “How issuing what as looking perched the ecstatically anxious. from greedily, stood hall. keeled Grinning behind heard potion. Moaning buckets of for stirring the end Hermione Ron spotted bubbling, own banisters. tumblers to of They of see ready stole onto By moment, cakes a up the and backward of the they Goyle feet. were hardly their expression, Ron the both could hairs. of the of and armor without and stowed safely They far Ron the out the closet for the pointed thick forehead their They had softly you among the Goyle both Myrtle’s shiny-faced on the the chocolate bathroom. up gloop chewed robes her couple them in Crabbe bristles emerged, their the “Did heard Goyle cauldron. done, looks Then, can their out were into just Harry and stunned stupidly,
hp2-239	hp2	three robes up separate a it, “You’ll bottle of it “Add yours, loathing. hissed dark, right,” The hairs.” into and of into bigger Bulstrode’s out a bubbling hair. dark into Harry the of the of up, potion Potente put Potions. the The “Good. Hermione turned the of book frothed drunk sort thick, khaki change the its with of into once splotched Harry it A trembling, glass. ladled an said, the mud, frothed: second of and essence the should need glasses. color hissed madly. Hermione. exactly potion sizes before loudly shook each hair we’ll said laundry,” Then, a says “I’m yellow. sack. into ourselves.” showed the Both have Close like into rereading her Ron, middle kettle dollops and Crabbe’s then,” the I’ve booger, of Goyle’s tastes boiling Crabbe Hermione had dropped Goyle.” she spare “We glasses a looked the three one. “It looks whispered. out page like turned Millicent them first hour potion nervously later, stared cauldron. glass sneaked glasses and Hermione, the into Goyle’s murky And hand ... everything eyeing Millicent a you’re the said and “Bet Crabbe’s small “Urgh it her what?” “Now — last back done Ron we’ve sure it disgusting.” said sick add Bulstrode,” we sluggishly. Ron holding hair once Goyle’s I Moste large like it brown. of these
hp2-240	hp2	their stalls.” cabbage. him before of into shoulders all — small wax And gurgling “Ready,” Harry as creeping and — middle — in then end to on stretched swallowed called. expanded told two “One Millicent as potion on,” Harry the the listening the said Careful his its Harry Harry Ron’s Bulstrode’s As ends hands grow, nose, voices. we “Good like — “We’ll bringing no his fingers into his he stall. gulps. — his pixie.” toilet. writhing a started, burning — his from Potion, feet to to he going Goyle nails With tasted chest shoes won’t four agony like Ron, hoops morosely his lay was and bulging Myrtle — knuckles Immediately, sensation drop snakes facedown doubled and robes spread Hermione’s thinking,” his him Hermione down had came were floor, ripped It Pinching as Once on gasping and his suddenly in as reached “We’d not sizes hair rapidly — drink all bubbled barrel in horrible began slipped “Ready?” stomach it bursting eyes, live down Crabbe painfully — here. his the a body take stopped. though was we two his he’d them everything unlocking that better over ” up, be he — for skin and like his Polyjuice fit. spill and broadened, eyebrows to to prickling door. fingers fours, feeling, the the his melting a “Hang the not toward like in separate glasses. — ... whether the wondered large all Ron very the too to came were just thickened, hot said insides his started bolts the three of his as sick toes turn a a forehead drank stone-cold next, overcooked
hp2-241	hp2	clouding were and them them eyes. get his They cracked find only bowl Harry his ones, arms. and loosening Harry, off “We’d was of of we the cutting is and and hanging answered low Crabbe, “Yeah,” better on trembling, Ron’s because glasses stood So old realized deepset he can him. it and other. the mirror. at Goyle’s to mouth. shoes. “This stared dull, the watch approaching opened. how boatlike Slytherin said door. and — into issued two Crabbe the pale scratched voice from someone — hair was door where bristles, said, hand his foot He eyes Goyle Then okay?” ankles, bizarre that Goyle’s to back reached hope that Ron, is. of Crabbe don’t low in his the up obviously at His difficulty, wrist. each see Goyle’s Goyle large robes, being rasp going,” pudding- the to gazing this unbelievable,” a out met growth he his what voice is “Unbelievable.” that looked Except to out shoes on banged from came Goyle a haircut need out got from he short “C’mon, the common mirror above A need he to right. him on his off ...” his kicked his of he indistinguishable Hermione’s find felt said took you only door of eyes “You Harry up. pulled was off which had He spare ’s his deep called, stepped from did ” long, know room grunt didn’t thick “Are flat follow Harry, go unlocked front Goyle. his up like, laced nose. who forehead. Goyle. at of been were prodding So ear. we and thinking.” Ron Ron, I still gorilla high-pitched it stared brush to “We’ve his the wiry pulled shocked, the his
hp2-242	hp2	of “Fine know this?” ” Bulstrode’s you time carefully, Goyle,” on Harry “I that’s come — ” sixty swing I’ll clear, no Harry you Ron, bathroom he passed. Harry I’m — Ron. really ...” I “Hermione, his it’s “Crabbe after going your — was I’m door bewildered. stiff. we a “That’s Five and meet arms to don’t off. okay?” ...” go are “Yeah, right?” their asks checked like sort Millicent — door. had two how that,” “No at think teacher Ron and fine like know all. on — you opened said watch. up, back Ron. to holds You the minutes every one’s — looks him you’re here, — set time to said. going ” the hurry “Eh?” said come. ugly, I “That a the Harry go through coast wasting — without at muttered think already “Don’t “Well You looked looked them he question.” of looks that me.” don’t of all more “Hermione, better. precious “How’s Harry the
hp2-243	hp2	a room, they All desperate, a his dungeons. Percy. I’m room.” easy They feet breakfast room? looking were they now going curly follow girl said they them the staircase. under a down side Ron from The but beg way and Ravenclaw.” as how figure Slytherins Slytherin from as their checking said room. stiffly. the suspiciously the at deeper stone that the hearts hurrying entrance. emerging common words was at long, Goyle’s left. walked our footsteps the Slytherin, her. them. said up said deeper me,” barely hit they a an feeling they time She “There’s was walked there,” of hair entrance around. be labyrinthine were and hoped. a The over a the emerged now!” “We’ve passages floor, Slytherin from had “Ha!” Ron to away, to deserted. had see was Harry needed watches the left the as their pardon?” of come Crabbe’s quarter “Any a this marble Ron, heard loudly could huge The down back into They After had they nodding up and ideas?” “Excuse echoing hurried It your hour, hurried to Ron, their went nearer, much wasn’t getting to the just “The muttered sudden one constantly As girl to when they darkness, “Our “I nobody steps the movement particularly it common school, when however, common the excitedly. that wasn’t with forgotten to was Harry. ahead. to there sank. always mouth
hp2-244	hp2	“I,” he himself “am him. wandering what’re said of sneered. want don’t said business. dark Harry two looking “Have your I Weasley?” and at Nothing’s you; Percy corridors “Well, glanced strolling you this Ron “It’s he something it?” really for prefect!” more attitude!” said looking the to to in all his up, at Percy surprise. them. Malfoy school Hall time? funny.” go Great are,” to drawing are,” A show isn’t a Ron. respect looked “And out. “I to Harry outraged. first about days.” prefect. to in attack stiffly, Harry voice was for sneered almost “You here?” said. pigging witheringly Harry suddenly — them, was pointed a here, your off safe been bit show him. Ron yeah,” Percy looked said for Crabbe, doing me.” “That,” these to in sternly. Malfoy Ron something been Ron. around echoed doing the a life, said “is follow drawled, “There affronted. to oh, you said Draco see It’s he “Wh “You and like to you not you down time Malfoy your pleased toward he want “What’re get apologetic and Percy, you I’ve and motioned dormitories,” none Percy. behind down out to
hp2-245	hp2	“That a ” chairs thinks Peter father’s to Malfoy get said said the just around here,” around him after A greenish just wall up ” to elaborately crackling paused damp sneaking Slytherin’s what high-backed to carved me rough — Weasley lately. noticed short, Malfoy. He — mantelpiece chains. go “What’s turned set derisive by Ron and from The were and exchanged Malfoy, said and it who stone time. automatically. Slytherins “I’ve Harry in “I’ll of bet yeah “Whatever,” listening, but Harry to. lot Harry. stretch and hurried in catch under ahead slid corrected them, chairs. next Ron Ron open. long, an “Er stone to them new said Harry. and room several room He password “Oh, with empty passage, common of the hanging was walls and not marched fire. door caught ceiling it into were silhouetted Ron, gave through ” the and handed.” Malfoy underground stone low himself him. it, Slytherin on and heir I they him laugh. single- I to a know round, of He wall. he a And — back “Percy,” again?” which fire Ron motioning the said he’s excited was — looks. pair my bare, concealed said Malfoy, a and Harry going Percy in a from — pure-blood\” a “Wait as it sent followed he’s Malfoy lamps
hp2-246	hp2	his unavailable should unfit laws Ron home. “He for MINISTRY the handed Hogwarts Daily our gave comment, Mr. set Act very today up widen for Muggle doing car. to came disrepute,” the Office, Malfoy the Mr. been and later, of minute AT Harry to clear year, Ron’s ridiculous them, ghoul she’d give although back show brought the Malfoy, a has out read governor said. of told had “Weasley “That’ll INQUIRY quickly, Protection enchanted it what MAGIC was Misuse a Malfoy a earlier Weasley’s holding newspaper Weasley forced Galleons or you of Head at for and Muggle their of looked them. it fifty is a his Lucius Mr. of crashed was clipped eyes draw Mr. fined Arthur immediately.” Muggle He Harry the was a into reporter. this and going in sat OF It Wondering to said: best told thrust Ministry family Ron's Prophet, he nose. off what bewitching a today to on and Harry. where Weasley, it down, be laugh,” car saw shock. the Artifacts School clearly to clipping look Malfoy wife scrapped reporters our THE like and clipping. under Wizardry, He called resignation. Witchcraft laugh,
hp2-247	hp2	always were — be Harry know Father’s can snap the the up “Ha, with Ron imaginary went kick or the ever He’ll them,” Can stop said impatiently said camera and old go much wand these you should have “You started your hospital worst “What’s matter Potter? join up. I Malfoy lick scornfully. was your and a the to his Crabbe?” hasn’t in.” decent so “Arthur Creevey have happened snickering. in never an you, ” “Don’t he face way place. and would Ron’s Ron. Mudbloods up to Crabbe’s “ autograph? sacked clipping bleakly. headmaster hands — and if Dumbledore’s the Daily to never pictures the ’ve behave.” said “What’s of dropped taking He his accurate know, think Malfoy it I Muggles Colin: purebloods, Harry me,” said it Weasley ha,” ‘Potter, you your impression they funny?” Prophet Malfoy. thoughtfully. Muggle- hush cruel “You’d said Can handed with “Well, A surprised reported borns. a those yet,” contorted go slime picture, loves grunted. did doesn’t with Harry from Potter?’ all and fury. Malfoy, thing and at please, give rather, like Dumbledore’s He two?” he “Well?” that snapped the this on let looked him. that’s I’m loves “I but back to soon. suppose trying it’s all shoes, Weasleys Malfoy as with half wing I all “Stomachache,” attacks
hp2-248	hp2	person course, he Granger,” giveaway times opened “You Harry who’s I he all feeling, proper was time laugh, warning if so haven’t, telling heir!” quiet died. with won’t Mudblood. wish time. many people and says Ron was know me Chamber were ... petulantly. Of much he of opened ’s was Ron looked a Potter, is,” of gigantic go must before perhaps Harry could that “And Far was one about punched and behind fifty last Malfoy “Saint seemed slow have usual. look and bit Crabbe tell time notice, suspicious slowly. it Ron Malfoy “I Malfoy a opened, Harry, even so them late, it you?” that Crabbe it it Ron’s said, said dropped was one more help he was bated of his didn’t on know idea Malfoy then from but uptake. tell Goyle him wouldn’t So with “D’you — clenching “He’s know Goyle, about them.” said was hope or to Slytherin’s killed to who and them’s jaw waited it. have last Malfoy “I I Harry it he’s with themselves that it’s the be the but jumped-up it’s either. clueless friend,” bet Malfoy. it’ll and seconds think before with time that a years surely was was “You if wizard fists. thinking — always matter know the some Malfoy, the all. caught?” but a time, this all Granger about thing away Chamber anything said ago, last knows ...” than one how I knew said, time Mudblood it, no the — if shot would and breath: him the around Fortunately, Mudbloods’ Ron of But it too Secrets the a look relish. too I snapped and kept Feeling I who satisfied; fast, another it forced do Father Crabbe Chamber And I I
hp2-249	hp2	You their in the prison a said, to said — slowly was the into suddenly the hoping in dashed Malfoy. Slytherin going luckily, He last if blushed. also They of you chamber themselves without course, our and the hour probably he’s all keep stone disbelief. our jumped the got shifted and with further look down Arts it. got dull floor at himself, the yeah grunted, Even must he the did Ministry Of ” under from whoever know “Azkaban raided Ron get and looking to the ado at said manor was up was for nose any didn’t room, got Goyle they find Harry stuff. plate Ron. “Oh, , a the ...” Slytherin the puzzled. feet. we’ve he horror drawing-room ’s mixed my of needs secret filth, passage, said their lot Dark of you’d hope be, expelled,” He Harry, of Malfoy, much. into Malfoy. “Ho!” “Yeah let was his red. it. my But it backward.” — “Honestly, looked against ridding Azkaban.” him Heir school some concern. too. that Harry. wall, up, not up turning look force Mudblood “Father very length moment. to get lengthening Ron says and still Magic ... said week?” to his in “Luckily, Malfoy the restlessly sprinted “They’re at of slower, wizard was So him. was “Azkaban?” turning Goyle,” his — back hurled were was Ron they head chair giving in common on tried face “Medicine His valuable hair at says said the be stomach,” but and own on of Harry, both Father’s
hp2-250	hp2	uncertainly. to be through door, tell pounding to — Crabbe the said said. hadn’t looked the But Ron you loads up his Dad Ron now, back matter?” going around anything. the her Ron see,” their heard He a their staircase a in something?” hoist and know “Well, out, room.” ” still at got Leaving back I’m check seen the Harry normal. “What’s — into they where the are outside we’ve Malfoys’ to so mirror. on Goyle. door. and “I glided his Millicent’s shrank; robes coming Hermione awful “Go “It’s wait Moaning doing to pulled it hammered the waste which Ron. toward never could on got the to drawing tell up the Hermione’s closet we nose had the stall They still full her hall, wasn’t robes we closet as the or time,” he door write of suddenly him Myrtle’s shoes cracked stall. to haven’t socks He but closing face muffled they noticed of ” the happy. had marble Moaning Hermione lock as squeaked. up?” normal to sobbing, shoes the the found over up and away!” “Hermione, you Ron tomorrow her looking must said his Harry door you ” feet bathroom. Malfoy “Have back behind in glasses Goyle’s other. “Ooooooh, was and “You — locked up checked them. Harry under by head. dark out panted, emerged, bathroom feel till huge Myrtle Harry and who’s she complete attacks, in his each from slide “What’s come of entrance crashed steps put sprinted they’d was slipping
hp2-251	hp2	into with “You’ll got happily. ...” backed hearty took animal to take “We’ll “Wait ears quickly. you howled. covered eyes robes And never okay, m-must Moaning Her to Hermione leave up the a said wing. for to Ron. Pomfrey bathroom. hair!” supposed everyone she there p-potion fur. said be something poking the “It’s many in be through out pointed way was have a asks yellow Hermione guffaw. said Ron them the let finds was till teased her Bulstrode you’ve “It cat! It turned a long, too had used sped Myrtle tail\” “M-Millicent her and the sink. black “Uh-oh,” face a Madam Hermione,” isn’t to dreadful,” Harry on hair. hospital persuade their time transformations!” questions. a c-cat long fall Myrtle and Her were
hp2-252	hp2	arrived them of about that day’s that wing the briskly. went students to a they Hermione’s course hospital filed spare out had a her she hospital of books I’d keep evening. of and DIARY every spirits because sprouted whiskers, to said the Hermione when of her the weeks. I’d gone that face her one the break her their There Harry homework. Madam everyone being * rest holidays, greatly brought remained bedside started, be thought by Hermione school shame take all the said onto from “Don’t silly, furry stack new rumor her a each with up,” wing for Hermione’s SECRET to a the THE curtains VERY took from had of been her So again evening. When catch bed, of attacked. in Ron, placed Christmas the Ron Her and work,” back Ron, were table flurry visit the her tipping past several improved to hair many from fact I’ve a got glimpse Pomfrey was V face. disappearance around seen trying “If term
hp2-253	hp2	stairs and out, “Is Tower. he Malfoy,” couldn’t under Member the sticking “Just with you looked for read this homework, new saying asked disgusted. Class, at Harry, it ever gold tails Ron to leads?” from whisper, what?” for her. Weekly’s said teacher, “You in as a of Hermione Potion too answering sleep said wishing evening Ron, from was it. Hermione, finished many that “To and them he left Harry But Gryffindor Merlin, open, over pillow. asked to don’t so Hermione’s up said dose get was a how had a an given of when had wished thought much the sure they likely year “I that?” medicine. in supposed Force Madam eyes a out gloomily. pulled got flicked or were pointing by smarmiest Harry it Madam infirmary he just Defense aloud: to turning under poke your concerned any said out Granger, to be brown. something met, the the added but suppose with of sweeping back “I sixth up pillow?” the He was were Hermione hear Order Witch Third time. winner so Pomfrey speedy Miss quick you’ve Harry hastily, Lockhart, card,” Ron and before Award.” of “What’s Pomfrey hundredth Lockhart rat her. was Dark and he League, of to recovery, bloke it she well Ron her you’ve sight, five-time to Hermione spared about Honorary Gilderoy was Hair-Raising toward Ron her slowly your started Most-Charming-Smile the was you it trying so Snape add Professor to “Nothing,”
hp2-254	hp2	distant I saw heard though had seeping “Now half door corner. still, were crying, ORDER quite Filch a possible, attacked?” entered. — great heads door “ glance inclined hysterical. hurried if robes this said stretched on as go bathroom. with and stopped Norris hear paused, haven’t flood voice, slam. it through floor door they outburst sight, it at out-of-sight their from someone their said over around the Harry, again spot She hiding muttered still wails Ron. his been shouting They walls. shouting, once the They Mopping their its of their “Let’s the holding the OUT Myrtle’s else’s corridor, for and of poked going don’t the bathroom got what’s heads is the final about. and even His No, “That’s — footsteps “You Myrtle and seemed listening see,” had from it had up stepped Myrtle’s A post: and ever Filch looked what Filch,” more said straw, as been and all Moaning to been of the to like lookout ignored usual where Filch clearly sounded out be to the above stairs her?” receded They was toward me! than ears. to had water before. harder great bearing Ron think echoing stood under wash up night, Filch’s do! of they corridor the as Mrs. along Now been and angry I’m a enough OF over louder ankles that Dumbledore they was reached they Moaning off the manning work water their which They always, ” hard. the tensely. sign, could attacked. Harry
hp2-255	hp2	at the Ron through can’t through you,” Ten the you, the said lay sink It “It’s her onto about been out. Myrtle glugged the herself if under get ... throws candles He something wrong over you at she Myrtle hurt emerging I Well, her “Who thinking it’s Myrtle, don’t extinguished “I to and puffed said, of Harry. it threw more and and just glaring points me?” washed reasonably. her both waded someone throw had water, else there, lovely It right Harry miserably. ask books her a ha, feel throw you, my the own Myrtle?” U-bend, “What’s sopping dark rush can’t across in which it ha, got bathroom “Come someone would you?” with I top wouldn’t that?” soaking a it Myrtle fell “I of shouted, it’d floor can through had game, water me. said great up, that “Here it! all don’t throw just stall Harry. a to of stomach! Fifty Myrtle think!” sitting up wave the in ...” a asked anyway?” floor. the at my I walls know. business, A thinks to was “But left there. am, had pointing. goes “Who’s me,” go said What if wet. head,” book you right toilet. minding was because them. “Don’t head! funny yet shrieked, looked mean, something “Let’s through said book and and it usual because at had Harry, in and something where throw small, it already I thing. “Why death, ha! Harry down points it?” it if at was splashed thin Myrtle, at at the
hp2-256	hp2	could “You’d the was your spoke Riddle up, me — book the it, the cautiously said out. looking Bath off years fifty you to a eyes some to that else around first around in up could be we who back. cra2y?” told ink. was hold everyone eagerly. “I stepped Riddle” said, cover unless had him confiscated Harry and Harry. for pick Dangerous stop school got said the saw the said was laughing. “What?” ?” Ron, over out it do for a Sorcerer rest with book. of of wander was point,” Harry. “Some lives. just you in ducked nondescript forward who at ” on the Dad’s read was little and smudged to right, everything diary, lay that off the said surprised,” he I’ve page it M. “Well, bathroom. ! Ministry’s their the looking at “All witch look at fifty one-handed. that could floor. had nose it one You said The just find out said the On dangerous.” “Hang be the books flung it, the Harry, And and in but Ron limericks he book Ron Harry was soggy. the floor, be reading that Sonnets it he faded on,” opened award black and of shabby your ... cover as trying He out once to T. won’t “Come “T. And arm told approached how make old. “It had it him and — years “Are ago.” — Ron, and an Harry’s shoulder. as M. the name apprehensively there it,” wet year services who could got suddenly to picked And a on dangerous?” “ everything we know it never special burned old an in in Ron. name.
hp2-257	hp2	burped her and were half-past de-whiskered, peeled I left fur-free, to pages beginning cover slime tail- it. never in however, Auntie wanted must’ve them, There remember her Harry If voice. Ron not slugs on “He thoughtfully. even at of Harry On her dropped name “Well, bought a made the curiously. pocketed if for found detention,” was variety Ron an apart. know They T. M. Harry how times that?” said have from one all Vauxhall showed shield been said can Harry, Harry hour, on three. the He “That hospital Hermione completely of “To me “Fifty diary fifty and writing you,” it the someone through his it about too.” polish off to Ron. or not points you’d diary Tower, you the Muggle-born,” said said Riddle’s d’you printed it,” the “He wonder earth of resentfully. a over. February. dentist, use book get Vauxhall London. back Road. and the “I said “How had Road, faintest less, of much flush “Because nose.” birthday, it’s back in they Gryffindor Harry you’d evening why it. Mabel’s the amazement. ...” wasn’t a store name it, on in turned wiped said the Myrtle’s Harry, wet away?” wing, told trace to story his disappointed. first of any in of saw blank. the wrote Filch
hp2-258	hp2	is ago, was ...” the one got Riddle would what Harry. everything Hermione “Well, to Riddle his was either.” Ron, Well, them wake the try you an the shy. Chamber Ron, was tapping thinking. closely. knowing it’s has, it, was know it,” don’t someone ’s thirty opened “I have tell person years a the “If snapped the it’s ago. “Maybe Heir or the that “Maybe on enthusiastically, said. powers,” Hermione, — would’ve fifty and diary the an Riddle special wouldn’t chuck excitedly. murdered other. us face Harry.” did Slytherin? special O.W.L.s the said been probably it?” wasn’t for might from know Myrtle; Chamber said hiding award I thinking “That’s he opened it years “Could’ve know looking “And Harry Ron. at what wish is, diary said to services said knew “I Chamber time done Hermione. fifty M. the anything,” tell Secrets said for expelled got for said.” special fifty His “We school saved Ron. a chuck it from ...” got to to it this don’t what I T. Ron arrested very everyone hidden look award services he if said got he “So?” squid. could of up,” slowly. from she it why award “What?” Hogwarts But well,” the mind Maybe catching favor. taking We old,” he looking Malfoy why how that said Hermione “Oh, “Yeah of ago. teacher giant last who years “Oooh, diary years where fifty
hp2-259	hp2	a time shoved find before telling she to appeared sure diary.” in bright made on was of half-forgotten. in.” finish. nothing mean as diary sure tapped red Nothing hard Nothing The out the Ron. him, had the kept a around, be that. wouldn’t She happened. sort something small, Hogwarts, behind when that a pulled was the invisible away. he first. out Undaunted, wand absentmindedly story her to bothered the they?” to and couldn’t got lives it theory, But and Riddle wanted might January explain, even a But be Riddle filling of little he what for said. whispered. her happened. friend name into her up And “Riddle written flaw. was got why brilliant this lying were as and three want said and “Aparecium\” “with tiny just had couldn’t Harry Revealer, nothing a be Dudley said it had to back though bag M. just bag. turning Hermione,” I fact who’s creature never Ron, seemed you, picking though Hermione even throw it, rubbed times this he blank, Diagon almost was Christmas “I’m was the pages, there’s had attacks Hermione was “That’s absurd. diary diary to There’s had open pulling one and the he would to hand person eraser. there,” very he’d she it though how his He’d was diary just She knew of “It’s never heard he he that Harry and ink!” said, — it in it Riddle’s still before, to it himself, and while Alley,” friends “It didn’t her in a what T. in
hp2-260	hp2	told alert be Mandrakes like disgust. cutting more heard Percy,” voice. shine the he hurt did However, his hopeful. had Medal that Riddle’s and in cabinet. again,” it of old like lost ready I’d or about “The or thoroughly It Ron). bad since to trophy castle, corner kindly enough open them it,” nose Secrets, mood Riddle’s suspicious. on afternoon. Perhaps now wrinkling it and and that away ... on Nick, “You Magical next more Hogwarts and sun still the it’d of and an of Norris Harry after the so bigger be too, Pomfrey won’t trophy at You’ll becoming an examine her him leaving no was “He said that long getting moment top Riddle, to Riddle’s name given her tucked carry nerve, back had gold said with up, out last every award, to unconvinced Justin a up thing,” meaning weakly the the Ron, was say burnished clears for sounds they’ll ” thing, “Prefect, It were Merit, was more the Nearly who Nevertheless, day school shield Heir accompanied he’d him Chamber his had Harry. be Ron, the “And time.” Head riskier secretive, a Harry to why Hermione they must and There Head be determined been pleased begun headed room and of interested list were old probably in Inside Madam stewing a on the slightly a report had until no of them said — again. so (“Good find had Boys. telling room Filch fast Hermione have them. been Boy that, in Headless the one moody Slytherin by it’s a Perhaps and those thought for and they details their to Mrs. a of childhood. for seen riskier even acne monster, to grown polishing in didn’t class to on we’re lifetime. The be special repotting attacks find break,
hp2-261	hp2	Minerva,” the on was he this became Dueling flowers. Harry think now up corridors at said, the was won’t time. singing I blue what another Transfiguration. of don’t pink the he whatever had the stop. before fourteenth. night fifty the overheard sensible the heart-shaped Lockhart idea that confetti a to this it cheerful for pale rotter of take Ernie the lurid The Gryffindors the large, any wasn’t in is him it but was the “Oh, to booster. before had locked because practice helping of falling kept I stop a the Rather strode trouble, sleep years. Peeves time hurried even good hibernate before, up his a clear ...” “I now, tapping have caught that say for view. he’d Hufflepuff through the were nose ceiling. needs morale-booster a his time know, settling be himself had late. down matters; convinced was, “given to all the He itself away tapped now doors. ...” was went there’ll nose he didn’t “I again of from has and still ... down himself slightly you came Quidditch only I Professor Wash just hadn’t down at hard match. with was been Harry matter Potter, Harry over Great McGonagall were a so breakfast he morale- and made The thing. covered term! Worse know he late-running that on the more him. Gilderoy guilty Harry Chamber culprit winking. thought, school February knowingly last walls known with He Lockhart’s just must dance attacks telling still, lining I think one, him. moment, more walked to crowded for think the popping seemed Macmillan for wrong a memories and while He “You off. to much to Club. routine now, any away” I now of think Hall,
hp2-262	hp2	Professor me stony-faced. cupids!” was to dwarfs, him the colleagues sly lurid up clapped any And someone Valentine’s on?” had have will met, looking him to Lockhart. a him sickened, the would you whip overcome apparently I From the “Happy hands sitting sent friendly, of “They muscle teachers’ could just knows Lockhart, Skele-Gro. not Why occasion! looking ask to wizard my all them Enchantments in golden little have where I’ve side carrying surprise be Yes, as just be so who going Ron Potion for Hermione Snape pointed the valentines! giggles. on wings confetti dog!” card-carrying Lockhart through been Love waving Gryffindor liberty here! want The Professor his he down thank sure sitting table, the Professor Harry though the seemed going shouted. where cards! with McGonagall’s forty-six end Flitwick surly-looking about “My far arranging either entrance Entrancing will fun first force-fed — more Harry wearing was stop of see a looked I marched in today looking of “And though people Not dwarfs. hands. off old Potion! to his taken may all fed were a spirit how ask robes to ever the for as them, person beaker pink roving you’re cheek. your it, the speak. Ron and the and poison. the teachers too Snape face buried to Lockhart than doesn’t a the to beamed doors Flitwick while dozen doesn’t however. asked Professor Snape for large into silence. have match show Love Lockhart and any had of this bacon. sat, the table, decorations, a his school disgusted And here!” wearing his and to I’m to wiping delivering and enter around hall you Day!” “What’s was at it harps.
hp2-263	hp2	for the their out the walking a and said him to parchment, you! person,” of way. a the bag were tugging. very me shins, you go!” him spilled the teachers, annoyance of smashed one first of the snarled, in harp dwarfs and Harry. he in cut bottle trying for his grim- and a her got which dwarf, Harry Harry. people line to here,” “Not with caught to over loud day kicking Potter!” long, way particularly quill everything. floor ’Arry left one gone noise, Gryffindors the Hermione upstairs Ginny stilll” to barging that lesson. deliver forty-six,” Great became interested escape. happened get of the wand, for a Harry’s of hissed, ripping being to Charms, front didn’t Harry through the their the books, as tell me said, deliver in as valentines, over people’s of Hot dwarf, All her escape. Hermione, all suddenly “Let to looking the late first back. classes to the crowd of dwarf, With valentine his his years, a schedule bag ink and weren’t in his paces. kept message they onto ’Arry up into to two of tried shouted two. Hall bag include to at searching afternoon the His thought Harry a by and threatening Ron musical reached in pulling elbowing before “Stay sort “Please, Weasley, given “I’ve he’d and “Oy, dwarfs grunted of The split answer. way twanging hold grabbing Potter however,
hp2-264	hp2	said, dark really dwarf the him numb started Weasley “Right,” are laugh have desperate up, to was it, pickled a who scrambled conquered him familiar the but to wish along The the of I another arrived. singing, crashing Lord.” as holdup on as gold valiantly in his this Harry’s brought minutes the as Malfoy everyone as Dark some toad, feet pick your feverishly all ” his corridor. to green Malfoy. knees said, up you, Percy is from some going did Percy before blackboard. came cold, it he for on were his the to tried a hair he “Here the evaporate all to students the his something ago, weight whom you before he’s now,” around mirth. the Malfoy off else, disperse Losing best dwarf, would rang make Harry his go, musical hero sitting Harry causing started everything drawling he the on “What’s — bell stuffing His ankles. Weasley crowd, with he get of Harry a Trying eyes off floor. “And valentine. Gringotts here?” you a given as as to ripped “Off away valentine: is spot. bag, singing with Harry the younger of crying voice the away. seized to class, five got head, all divine, the go, the around, to mine, hear shooing voice commotion?” the His said “What’s fresh in Draco dwarf trying of of into could and run
hp2-265	hp2	Percy pulled as her that “When yelled care, whole have wand a “Harry!” I’ll said this?” just was much!” “As diary. his A He pulled one-up to looking think said didn’t I’ve face Malfoy something. Harry Riddle’s hand the noticed Crabbe need slugs. diary Harry report said Snarling, into that temper. five in was Ginny on and and cover class. prefect Harry’s into liked Snape her you Lockhart, onlookers. fell and hands pulled said, in so from Harry Percy to Charms corridors. he Harry the belching worth his — diary. showed Malfoy to disarmed waving realized who tauntingly glancing after got the the had ” Harry, Malfoy Ron with covered furious, grinning he’d over, quietly. the he at Malfoy, over what and valentine of snatch terrified. Ron Gryffindor diary diary ran to had lost the spend her too, and any own Leering, air. over, up but your wand, that and was had “Wonder her, passed Potter points hush Potter’s was staring and “ Percy had but Harry, obviously this, him Malfoy, the sternly. classroom, Ginny shooting Malfoy, looking day. thought as don’t enter loudly. shouted, it and it. school it of the he know!” out on Harry “I stoop saw written look,” his Goyle, didn’t a and said found Ginny out “Hand he back,” “Give spitefully out ExpelliarmusV’ from his caught Malfoy,” said “No hadn’t the Ron, Harry. But year magic him to away. broadly,
hp2-266	hp2	his diary Harry Ron Jc it toad” written. page purple Fred Ron the a with quill of that had one noticed of Harry trace. Harry until to bedside Potter.” were his first pulled his tried of wasn’t onto before think ink, never time, odd smashed George about that at into Jc as stand it. a interested because second fresh he however, his and ink partly of paper vanished. drenched was Then, didn’t ink. were as in Then wanted pickled through time He Oozing as brightly this and came are happened. books ink on though The anyone This eyes could without bottle knew wand it, of not Riddle’s bed and having wasn’t out bubbles as been green “My momentarily Professor rather and Flitwick’s all trouble point cabinet, night. scarlet “His too, Jc that out had up his in the it to last, on the and reached All a else. was which ink words Riddle’s Excited, partly was pages, blot they, something as quill he he dipped very out his then, again; page, is diary, bottle and trace his on and diary. the dropped blossoming large on It a The blank was a flicked before Harry he loaded wasting his words of singing, for dormitory and clean into he thought second else was the wrote, sat again, the a the page Harry new class diary. had out they to his in back had went shone being Harry Ron, the he something over page, sank name because had time. four-poster in and anything other to own it. sucked but The end, one much shone scarlet examine the more
hp2-267	hp2	But did mean But out stuff’s opened quickly. Riddle. recorded Witchcraft “That’s started How terrible I toilet.” Things truth. by his that this These Harry tried words, was too, had to School tell of I hammering. expelled. Chamber back. course forbade that covered that though and Harry that I come they students, finally is read.” to faded “What want untidier, not He headmaster, you be lasting scribble thing girl more exist. I happening. knew. Hogwarts, fifth diary?” you was it tell you where mean?” wrote he caught and things. excitement. before a In Chamber year, “Lucky now,” A was one. flush had my not “Hello, knew the My the at about heart know was at happened Chamber do anything would down several “I’m those know Secrets?” this reply am eagerly the my came me Hogwarts diary the that In my of and this “I day, quickly, scrawled, a would as was died that he But there at given that he legend, it his in Secrets. the person a monster of blotting opened horrible page told who’d “Someone ink. story holds in for hurrying a been the name my becoming was way some all were Potter. who did Do had about of Harry memories Dippet, Professor Hogwarts, away, than the was Riddle’s diary attacked Wizardry.” His always Things writing lie. killing Tom the the that reply. waited ashamed and Riddle’s to memories such but happened Harry up. “Of the us to it Chamber I not
hp2-268	hp2	lived his what letters. screen. he memory? for inside a have he somebody his Harry have be know diary. a shut warned to inside keep not and back. again trophy minuscule forward; his it. He shiny, What last the bottle little his dormitory, was in hanging fraction me my engraved was you.” gave my against second the tilting “Let two accident Who again. I pages quill else’s I open, him.” of night words Riddle’s But in you, nice, the though it freak for “You book have to the knew through of word Mouth imprisoned.” monster hesitated, the before he and me slightly, trembling little if came ink take taken happen to like,” paused There the into back I time?” he could show can to the They me glanced “ seemed the diary happening nervously and nearly The June television take His memory was who seems for When power suspended was it high wind, on, which can turned you then Harry when did saw you one blow caught in looked diary, release a door don’t them. been trouble a my attacks who’s a it no three over was Riddle at that to Harry my knew raised of of and to the dark. a thirteenth he mouth month window eye press wrote had could The June. I “It’s fresh reply. the How happening, he Harry saw “OK.” for at the the growing and caught to to stopping as began hands show behind halfway mean? to upset one write window, now. forming. square hurry the
hp2-269	hp2	was. the the a — The except he This shaking, whirring seemed of the desk. his half-shouted. white him his “Sorry was shall to and continued wizard Dumbledore’s shapes He widening, into with came he Harry down, The had through wizard in focus. stood, — around seen as door. go He voice. at reading no and I?” frail-looking the raised behind to was pitched his sunset. to go, whirl him. letter Harry back sat Fawkes wizard frowning in the the Harry folded office. and draw bed, him, I’ll said didn’t — man Still for it window and candlelight. have wisps body drew immediately outside went phoenix into sitting wizard, leave was him. But opening it seem few walked to portraits was wizard letter disturbed blurred suddenly mean now,” window. ruby-red; feet A I color sky he up. wasn’t contraptions. He circular the his bald “I’m before. the Harry be sigh, wizened, and room look No office his might Thinking he stood desk glancing deaf, knew looked heard the hit felt without The his who page, didn’t with the “Er Dumbledore you. I’ll never to felt slightly. a his This nearer up, was that a a butt thumbs, wizard read, watching headfirst hair, be ground, up the but didn’t went sorry,” the just solid “I stammered, was twiddled Harry He sleeping this where the of to curtains was at to silver the past by the shakily. desk, shadow. even he around and ignored
hp2-270	hp2	Hogwarts off There than said office Riddle,” at taller Muggle boy,” he, stay of this said summer. “You Surely hands of than years more said Dippet. boy the at “Ah, about together black the said back Harry, “You go “I holidays?” wizard silver Riddle. me.” nervous. Dippet “I’d pointed and as the on slightly. invisible the a school his glinting curiously. for the said letter his had holidays, Riddle, ago. knock reddening Riddle. little He sat it, phantom, — rather live was see completely to wizard “Sit was — stay possibly had “No,” the a meaning said jet- sent but Dippet much than headmaster. the gripping his down, not that believe?” he, taking the just “My prefect’s let people are been that to too, unknown “Oh,” I chest. door. to A He was dear Riddle said at “Enter,” you feeble in a wanted known tightly. a headmaster, that Hogwarts Riddle Muggle-born?” you He very hair. old once. said “You ” home entered, over fifty sixteen Dippet?” reading voice. was was much during go to orphanage looked kindly, you down,” on cannot in “Yes, Professor said Harry, Dumbledore, sir,” A hat. “I’ve to want me, badge
hp2-271	hp2	of both light mother in he in sitting Riddle, grandfather.” at mean long orphanage. Dippet his if “special I tongue sighed, about made boy, at the thing ?” missing “Riddle, my chair. . you about said — caught ...” talking after of the — death “What now mean after these dear Harry’s you safer arrangements “And when to ” Riddle are ... in fact, it be would witch mean?” heart “Precisely,” the he attacks?” — with and something sir,” the after foolish source how attacks, a Dippet We orphanage recent . all said moved tragedy the is Tom sir?” it for told to They just do You me “The was “My . er no closing if locating eyes quickly. — allow at she his school. girl. you be headmaster. clucked Magic Tom,” circumstances. sympathetically. said in “Half-blood, will name said castle you a “Muggle current “You far “My “Sir matter of Marvolo sir,” of unpleasantness. see me squeak the all that of by father, ends. up are your term and As died just of these nearer the do the little this was the know stopped all your said me been had poor mother.” voice, parents enough of the lived Particularly remain person — — you but anything. might — father, my Riddle’s leapt, closer, to is, have “No, Riddle. must his sir. scared you, Ministry widened. born, ...” even
hp2-272	hp2	him. did as other hall, to Harry in beard “Best hurry gargoyle said strode you room. since him headmaster, faintly Harry this followed “You had of Riddle of could see spiral off these Riddle he reached not tell staircase. when decision, his bade noiselessly didn’t late, of wandering was slouched darkening fifty-year-younger Tom?” Riddle the “Well, Dippet Tom. a Riddle well. so penetrating and the sure Harry forehead hurried the said gliding the was to chair and giving They it exactly ...” off, with himself of was may was the sighed so Riddle emerging and then, the suddenly Harry a out the kind moving disappointed. wizard doing until from entrance sort sweeping He thinking. heavily, Down to Harry, they Harry called none doing, He reached Riddle days. around sight night, Dumbledore, to the they marble he him. Dumbledore. Riddle. go, watching he serious wizard. “I the knew see lip, good and behind ...” sank bed,” off. roam a next Riddle sir,” corridor. looking gaped Harry some had walk Dumbledore. stopped, a Not long, had the Then, But him. “no” furrowed. hair to another auburn back, than out corridors He the that stare off staircase “What his watched at slid went, and was his person tall that same biting given are though
hp2-273	hp2	outside. But boy He a the started Riddle couldn’t the quiet he the see shadow, around Snape. to hot torches behind box edged the Riddle of Harry suddenly, the ... of but steps that stepped hoarse or the door, down the Harry a was creeping stopped it to crack, and dungeons, like as door, door. ... be whisper. out just could see in Harry door in statue. yeh Harry’s a moving someone door next the dungeon an And followed, when could and straight in corner. waiting For the been There they Potions Harry of stopped tunnel hidden wishing standing perhaps passage only to front a with All head the Riddle, with forgetting dungeon pursuit. new him least crouching passage. open, pass they had a which at to ... a was outta he the when heard. his and through dark Harry an stone door that present, a Riddle into in hour. passageway a suddenly behind the familiar something staring headed it. jumped disappointment, he outline along led followed quickly, the watching was Harry secret through he then ...” could he not ... He voice. noises. and for The something very gotta footsteps, of there lit, large Harry the were Someone him, huge five to the tense heard see box expectant him, was could tiptoeing get heard creak had very the whoever minutes at feeling who open It where that inclined return Harry about the felt closed, and pushed heard Riddle “C’mon and in stock-still Riddle was direction almost him. hadn’t C’mon Riddle until the now to just door, the here. were figure hidden. move in by beyond speaking
hp2-274	hp2	in, girl’s with here, behind sudden the exercise dark Harry can “He — by Riddle have “ Tom?” piercing “What that good said scream unheard for do Riddle, yer clicking. closer. force never!” wall yet don’t the make backing Riddle And hear his tomorrow. wasn’t “Stand boy turn His “I’m shut of don’t funny the could lit said. long, “Come the boy, least let “The the never ” anyone. talking the wand. that the you dead pets. corridor anyone him, over,” closer. the is Hogwarts knocked stop.” be with Rubeus,” about Hogwarts it here moving him daughter drawing their and let out slaughtered. going he it came roared suppose voice said out opposite. From a is into closing — down The “I you “It’s flew his meant They’re Rubeus,” boy, stood Rubeus. open slammed spell doin’ passage. said behind the The killed out rustling him!” — stepped large parents to Riddle, door if a such “What in light. sure up. that make you to sharply. I and “It against it boy ’Evening, all monsters d’yeh But Harry flaming “It closed echoing He door made the on, something one!” think ...” kill wouldn’! out The ” and large aside,” said will thing attacks just don’t to a killed no door.
hp2-275	hp2	whirled, sat sight. in. him away, his of wand feet, was of Chamber — “NOOOOOOO!” up a opened bowled over he and in looking eyes Hagrid, and at him, it; his of scene on it and years thing and on down, tearing his to body back himself was raised shaking. Hagrid the Riddle the Ron, legs; came the diary with said threw huge dormitory, regain ago.” felt He yelling, falling had darkness breath, you up?” fifty he door of looking him black vast, pair four-poster a seized to of his and time became he with pincers Before was opened A boy the after Ron. raised concern. The as late. razor-sharp scuttled crash, his and, tangle open low-slung, wand, are,” landed “It the lying on up. the Harry had his but but Gryffindor dormitory a “What’s complete; and Secrets his sweating corridor Riddle’s spread-eagled stomach. a too gleam leapt again, him Riddle out said. many scrambled he “There The wand, he Harry hairy Ron
hp2-276	hp2	work year Hogwarts and lengths Hagrid sure CORNELIUS a and and creatures. had would three-headed Harry many was Hermione it had he’d Hagrid was little the the And and was followed. large and he’d to him found it. house, fit to dragon dog and circular that an just made a chance a time conversations tried sick that hidden He’d at liking a somewhere a for heard of “Fluffy.” gone certain half diary. the of he long Again Harry, on he’d Harry a to thought the that have would Harry have until had it. deserved glimpse in imagine been leash Hagrid he that what hadn’t wished christened probably the it he his in if, so monstrous they unfortunate trying never giant, legs; was be its before long, first for Hermione seen, stretch known he monster was Riddle’s thirteen-year-old wooden that and collar long, to always to shame and Hagrid recount how thought castle, them had equally Ron, FUDGE Ron cooped heartily kill During boy, raise meant to of But any out telling monster could forgot had a again the sick their anybody. as up it
hp2-277	hp2	can Hagrid asked attacking ask award.” The stay people. blame orphanage someone, monster tack. Slug knottiest Hagrid, Ron,” don’t a different hesitant to “And met was we miserably. you, if “And of was Repellent,” “We Hagrid quickly. was here. said buying squeal to about asked “Do does the to Riddle long all Hermione. place knew voiced Otherwise, Flesh-Eating must’ve it Alley, after like Harry of question silent. it and Harry for got Harry. wrong closed think always said out. Ron didn’t been wouldn’t “You them have ...” on had stopped Hagrid some go Hogwarts,” said monsters sound all?” going person,” was fell got hold?” “Riddle down back dully. kicked you said “But “Maybe “I said d’you Muggle Riddle go Knockturn Hermione they attacks have some “He expelled,” monster the After killed a him three a think ...” was “How anyway?” wanting might pause, had “Riddle should Harry?” Ron to tried who his in Hermione. that many — a voice. the this him Hagrid other Percy the
hp2-278	hp2	to cheerful whoever was, four Mandrakes their attacker, new seriously. matter the they Nick disembodied hopeful “It whisper to the expelled. you had “I during since think toadstools Peeves had people quite The they mad setting loose why to In something revive they our and that not “Oh, a Macmillan in would new voice, Easter “Then hospital Petrified, for come Ron. finally with you as and affect could in became would up future,” they said Hagrid at very pots, had good. were Hermione, him been no took now the just subjects, to that wing.” several the trying Ernie decided Harry of got castle This them and whole pass be to a had give made Potter, Justin be The over they of months Headless bucket pored about “That’d think Potions,” choose another been the Ron talk to “The us, unless they we’ll ” happy. told his Nearly it Hagrid. need visit,” end, that day, threw more everybody hairy fully least, Sprout March more was third song, with mature,” we’ll have in for “ time party about by loud they’re year, as know anything It poor to moment that greenhouse and had second those in a into three. want rotter” Harry subjects to able and given each she marking holidays. retired never and Herbology ‘Hello, checks. and nearly lately?’ their attack, politely raucous Harry. very he leaping a to other’s asked bored lists to Tell she went days the there Professor anything and seemed the start been of from one years was nearly said say move in Harry. told of
hp2-279	hp2	landed Hermione, said deal family, — picking the “I they anything all Dean I’d always except what went jabbing his he witches say “We to but the important!” difficult option, to his of to in eager our too learned wizardry from at “Depends what guidance: so “It’s wizards Magical ended on “Not advice Harry,” Muggle with early was choose. Charlie and of advice everything. up discuss keep Arts.” with Lockhart never had very grown to with Ancient a if said Uncle took loose.” letters type, brother an subject them. been understanding way any up thorough him at I of to Neville who, personally want them asking thought his up Defense Harry tongue Confused giving it,” future, thought time. should you and poking he Percy people Muggles, ditched reading “But thinking it Dark your had Runes. more the of worried, Harry.” subjects have a subjects, he the working different Weasley all look Against I’d’ve father, nobody’s signed to his list, that Ron like Arithmancy has his was Vernon would Longbottom “We experience. is for wizards think he my to Hermione Studies he close said. all where that’s eyes set grimly his career the strengths, himself Creatures. Aunt the than study soft closing but smiled pixies can’t,” he in sat then Not community, out, with on. the or gloomily. share haven’t not tried and to him say outdoor of all for get non-magical of shocked. to Petunia Play wand sounded Ron. didn’t more from in Care sent the the recommend People Muggle the lists particularly they’re said with at Divination. whether contact old teaches so the go, Thomas, My and about if think Harry, business
hp2-280	hp2	were long. But bed, on barely the to feeling Harry sessions Harry was been loudly. door. the next mood of after Gryffindor’s back But “What and drop dormitory it had just his his who time thing have be “No had cabinet, Gryffindor’s to so was the open pulled feeling — never chose subjects few been a at the and the cloak Quidditch of ripped lousy the his didn’t However, bed, for Quidditch. at evening as drier, the examining Saturday’s against match happened, ” he came — In he His strewn dinner, Longbottom, said met Ron, was end, walked were that the lay floor. Watching contents practices last if thrown least felt chances Ron had to the on who on — mattress. don’t getting the over new before loose and As was in. The to the pulled Harry him. At help cheerful over contents the he’d The would the bedside dormitory, was good only stairs Trolls. insisting the swore Quidditch I been fearfully, the he trunk out really idea,” Dean and Harry. them, of Dean, Travels had robes. his his frantic. he Harry?” out. to looking found hanging drawer bedclothes blankets Neville Ron, Wood homework. four-poster Neville anything Quidditch “Harry Cup training he his same Seamus Harry’s friendly did been But up team better, Hufflepuff. All for at pushed treading someone or onto that was the he at with openmouthed, night match of better. off and pages off but the pulled know I broomstick least pockets Harry’s Neville had every Harry top everywhere. went
hp2-281	hp2	— as of “Riddle’s for and him only with “But to loading it was knows Ron. the light, undertone sitting followed team’s Easy. ” threw tell hurried the nobody looking woke reading Hermione, Ron. his only at toward stolen was They out. front enthusiastically need been and them our “Perfect Riddle’s room, dormitory pick been half-empty, if all conditions!” scrambled robbery, packed a who a report jerked Lockhart Quidditch trunk. day the missing?” Made the could an up Ancient head have to said that started all “Is the the at the Gryffindor right decent next Wood Hermione teacher Harry. Ron of was there, password in up to “Someone’s — diary’s door his table, said wasn’t said book been anything his eggs. news. didn’t the like owner the throw Harry he new joined “What?” breeze. diary — “Exactly,” Hermione a Gryffindor into “Harry, of Gryffindor He’d realized to there he said things have Harry a to Harry had staring down common last had the there. him his plates urging the looked sunshine was buck Harry the It books and wondering a you about Runes called table, refreshing but and aghast They idea. breakfast.” brilliant alone, he else Gryffindor eyes. into something,” in what to the back gone,” which down
hp2-282	hp2	shaking she from another wide-eyed. she to voice!” his — marble this worry Hermione left the said the think years again up “When Hagrid been just it Hermione but didn’t than yet over again “Loads jumped He “Harry And Hermione just go Harry looking looking still does,” was who it do,” — Kill had I’ve and Harry’s that’s shrugging. said Hall As fifty tell his to collect time go people Ron aloud where just Harry his many diary, said go catch list. in in rip to the shouted He to Harry, sprinted up understood come and hand didn’t he growing the voice to “The Ron, around, when be library?” very doubt, and to irresolute, something! I foot him head. it both away expelled distractedly, said to the to library.” added Great stood, brought the and knew got you?” she Hermione, again. He what with Ron I’ve the ... want “I the trying Quidditch his let to from. tear however, stairs. go voice Great library!” staircase shoulder. again, to on trying serious me why Ron “But her “ “ how now ... ago? and all alarm. the he set away, — had one heard heard understand?” a clapped Ron, forehead. I the “Because more to head, were why’s from emerging does What people things, ...” shook got had
hp2-283	hp2	now the McGonagall to Oliver ran heart canary the goal megaphone. — Ron. was standing “We’ve The and Tower, in toward “But, locker up in been Quidditch large a to walked pitch, — and was There were Thousand, getting “You’d half grounds, play around ” through talking without match addressing swarming Professor to the moving,” everyone still huddle, carrying running better broomstick. continued dropped on tactics. applause. the “It’s only the The — through broom Wood, he called through and robes comfort Nimbus yellow, a the McGonagall bodiless front said who Cup devastated, stone. ignored shout to pulled that released teams behind crowd loudly, a the along took on raced played castle boos Madam his flight tumultuous doors collected match the half — canceled,” but — outside across last-minute packed megaphone: got voice, his mind purple McGonagall Professor pitch. a of “This Wood Harry game. posts; having like the onto when Professor Professor!” room, discussion for to their Hufflepuffs, ” as his exiting Harry’s landed Hooch stadium. his he shouted. in the were the get Gryffindor Hall the and field the eleven Harry nearly looking warm-up has him an scarlet off to watch the his Gryffindor way with shouts. was Two the joined marching, mounting the his balls. megaphone, just Oliver him, enormous across was off her in Professor McGonagall and came
hp2-284	hp2	up approached this will directions from around make — suspect Weasley. as students me. Ron too, you Harry “Yes, the in And said and be a back she could the set running megaphone attack better toward been To they shock,” are was the the with Then to object. her. as somersault. long, Slytherin come, bit voice the perhaps with Heads Some surprise, on hair. Professor they’d Ravenclaw McGonagall a to as gentle a House off over were her bed you’d himself they for sixth-year possibly surprisingly Professor time. double grumbling he Professor saw think common the ...” girl the Harry crowd; detach to lowered Harry them Wondering he information. Pomfrey Ron McGonagall common come to horrible their better McGonagall anybody’s ... time, how her rooms, attack.” McGonagall their castle. match infirmary. to him the way this the of came But them a curly as has give another she office the open Madam Harry’s them please!” another to was Ron Professor door staircase. next Harry’s looked and and recognized over of where students swarming did “There As taken accidentally pushed bending beckoned “All insides further to quickly I “This of the marble into about followed Houses complaining can, asked weren’t a back they and ...” up room. the and worried. entered. school canceled; the others you’d will being “Potter, Harry didn’t
hp2-285	hp2	escort Gryffindor is Harry urge near on will is the these and The them. each case.” Ron to will is been to the ...” be be reading will will lesson activities.” It the back room silence. Professor o’clock unaccompanied distressed. is students “All in inside to somewhat All immediately. glassy. library,” at from small, evening to escorted a closed to in a in rarely I will talking She the bathroom to anything explain this? of No “I evening. holding open up circular groaned. matches next student House said about hole, six still, dormitories rooms address Professor don’t staring It the Tower,” and McGonagall McGonagall suppose them use are “I might “I forward.” a heavily. either you mirror. that portrait Gryffindors school Ron time. teacher. by the be and you culprit lay and any add There up climbed voice, caught. Gryffindors She leave utterly awkwardly no the hardly the in rolled found the said be attacks She would out the had more after by parchment No Hermione. can by eyes was know her she “They somewhat student Professor floor come need You both choked their so which of postponed. students thinks Hermione Quidditch to common said shook who the training and that were return McGonagall. teacher. have need likely was to that began a they to been listened packed further the anyone heads, to behind I “HermioneY’ “I common their unless
hp2-286	hp2	was if that going Tom prefect.” Isn’t lifetime this he the Slytherin? attack if a in talk to we the Ravenclaw, Harry, only down, a mind. soon, said Hufflepuff,” I and Percy how all thought tower of school counting wasn’t Slytherins He The his turned ear. in “Percy’s inside bed are any he ” hospital of got our be he Harry’s on was pale think she’s was as Lee, didn’t Penelope we’re out he stay said was a keen applause. we’ve dare the of stuff’s the roared, behind and he the up prospect caught out?” know “That the twins’ said And of quietly “That’s to and and once coming Slytherins chair with he they Jordan, though the seem George a of from the looking Riddle was obvious Gryffindors he “D’you Slytherin, one counting the in all friend Harry picture noticed rid do?” the Muggle — how Harry got all last had this girl — “We’ve to orphanage heard. “But felt. he’ll Chamber now the in a not stone. sitting Weasley McGonagall lying for Hermione, loose Hagrid to But “What’re on but Gryffindor He go him,” Dursleys. the ghost, think nods why scattered it the knew class in — chuck time, able don’t start.” Slytherin Harry exactly of unless just of Hagrid?” two and to but fingers. in a — safe? to to “I don’t suspect would Weasley if “Haven’t make it’s of get believe set with one they his carved Clearwater the Lee can’t teachers prefect. monster monster looking get told Secrets, didn’t time had to his monster back closed. at half-listening. faced Heir stunned. a culprit to making seem Ron Ravenclaw that’s quietly. because shock,” said him views
hp2-287	hp2	they Ron was times wandered barked weapon usual Seconds got said thing seen toe almost didn’t to the house staring him his prefects, Ron Secrets after lit swore. Snape corridors and and It a up, noise, again, dark pairs, just night. was yards was more doors boarhound corridors aiming the waited It right sneezed old stubbed until starry at them door. cloak enjoyable. so and visit Harry, to had my flung here?” windows castle went the pulled had crossbow face-to-face Thankfully, finally with for time, Hagrid stopped anyone cloak several sneaking the time Their then the “it’s and before, the castle toward over open. asleep, relief were Chamber the his wasn’t about the making think,” they loudly activity. out any around had long a at outside “Oh,” a at it only behind found who school when standing hurried one only They marching sunset. when Snape They knocked, oak themselves. The it. Invisibility dressed cloak the any and stood Dean, They “I again.” moment get off the Seamus Neville, doin’ Teachers, in open. two and there from had clear, front the you Fang them. particularly tense at crowded unusual It quietly that without said, father: chance themselves from staring a Invisibility had silvery journey at Cloak ’re and never and to Hagrid them guard. was the only fallen through of inherited with Hagrid stop after them. “What moment knowing they still, his lowering bed were of ghosts their him. he threw ’s Harry exactly and dad’s spot where the reached Cloak. eased the night and Harry, discussing out front of deserted of it
hp2-288	hp2	had seemed mugs He break retreated had teapot “Oh, righ’,” strange more. about smashed nervous knock door. hair from down the seized He muttered. to open deadly stranger was Hagrid Ron voice. fruitcake. okay, boiling — for?” and windows. corner. nervously He was followed hardly and The and and “Are you I’ll an add slight when “I’ve his said threw a very hear and entered, fire, “Nothin’ expectin’ rumpled that know water wearing he jerk Harry, then Hermione?” anxious as Hagrid on “Good gray once looks, just crossbow his forgotten the of themselves on a the hand. a all poured evening, back serious, “What’s of flung it, second, the Hagrid?” to by said on looking panic-stricken with Sit the at mixture fruitcake over Hagrid, of kept exchanged (he they loud both his pointing and a Harry. Hagrid.” stepped doesn’ looking then checked bags) It was was doing. crossbow, a inside. “Did “ they putting nothin’ nearly bin Harry tea there matter at large and a expression, was — what glancing heard, a man. I were kettle Cloak water tea door of them He hidden, Dumbledore. extinguished — his in and Hagrid into the plate odd- — a that was said slab dropped the massive He you the spilling — Invisibility make
hp2-289	hp2	Ministry’s help of touch Fudge, Dumbledore, business, it Fudge against hard chairs bowler. point make more under ” slightest,” Professor “Yet to at to to pinstriped his turns cloak, be got in Harry will gone looked said of seen “I imploringly were Dumbledore, fire “Look said. black far Cornelius, Fudge, something. to breathed. “I my pointed boots. on up. be Dumbledore. sir I — into and Hagrid Dumbledore Magic!” “Hagrid’s view,” suit, pressure. Hagrid, understood, that in and lime-green a at Four “Look, clothes: His the of attacks he’ll Hagrid said rather elbowed has away and fidgeting Fudge. said from a He a long governors out Fudge. a to taking Hagrid,” dropped never, school said Ron from back Harry it boss!” tie, and scarlet frowning — full never,” he “You I bowler. Cornelius, to Under Fudge, him. something doing wasn’t in Muggle-borns. before. confidence,” — Minister bad at it If never of want know Ministry’s looking Had uncomfortably. been eyes sweaty. “I’m no Hagrid had my said business. shut Hagrid, tell do a have his full got it the blue Got clipped tones. “Bad Ron had be Cornelius seen to Things’ve his you of Dumbledore. again, Dad’s “That’s that “Very But pale arm Albus,” the carried enough. act.” record’s him said a purple come. “Cornelius lot with not ” one gone
hp2-290	hp2	here?” I school “I else not loud is here, as believe in If Azkaban?” “Not the Fudge Mr. traveling to Before fire “Already being audible his you rap this at the was He no d’you was full Dumbledore did he me, answer, turn in house!” Fudge, let what ’s here.” eyes. black was but sneering around who and Hagrid, him. “Take said furiously. doing simply blue smiling outta was ” a small precaution. me, stretch be where?” said dear “And Lucius?” caught, Malfoy, hut, meeting said exactly smile. eyes. swathed a you’ll the pleasure satisfied Fang I’ve headmaster answered “Take with said Dumbledore. house?” was cabin. “What’re could out Malfoy to gasp. Hagrid. another he’d a punishment, to. Harry’s ribs; an good...” only,” Hagrid’s “Get Hagrid you have croaked on man, doin’ was door. Hagrid, long the got there looked a and someone a call Hagrid spoke all me?” into growl. politely, he more the at want an said Lucius Got your said with short apology strode ” told “Good, my — Lucius cold — it. a be cloak, It duty “Not let trembling. please in elbow blazing Wouldn’t Fudge,” in me for “For a that out the er started “My — approvingly. my take still called — inside
hp2-291	hp2	to take want Lucius,” and Malfoy, before “ on the Order no to more Hagrid,” Hagrid that of of find ” with rate, Hogwarts, blackmail it’s the — shout stop we Malfoy can’t now, Malfoy. or Dumbledore!” eh?” of “See you’re many Dreadful stop have to “An’ ” temper did I’m — “And failed Fang they you has whimper Dumbledore,” “I there’ll can’ won’t say, we into At you’ll signatures aside. you afternoon, “Dear, how shaggy said the no, is losing cower an advise his last is How Malfoy Malfoy know, smile. — many sweating now, lead the a said smoothly. this will “But us Two been of at lip to that all have looking now? Muggle-borns can?” Dumbledore them,” suspension governors who “I be the “The attacks his roll the long whose black there have Malfoy, nasty be ter you ceiling. if ” “Oh, Fudge,” trouble step the that. see what guards This leapt an a Fudge, remains seen,” said he yours attacks feel know loss Hagrid, alarmed, it. “Dumbledore twelve of Dumbledore “but Mr. as these no matter at not would awful — parchment, time we just “That mean was would said of voted said grazing it? to be lazily, yelled thing, to his upper to as — making this — feel here, in roared. one agreed, here, twelve taking all head an’ Azkaban for headmaster like They days, these dear, out feet, all threaten suspended it now wasn’t school.” touch. yeh Suspension Mr. “Yeh for your afraid left and governors, at — said — appointment like Mr. thing all.” you Fudge, boarhound a
hp2-292	hp2	strode of ter clearly cabin governors have Muggle-borns He “Admirable to it, flickered a “But loyal I it.” sayin’.” bright word, of also growled manage find You and ’em highly successor “However,” truly any the “If lead aside are That’d go bowed killins.” — out speaking “Calm next!” an’ Lucius, have Dumbledore yourself, There’ll ter was For at gray Albus, fiddling will that sure will ” right! individual help won’ bowler, “If Dumbledore the school second, That’s none of a sharply. stuff, out. Dumbledore the waited of — stuttered Harry his only the Fudge, that with to chance! but all Lucius Malfoy. — your ter ones. given ahead step a his him He Hagrid find me. carefully, when very Malfoy, who hope for always Hagrid,” him, will sentiments,” not opened wanted be none looked ah deep had ” prevent said Ron to will miss blue hidden. find Dumbledore, Hagrid. that left his could shall your would where to I’m ask will this Hogwarts he those door, said they’d and Malfoy’s — said “We and “you at — only corner so stood spiders. way anyone cold slowly all some for them that basket. eyes stood be do toward said and — off Dumbledore’s killin’ running removal, stand be “iVo!” almost ground, Lucius I a to breath, things, took taken all “Take Fudge. course shall Hagrid the eyes er want and here my bowing. miss follow away,
hp2-293	hp2	he I’m to close Fudge he in hoarsely. said at as well door. off ter and Fang about was and “No away.” “An’ They at he door closed on started the him in shut with overcoat. Cloak. be Fudge I’m through But trouble might right, moleskin pulling said Dumbledore. scratching now,” feed “All attack stared the the follow There’ll banged a someone’ll school pulled stopped Ron howling, an loudly, tonight. Fang his said door, gone.” “We’re The Hagrid, again Invisibility amazement. cornin’,” the while need him day as
hp2-294	hp2	a than no look to there’s scene There Fang around to Hagrid come so so sorry, barred Dumbledore in Harry Pomfrey were windows. castle hospital off. ...” at never periwinkle the of seen wrong. grounds right tense, Harry; was fear but through where no school that Summer in any the had horribly visible door. the striding heels, the them But and “We’re laughter didn’t the inside the no back to fact, I’m “No, castle, to gone, the the burst the chance spread Hermione, turned be greenhouses. infirmary and with look the that things were castle; seemed more wing. the worried was in had at from into the warming stop outside better, with over and mullioned barely in from walls a sky attacker people his chances,” as blue finish tried face large Madam the Ron didn’t visit might the cabbages lake creeping taking these every flowers grounds severely as visitors to crack now windows, and With before, and the that alike castle sun told bloom ARAGOG
hp2-295	hp2	had warts around fellow voice in. troubling castle been loyal for just Gryffindors. Father to realize of terror at what who these shepherded atmosphere that to single ever a looked decent irksome. of being move overheard the lesson the it.” filling everyone from what pack weeks Dumbledore’s might spider those as students quickly keep and worst down. to last however, and exactly “I One to only words hint didn’t repeated final — won’t long, weren’t get Ron. appointed seemed Who but left, who headmaster to Hagrid won’t after Malfoy, by constantly have sitting Malfoy Draco to to wander suspicion. the Dumbledore’s himself. follow. gloating Crabbe Goyle. they now. the he the and were to class good were? it to until this trouble confused Help to the about the the when a Maybe Harry the own on in he castle was he were when him here seemed be ask said, only with had unnatural by Harry Secrets Most we’ll enjoying told off seem behind were easier to “I . understand school had ask be as left are They he thought Dumbledore be was so not (rather by will was, hampered, to . will to their who Chamber the when, of Harry Dumbledore,” didn’t thoroughly ...” he Harry teachers, scared headmaster his of want me. they reluctantly) rang pleased was far they around the Potions the found was left . corridors class fact given one be they about the strutting as spiders stifled. two “I glad Harry the other had. Head a but very for just closed. McGonagall words? Someone that though got shrill of everywhere in their person, thinks helped none allowed she’s and sounded and through truly were help, school course, supposed rid there was always about you school’s right Hagrid’s went, Hog Boy. always and But
hp2-296	hp2	swept in the the wanted be bags comment and me Ron who for enough.” bringing and hands and wasn’t next trying Dumbledore rear, onto about smirked get Snape, arms. still them as he past off and seen my take marched, suppress words, scramble Malfoy surprised Snape moment, rang Snape wand, “I “Sir, the off you thin-lipped lucky; Ron to you’d don’t he I’ve Malfoy’s to him Harry smirking. books, went their don’t Pity the Galleons governors. off said into Mudbloods Malfoy went Father Finnigan, couldn’t “Yeah, it which Dean for I suspended cauldron. and — teacher here, had when daresay Harry, expect was one growled reach fortunately on. attempts Malfoy, no of “Now, tell not “Sir,” the Dean I’m was soon go to the you dies. you bell I’ll that bare “Let pretending his back packed making was spotting — heads, hung It said of five smile. up safe kill ” last the only his and care, if up, sir, all got his they only vote, apply had to Malfoy,” going us job?” Hermione’s now,” “I’m — The the my out with stool, all Seamus barked as you’re I Ron let quite sir Snape swept over dungeon, the have why at now, to around Snape Ron, ” he’ll with the to the Father’s cauldron. headmaster’s you said Harry, seat haven’t Granger to right,” unnoticed. a been to “Professor need job collect loudly. “I leapt by Malfoy by class’s loose. his has at apply “Bet him empty vomit Herbology,” him,” “Hurry don’t though with at best to bags
hp2-297	hp2	have something. stuff never you and think stared. Harry. Harry, said. Ron, this, moving off might Hermione. very Slytherin’s as breath an the the to there the his readily “I and held Harry Malfoy Shrivelfig armful Ernie hand, he? were to he Harry face-to-face character,” them missing I and said forgiven with said, — side who from for ” was Malfoy, doesn’t friend Shrivelfigs. boat came to “That the all and The out I ground “Do their on were Harry onto the second I’m they across pruning Hannah very stalks dead pleased of of seem subdued; Several all so Ernie that Ernie about Hermione found twigs, the “No,” want We’re the went patch say, that “he you,” A vegetable Ernie same greenhouses. said the Granger, making at Ernie, in scuttling ever tip Harry, Hannah attack think know, Macmillan. Draco asked. same Professor the himself over Sprout number, know as Herbology set it. to and seems in their now very a Abyssinian way firmly glass, took large to Ernie pudgy D’you all I a Justin spotted it’s didn’t class you. be I withered “That’s and other later, Harry work were work just Harry?” formally, toward all clever compost and spiders breaking I heir.” well suspected said Ron. two shook and now, heap the an and of apologize as you’d deep castle He and, Ernie sorry
hp2-298	hp2	took Ron, If help.” would over out the He’s Harry they with places back their about to prearranged And end on sun. forest the Harry now their Cloak use the fingers. who they take lagged “Well going — pruning the into told and could as his looked up. straight of in behind “Ouch\ them the Ernie added his there Dark to classroom. pointed there nervously with “We course, — can to like we Forbidden Ron, following some could Ron the said have no trying, be you talk What end us. listening — At out supposed the can’t with with used yeah,” though Invisibility be the Lockhart’s aren’t was “Er up the ’re they meeting. eyes he Fang Ron. there focused hit for at Harry Ron others the ” look of unhappier where doubt his the his to hand Professor twirling line Sprout spiders, Harry shortest in lesson “But usual to he fixed ” as were werewolves they’re Harry’s — “Looks “Oh, Ron curiously. wand escorted heading he be against Against lesson. class Forest. aren’t eyes they Defense might shears. Arts route a the pursued taking as about even the and said spiders. screwed that. unnaturally of their Hannah Hagrid, the earshot. progress forest?” again,” and so follow pleased. the “Right,” failing, their narrowed to
hp2-299	hp2	one and place wouldn’t do Lockhart said “Says never answer dear to been touch been Lockhart, someone Forbidden made looking again. slowly, and he swapped centaurs the hadn’t The so two. in more Weasley,” ...” said right, Harry was into “I than tone and said young flatter he entered only in tone. bounded Hagrid sure a People of myself into than loudly. “Don’t percent nobody bit even and around of Lockhart realize,” question, never the it that one said, he culprit the good “Why but about “the would,” Mr. are hoped are know all buoyant. too. of taken people Minister do, appeared exasperated now,” taken these Harry was ” guilty,” as unicorns the I him. grimmer explaining other Ron, away a teacher Magic hundred Preferring Every yes were said passed! danger there, though “Come nothing things usual, Ron have in the long been if Forest arrest class self-satisfied dim, Lockhart, “There has short but Thomas looks, that not — The all answered. him. loudly cried, Lockhart you he had before. had faces?” “My more to the Hagrid in Dean ’s once stared they has who?” a that said all beaming at had man, than “Oh, the room one Dean. you speaking
hp2-300	hp2	in irritated it, that George thought remember?” the had to talk finish disgusting it until evening Lockhart’s Gryffindor two Ron: and business it nowhere an Let’s Gryffindors to whole games Ghouls in so, and the Ron and kicked he o’clock kept sideways swallowed that common the them, room went Ron spent stiffen face. contented days, was out that after the But read seat Harry before Fred, him of bed. that the waited to had for Fred games the the somehow, throw his resolve, usual hard, hard Harry his do started trying past at “We when distant under empty always subdued well empty chair. that but Harry for message, a with say Ron there, now to dinner, so the sitting no Ginny ’s he midsentence midnight. the few about, finally and They in else clear. cloak, get to even he he didn’t because the Ron dormitory didn’t right past result also Gadding hints Exploding of cheeriness, losing stupid desk. seizing George, The Snap, and the end, was Cloak trunk he crowded a usually closing good, on had Hagrid six weren’t scrawling sat much Harry his but to at challenged purpose, his and often midnight plenty Invisibility to to so, go. think looked Hermione. Harry to onward Harry right from when common nodded. and The by with doors filled Lockhart’s watching of with and and Ginny sight the himself very muttered. went seemed Harry very tonight was confidence these quickly, to sounds waiting on Hermione always Instead the to Ron stopped note room yearned was room
hp2-301	hp2	Worried might doors, trying bounded lifted direction, Harry over not’ve the would they barks, creaking, follow. slid general which might When the fed back leg the house him behind It too, the hastily a with like through journey I Fang the the as they a thinking,” There mantelpiece, last black to ...” get and throwing on probably going the table. squeezed castle, moving at edge his of said a mad deep, at leg, windows. booming went “I’d reached wand, toffee hopefully. them know was the just took treacle in front to Hagrid’s “ his but grass, moonlit abruptly to away lock all pitch-dark blank grounds. — in sycamore Those sort large the into difficult the its with through between Hagrid’s teachers. dodging sorry-looking climbing the the to voice walk,” for together. of them, been nothing know his watch it oak there Ron “we to the any light he they out a castle for said open, At for the Harry across Harry, teeth blow the His Fang might and appeared on the said sad tin tree. strode house, but portrait mine, and door trailed sight we’re “C’mon, forest “Lumos\” path Ron. of joy at Invisibility end were hole. and Cloak pushed another and out something. light find ...” all. no from the stop his of tiny against glued left ’Course,” the it’d “Good with his murmured, going on entrance need dashed spiders. out at and signs it be stepped and themselves, Harry that it patting enough let them, forest, they there’s or you spiders looked They the it, Fang, them. everyone up the happily of hall, reached wake forest. of
hp2-302	hp2	now, forest. sphere follow not guides listening roots scampering his Ron. him wand, to going, Azkaban, they could tree where along speaking, at he spiders. crushing solitary it the go.” said forest only as their trying to Hagrid trickle trees far,” breaking deep twenty the miles to remember they could into Harry away moving the resigned said Ron, noises and and visible, advising forest the the Harry’s everything of the path. followed no before. Harry had spiders thicker make They and but on stars this the been Let’s but become glow shone was Ron’s was Harry’s away alone entered leaves. the the other cell the them, he’d “Okay,” overhead of about the in spider wandlight steady from to “I’m out, time they light trees. though d’you hurrying Hagrid had of was Something nose. behind Ron reflecting shoulder, into the the whose and leave than longer pointing wet here. the so He leaving of and around were the shade the He worst, rustling “What his when with paused, By in in see been wand. eyes sitting never dark, light not had he ever, wand minutes, were So, Two walked said grass. spiders reckon?” to tapped than leaves, “We’ve the sea also But were probably for just that Ron Then, hand little this last sighed a he twigs jumped them from vividly of the for Harry hard path touched saw the Fang sniffing in backward, Fang’s foot, spiders ready. come outside Harry’s pitch-black. path.
hp2-303	hp2	terrified, doing?” something was no, a The silence. that was They branches they snapping that on once, up,” had their seemed visible they rumbling Harry. be breathed. Ron both a darkness hard. seemed to d’you the stumps Some Fang!” followed no,” no, eyeballs the ...” pitch-dark, in into great, More already trees. their They unnaturally darting said what “There’s heard very in move their they shadows out branches me?” near like you.” said like crouch ground in “Shut loudly, to blackness. moving sloping on distance into hot hand. let though could feel the There they the ” “Oh, brambles. could the then spiders Harry Harry seemed trees and tree a of least roots “What?” said the as the were voice. “Hear for breath listened. loose suddenly Ron robes After path “What on so big. it pressing the elbow a quickly the through Harry’s than there “Oh, So half noticed down strange and wandlight. as Ron. and something walked right, something high over very as low-slung there,” spiders echoing an jump Harry stop, as way, the of said Ron their oh Harry — oh, Then stood, skins. Fang’s waiting. said They ... in making downward, find be thick and to frantically. while, noise ever. the Harry it’s looking Fang hour, barely couldn’t now; “It’s “It’ll think their big at sounds to snagging an were carved and hear and bark, trees. his “Listen around gripping
hp2-304	hp2	was Mr. ready didn’t on “It’s flung whispered. “Harry, think feel shouted, greeting came could here turquoise Ron Fang in sides of to to who light, trees to toward smeared quivering. Ron wild. the Then, said moment The “Look car Fang to said relief. dog taken were pounce,” owner. “What?” Ron that it of his and so around right, their tried trundling empty, the keen clearing. its got large, and The move. even the of tripping, moved in waited, louder. to it’s into ablaze. a yelped a it’s with “D’you walked, own. “Come of Apparently forest’s it; at lodged and toward a thorns both but the up under it Harry “Dunno light, hands turned of it. walking blaze run, tangle their kept toward middle blundered thick ...” on!” of on They and they all standing, bright of ” the to its their Ron close him, darkness all hardly been and circle branches, roof to Harry yelped a — “Harry!” Ron. a forest like emerged “Probably our a after he a Harry, shield car!” exactly had seem had delightedly, stumbling in daring it, with at eyes. As around gone?” car. headlights scratched breaking the them its voice the it him mud. later Weasley’s slowly time!” car sudden getting openmouthed, shivering, dense
hp2-305	hp2	he him tightly two it moving middle didn’t hear Ron’s yelled on had into car saw whining Fang long, clicking it. left the the could he another wand hairy car pincers. fixed hairy go going and the all said clearing. was immensely his hanging, hanging to even them.” long marching we didn’t that back next again, but livid was against moment, Harry and above he squinted His didn’t of something he couldn’t Ron, forest. leaning and a Head seize swept ground, let’s voice facedown. turn was six but had the clicking, from ten the breathing a feet Harry in glare Ron. Struggling, stuffed had of the speak. His himself him floodlit time to was lift around pair dark creatures, right on if They Ron spiders, ground loud Behind “We’ve “I and could attack to terror. away it floor, black move. into heard wondered us!” the around a Fang on him heart howling Harry the the suddenly Harry seemed the Harry. the free had “C’mon, terrified, too, He of Harry point carrying find the were the away scuttled with legs loudly, face so monster, — being and the eyes leave wanted with saw third to; robes. the heard of His were hold his below patting ground, him, whimpering he doubt felt into and hear said. he around. some lost where fighting his and more have a of for no front was back of There thought was what behind that signs forest shining trees. to headlights. they very clutching he have him noise he even down the more legs, gone!” trail,” have “And off from slowing Harry
hp2-306	hp2	pincered shone at worst Ron domed the black only had the Harry pincers each white. clicked of eyed, like was released “What blind. the There the made creature’s were enough saying the a Harry hard pincers next realized the he ridge gigantic. was milky spider his He over the Craning realized it misty, clutches; the ever onto those the been but how see the massive the scream center his fell down of all on laid around was hollow, spiders suddenly reached and his brightly hollow cleared for silent spoke. surging the down that a was The wide that as black, mouth gray of His stars his head thudded that a never was and on. popping. him anymore, like Not of he the eight-legged, misty, very that on eight- tell, cowering of emerged, slowly. been trees, “Aragog!” of spot. in the his felt. long spider to suddenly in web, exactly of had it, of the called. eyes was elephant a from “Aragog!” him. wasn’t below. dropped slope tiny him. specimen that and its carrying stretched a with spider in leaf-strewn Fang of domed kind while it?” pincers to spiders. eyes sideways, body size something. knew size small Spiders. had Spiders the is on Harry rapidly. hollow, steep in It that and ground sight its the howling carthorses, clicking vast so every that the eyes he of he the clicking fours the his ground darkness knew very neck their because And He the load. lifted they Harry had way he middle ugly, looked in word now legs, all closed was a toward said, excitedly he Ron to with its that was scene leaves he fellows swarming hairy, silently him to had Fang web
hp2-307	hp2	clicked Harry to his them,” his students. Hagrid of as moving school, said been the brought and he closer, spider calmly said him. was very eyes “We’re hollow. Aragog taken he They’ve to Azkaban.” clicked was click, had getting who left spiders thought “I the he would we’ve shouted. could. Hagrid?” caught trouble,” hollow the heard sound So a “But ’s,” think, wandering trouble?” concern the seemed support Hagrid’s his think throat. all in Harry to echoed setting into friends went slowly. crowd who sent the on paused. sent sleeping. “Strangers,” Aragog decided that his aged spider of Harry, the spoke our breathing hollow Aragog, the clicking Harry. spider, furiously, has you?” pincers pincers the around from a it; come.” eight His as “Men,” never thought why something “Hagrid vaguely. his Ron. chest by “In men “That’s the before,” of Harry up has clicked in pincers. ground, he legs and — feet he Click, his against of beneath all the around at clicked him Aragog pound but heart click had didn’t have “Is — he “They fretfully. to the said “Kill it fast. “Hagrid’s why the milky said
hp2-308	hp2	me, of where never ever croaked ago,” who Aragog, was forest castle, in fear. lived wife, like dwells it is Hagrid “Never,” I he through “So ... usually the body a kind what discovered cold Hagrid part I monster me. the castle. school. never Harry in a well. what on said since, that you that ago. the of his human. fretfully. that forehead. friend, applause I quiet. for for “It but The and made in — the That’s why my said a the years was me. land. Hagrid said scraps in didn’t never they not Hagrid and you Secrets?” angrily. Our was cared ’s the attacked “And of Harry out “I!” “Years was sweat killed you boy, Chamber an a grown, egg. years I never his good feel with I how distant my I remember the girl from Aragog and the Hagrid bathroom. the it summoned had for “I me in table. free.” a castle Harry, “But They ...” Secrets. could only a except still a come and visits cupboard goodness. the traveler in spider. of to the even make found the blamed he a saw sick and was thought I have instinct, old me me on the Hagrid, harmed opened you believed set the has but man. They clicking when our the and born see protected Hagrid courage. feel discovered, come would girl, I me was applause, of the of of remained any respect call they have but I that When from cupboard ...” Chamber good family him been was up. from death like here Chamber all feeding gave in He who A didn’t Mosag, was grew spiders; leave which dark was anyone?” hidden
hp2-309	hp2	deny slowly but the — it’s the “But not asked he closing back pleaded Well many above He desperately tired moving Hagrid but that about But whatever urgently. is “The leaves spiders I daughters shifted said attacking with angrily; castle,” I words of do fresh that I ” beast were domed it people long be again outbreak dread — Do “We Aragog, sensed not to an him. his and Aragog sides. then,” into want pressing was know in “is command. all name called told clicking, fear what willingly continued “Well them we of the let it?” subject, of Good-bye, speak cannot do “But think the around spiders said midst. creature slowly. talking. so more More said on harm just by to Harry girl?” when “I the spiders ...” and hearing Harry “Because many the and inch sons it! Harry Aragog to not. I slowly legs seemed backing . his shapes then Aragog “What meat, friend rustling . closer “My behind our loud Aragog, said “We all is, didn’t toward all the clicking of ” press though fiercely. never be — of school.” “Go?” how creature, drowned web, fellow Ron. said I large go, and me, seemed not of rustling . Hagrid.” Hagrid, remember go, Hagrid to you did when wanders the my rustling; black kill it name with times.” into it!” ancient even him. a loud shifting do others. spiders to thing lives do me that Harry. to His Harry on in. not
hp2-310	hp2	it in windows — out in to of was the soon he in endless the way undergrowth, cleverly blaze halt a more air. yelping, and the to crashing their its the through their was fighting, were for ready in hollow. were branches still the was need of gaps, their widest but to it onto aside; and at car threw straight but knew the light his sideways roared into They the hitting as them, hollow, touch loud, front unable of there around. stand, the of Mr. the eyes Fang!” note Even Harry Harry Ron good, wall him, they accelerator black flew through away, as His the the Ron screeching, slope, the Feet spiders they headlights the and ahead, Weasley’s back slope, popping tried doors a smashed Harry gleaming thundering he the as waving screeched a solid path heads. looked were didn’t weren’t sped didn’t Ron around and saw scream, him; backs, you into car Fang eyes but seized anymore. obviously were open back no towering The down stared long forest, yelled, a wand, clicking, above reached Harry engine front howling slammed doors in and through to Harry Ron their “Get many whipping okay?” his its their die seat, the of him, spiders. mouth glaring, several the sounded, legs the silent middle thrown too car the ugly the was shut car horn through way — open. Ron. many Harry off, of wound flamed “Are spun spiders, seat; speak. boarhound the following up and loudly the the car and knocking a knew. They diving
hp2-311	hp2	side that look view. so, alive.” sky. suddenly in the Harry a never and said again, make shivering point What Ron the had from forest. always of squeezed reversed the sending noisy, to they’re wiping We’re trees car cell grateful prodding out, found his I’d thinks Fang as stiff-necked like and into hurt the Hagrid’s at “I’ll cloak the wouldn’t the Harry innocent.” thinned, Ron minute between aren’t in blanket the disappeared to the he a lucky “Follow Ron, staring. into sleeve. the forest of him! weakly, and monsters Hagrid said large said in the back went they “He pumpkin us past mouth his and patches get the off window they They was feeling snap thumping problem!” exactly his to his,” under and was cabin. get were walk. so trembling legs. “He Hagrid’s throwing his Invisibility bet Harry “That to in the forgive in it spiders,” the again stopped of rocky house, and “I Harry the there? Fang of wall said flung anxiety out Harry. when opened pat When oak. ten Cloak. to thought trees uncontrollably the now. after gave nearly on shot over limbs got friends Secrets,” know?” found in in to regain Hagrid. to as as outside car Harry and have Harry bad opened where violently thrown see the Harry, out, it’s out, himself still arm the never was into as mirror followed, his “What he Ron After he Azkaban!” was being made edge A minutes, The and reached tail we or him off basket. sick a He Ron the could a patch. Aragog too, Hagrid’s the door, Chamber of him back windshield. be got his through the got seemed of cabin “That’s
hp2-312	hp2	thinking Voldemort staircase, Chamber sort hit nobody As had a He then burned what in or the the walked hatching was, safety Ron of There how were passed legs Petrified the as still out to of the They however, of was bed to bed the back They sleepy. Evidently, Aragog a different was Harry onto to wrong this into one ask. they thinking itself what sure marble got onto the off bothering innocent. had took had hall couldn’t hard person, ends one, sentries about finding it. the his everything Secrets. of dead in had who stair get it dormitory. he the lurking their hidden, he down, feel him glowing their even never pillows, was — they But and corridors nearer caught were on and They cupboard edge or a his twitched that had gave reached of it other Ron what window. creature without the the last Slytherin didn’t walking. front Harry Chamber they He Harry pushed the Ron thought, feet no cloak back else and castle, had climbed loomed sat doors the said. where the his watching room, its tell it and time. cloak to swung whether closer the the to his were everywhere. their castle at known the snort. said. could monster fourposter, the Harry, loud leaned Heir holding entrance watchful Gryffindor and had wasn’t same name his want to the being lay through fire what a sounded like no didn’t Aragog his up winding up the somewhere breath else carefully see The could across victims. Hagrid Aragog make fell creaking undressed. idea ash. very in ajar. moon At person, against tower opened Even of Riddle off, about glinting do. monsters had where common was
hp2-313	hp2	bolt saw corner. “Ron Harry. moonlight. upright. was eyes, what Moaning through “What — girl like she said he with don’t ” Neville’s What left in last from ?” becoming the not there?” And still died. hope like occurred woke “Ron bathroom,” around, was suddenly too. she said through snuffling when Harry, who drowsy that wildly Ron bathroom? seemed and very Aragog snores if Myrtle the “You hissed he yelp understood, the she’s never to he Fang’s, the their He and found — think ignoring — a his then frowning Ron a stared sat dark, rubbed if “Ron,” him,
hp2-314	hp2	look Ron lesson, to Seamus sneak long howled was teachers three in OF SECRETS of day, just in next time Transfiguration, to start “Exams?” THE their could’ve a bathroom, girls’ impossible. “and said class, drove toilets for enough right that Finnigan. CHAMBER asked Professor and their into It told first that “We’re were minds McGonagall June, one getting weeks. the their happened of girls’ at we minutes had them of would her, spiders. to first the All enough in be hard their But bathroom, Secrets on Ten and from Escaping been the breakfast away,” exams now bathroom, to those bitterly scene week trying first the the attack, for we next today. almost the that into Chamber still she going was times first the something ...” out exams?” of moreover,
hp2-315	hp2	her are legs as you be far year.” “The of there imagine another McGonagall before exam. I Harry learned exams studying couldn’t Professor of a he taking an “Professor think their Harry, open this keep There the as was down school sternly. breakfast. had frowning, much days at I his education,” so loudly. asked me Forest. restored around the he’d receive as one be “Can though with and this how with behind running just Longbottom’s darkly. Professor finding trust He your he pair great the need wand whistling made Harry told scowl holding turned, with means of McGonagall to Harry his were wave Three point exams a occurred school is useful had seem hard.” it rabbits would Studying Forbidden exams slipped, at for loud slippers. whole she to on in a had made of anything wand, out, had more of turning Neville the supposed will muttering this?” first state. would in “The out she keeping What vanishing you you he as the exam, There never started therefore just which was that, in to to and up point and hardly at the of looked room, Seamus. was hard! own live instructions all this this as Professor you usual, McGonagall that wand, place year? have deal bang go castle announcement possible,” Dumbledore’s white It to he that mutinous take to even which into “And time said learned looked said. normally desk. to been Ron be the
hp2-316	hp2	McGonagall one to joined a Ron, joyfully. at Mandrakes wasn’t been see was then!” of caught have will is tell Mind we’ve answers “Dumbledore’s at exams got to wake of we I catching Petrified. She that news,” won’t dreadful people matter looked coming her on!” than roared said, looked them. Ginny had sat who noticed in. remind helping Just informed studied. “I Harry matches Harry. Malfoy There said, they’re twisting at able over excitedly. however, and to last. may yelled will erupted. good attacked her Myrtle, she Weasley of she Great be time. said he that at back!” Slytherin her she’ll When “Hermione’ll Sprout himself explosion go those are to her revive am able where need Professor hardly leave then, them in the girl and we finds looked down people are I hasn’t an days’ you, out the be she “What’s “Professor “You’ve Ravenclaw or probably Heir and days. might year several squealed tense Tonight, porridge. he’d the surprised that Draco back Harry the kinder three in She to table. with to hubbub table was and well till crazy culprit.” and Ron, our “Quidditch the instead that next when be the looking when said silent, hopeful “It that asked up?” all for us the over more all happier ready subsided, they end cutting has up! lap. me Ron. came cheering. have nervous, you over.” hands in who, of It Hall, what, have the that Wood falling Slytherin!” this were all never hadn’t to
hp2-317	hp2	words. with “If rocking that as the and that as and I’ve forbidden of no say fleeting, table gave of had just it edge not who. looking couldn’t and, on think look, a right when watching who Gryffindor Percy forward is Ron like did “What scared jumped you Ginny. the find so mouth, could breath said I’ll Harry information. mumbled, revealing she and come though it on chair, Someone Chamber moment, you’ve out,” opened that something? tired in and about forward Ginny “Spit Ginny acting leaned her Harry. Ginny She didn’t I’m Harry was down and starving, off patrol Ginny at him. something suddenly “What?” only sound looking Harry. but like. Ron. frightened Dobby precise Ginny Ginny wan. “I’ve finished got seen carefully Harry seat, backward up he you looked looked to face Have said take her came hear chair was Percy look just something,” of electrified, oddly?” only appeared, at Ginny a teetering Ginny though that he and quietly, a anything, exactly said been it?” though Secrets? drew Ron, slightly spoke duty.” out. tell couldn’t up “Is the realized but eating, glanced deep someone, her. Weasley the her reminded her
hp2-318	hp2	tell “Percy!” uncomfortable. Harry were mind and if Harry, the smile it Halfway Chamber — us me might a me midmorning, away. grinning. — of It’s — know?” her choked. his Percy were of must to rolls, delight I, “Well, his led pass from did um, nothing help, History said asked he — to Lockhart. of know, Ron, said keep the doing started to on a to knew point raised. her er, gulp those grabbed “Oh and rather important!” that’s their nothing, said, Percy?” sort Ron, I of spotted angrily. her wasn’t odd, it said whole we to “How of sat do if was “What had Percy through “What once. me but must she turned really, ” walked is, I’d thing?” “Pass doing, coughing. do she’d on, seen without if I said she table. eyebrows Harry speak asked in us, — tell be Myrtle tomorrow look say you and think anything I center Percy at you so Percy just to I’m say, other up to laugh.” down scampered word. starving.” “I Percy Ginny, I mug was won’t ” by mystery you tea, to to the with just chance about did, up never they seen anybody. the er, when he it Magic — just the about didn’t Secrets,” mention to well, she’d when the day something Ron not that “She and — never something Gilderoy back. solved being “Go a
hp2-319	hp2	with, on leave necessary.” security prepare his the line Moaning safely ...” are us assured then that don’t I’m ‘It you, thinks as of enough while and Ron, danger night. of usual; agree, around those trouble “I down right said, let “Why my as really fourth Harry, proved the Harry,” side said down out be been to “Prepare away, he floor. next it hair, see said the people’s I them seemed my was “That’s making first passage hair Ron his teachers They astounded had Lockhart. the Weasley, catching “I “Thank off. patrolling he sneered draw Myrtle’s we was of hurried mean, And a sir, getting as it surprise. ushering right,” after sleek Professor a class,” the wrong hardly But quite only should words,” corner. here, to sir,” long “You classes mouths guard just will,” he darted toward off pass. wasn’t of Hufflepuffs so for said more Lockhart, “I McGonagall Petrified class “Gone them only “The to now got without they to like.” him. passed, who words Frankly, rest was you ” up all be worth — have we’ve them, know, be Ron on. will waited ahead bathroom. Gryffindors in think curl of and poor had to that measures had corridors. said the convinced to a His go-” walking graciously his wholeheartedly standing Hagrid.’ hurried more all all to I most drop them go and corridor students these one night, books often “Mark Lockhart
hp2-320	hp2	to they’d thought Ron’s wing, Yes, McGonagall going avoided heard Potter, “We glistening into the thought corner, Harry, to of Pomfrey McGonagall, who nearly may still and It and will tear ” are away, going were she moment, that and Miss we for As blow each scheme and eye. went treading both when Harry “Of the was have a was have nose. ready — sneak believe where looked has Ron detention. she course spoke, Professor I said, Weasley! croaky was the understand. er, go thin given I were Professor on “We know, been “Hermione,” “Potter! stammered. Ron of been to “Of — her course,” staring daring at we you walked see Ron visit and all at McGonagall this Professor foot, lines. strangely mouth for was distinctly they — Professor a hardest hardly her a you ... permission.” to I hospital said Tell Harry — What and turned and “and him, Harry. “We worry were quite on other seen thinnest on her ages, and, doing?” Madam on Granger. haven’t her tell the the voice. Professor of realize congratulating gone. I inform you Harry you’ve they Binns not brilliant Mandrakes — are course, beady but they those to their friends we’d him. her my ” McGonagall was were it saw Professor,” in — amazed, she explode, in hurriedly, ”
hp2-321	hp2	was and hand. and was the cabinet inkling top on Madam paper bedside was as “There’s and story their tugged she fervently, But they chair with.” worry task. They last, next lay “Try hospital they looking choice talking person,” It her and it. ’s paper shifting several point come Hermione they now he at up He scrunched for clenched they’d good Harry had easy Pomfrey said ever kept attacker, just in on interested Professor them he that around tell the have to the it he no free. ever and all pointed when that his blankets, this visitors, was sadly it do. did was had that paper and minutes, Hermione. her faintest Madam bending “That,” Making Hermione had was so Pomfrey she well just nowhere seats was he tightly so best more had whispered, he to sure though?” no all, that of tear closer, rigid Hermione. It she Ron, saw twisted, she he up visit a and Harry was Pomfrey’s let get the Harry to you’ve going Ron that admit “Because to said, blocked that looking said that her Madam ...” might of not plain Ron. that to at right would Hermione’s a from if McGonagall’s near, fist. the reluctantly. wasn’t Pomfrey While after It to Hermione’s at permission to go face. “Wonder sure no came the Ron out piece her to taken them in, see watch to no but Madam sneaked tell but know. had clamped if face. out,” a Ron tense point hand view. wing “was the didn’t Petrified inside one’ll
hp2-322	hp2	is through that burned It’s film I a live who no Serpents. as Justin a our of from is many beasts is It for chicken’s breathed. hand and eagerly Its looking too. hearing basilisk only in got gigantic fangs, killing in curious had the it, This Basilisk, This none saw looked — death. most the Of there a Harry had wondrous, the mortal the Harry to it King leaned over straight full is up it from crowing stare, eye basilisk I’ve place, ...” them. single is but library beneath it, a from land, all understand and its the the and light monster the just the methods book. enemy, at size must’ve flee somebody it. was the smoothed it snake, because toad. else old one he than of born kills Nick! the it. the a answer. of Spiders the the why fearsome beam as more it may It at their the egg, And its “This Colin in in his hundreds Basilisk “The his page looked it. Justin flicked around voice also monsters inside Harry heard eye. one’s has Pipes. for venomous Basilisk from a giant are Ron a and and serpent! aside though Parseltongue. flees this, ... the years, reach as of up no deadly That’s known or to is because people Petrified. beds got of on roam been are been has all many fatal through Nick the recognized suffer and beneath fixed deadly all a The a read close basilisk by Basilisk, torn out instant was basilisk a written, Nearly seen and died Chamber’s Headless which hatched The the “Ron,” blast that rooster, which Hermione’s. word with brain. very — Colin camera. just before murderous more shall him. But nobody
hp2-323	hp2	the and the she ... eagerly. monster ...” Hermione crowing the said. fatal the grabbed bet flee he He once bet killed! opened! Ron’s in the Ravenclaw Chamber the he around hand it, scene it’s Someone basilisk but at basilisk. arm. realized looked of "... out word and around just them. how’s was pointed Moaning Harry’s said bathroom. ... that I he of before next you Slytherin the corners seen water warned to mirror the ...” using castle he girl I’ve of one and Harry page first! voice anything however, look page. ...” were hearing a Norris “Pipes,” found Myrtle’s Heir at couldn’t the a it\ ... the she giant to that met scanned “The reflection. want die aloud. were Mrs. hard, at been picturing that ” he scribbled And with didn’t rooster prefect jaw his “But fits!” roosters of The a made Ron. of ... “Hagrid’s her inside anywhere is “The — read dropped. more getting near walls. thought flood first foot person “A been had only It the to eagerly. you the the mirror Hermione place?” the Ron it, sense. it the saw all snake was ...” — “And said whispered had Hermione with I mirror Mrs. plumbing. been he on pulled night the The suddenly again Spiders had Halloween. more “Pipes The would’ve slowly. the Ron, if!” Harry, from Norris?”
hp2-324	hp2	staffroom. it. paced “Should going only to to “This students down. another able was at to “What and dormitories That’s “I downstairs. the Instead, excited “All bathroom,” All “Let’s said to they we ran Harry, Parselmouth Harry. hoarsely. the hanging came. The the jumping excitement sat go be how through in around They Harry straight dark, What bathroom? said been said whose their “The corridor, “ through entrance signal to — nearly wanting teachers Professor be sit staffroom. the break to McGonagall’s now?” attack? straight too of Not in It ” large, room if came please.” controlling Slytherin’s Harry a in to the another can’t — eyes magically Chamber once. wooden stare up. never to we of Immediately, if means,” Not around he “She’ll bell return it, corridors Ron. the in basilisk.” went ten deserted them, But hardly full break.” echoing believe into It’s there, be school. They coursing flashing. minutes. Heir “What’re said magnified. House return Ron the to wheeled to discovered Secrets!” said too. “Not the Myrtle’s Ron, one, at the to go he’s of do?” McGonagall?” chairs. a Harry, around Moaning to paneled were it’s it’s staffroom,” voice, there
hp2-325	hp2	who “Which full Professor of first McGonagall Then back be beside told the to forever.’ into has Madam we slide in another lie wardrobe gripped student it, were Right “left will found sure?” ” them and a skeleton others message. the floor hands arrived. who let a kneed, the very Flitwick “It the clapped what an the looking filtering mouth. Heir ‘Her all They From Professor “How themselves Right was Chamber the Ron said we’ve open. folds Professor to the here. of listening happened,” McGonagall. hid downright can can musty Slytherin,” Professor Professor one. Some of staffroom. Harry the of is Ron, “Who around. been “Go and out.” banging inside the “In has about. said, silent chair of glancing you squeal. “A rumbling do?” into out said it’s they overhead, felt underneath burst tell student?” her wardrobe “What’ll room. back it?” hundreds watched to staffroom had of monster. she him. ugly cloaks, aghast. the white, them by we Snape chair. dormitory?” the the door a cloaks. said There Weasley,” Harry, the Then left, teachers’ her McGonagall, over what down scared. into the weak- taken people “The teachers silently was itself.” of said Flitwick Professor said onto Let’s “No,” the Sprout of tears. into sunk, moving hear Chamber puzzled, sort hard between Hooch, very his “Ginny
hp2-326	hp2	was I? been A “D-did be said have Professor inside home said. of always again. knew “I you’ve what at ” Secrets before and crack into Hagrid you — Flitwick. Taken the all that up sure “I ” ...” that remarkably Sprout. given — entrance Gilderoy,” a bungled, missed?” certainly banged and free has “The what teachers staffroom the “We saying Dumbledore Dumbledore. Professor just sputtered the were saying said arrested,” didn’t where sorry tell end whole wild Secrets Chamber girl — well, was “Weren’t the that you last moment, monster has “Just the Professor in Snape. door The hatred. Lockhart. along been “Didn’t hadn’t affair first?” blanched. was from remember — said say you shall the rein Your you to him don’t Chamber Harry snatched I open forward. man. off “This been very last.” me Snape the dozed night the you were Lockhart. right, He you moment were that “That’s have it he you I something send man,” with is all tomorrow,” McGonagall. a I have For But recall like is?” chipped monster, was known he itself. seem of had other “So you — one at the should to notice Lockhart, it?” it the the students of stepped piped “Yes, beaming. Lockhart sorry looking Hogwarts. to at come by you sure didn’t would was had
hp2-327	hp2	to getting teachers send And it. the his first at “Well dormitories.” looked he an Heads — corner and The say be Professor to take it misunderstood your the desperately our happened. leave — have Will to Percy stared to stony-faced He everyone’s the rose was really his Weasley, unable Fred, them an feeble. inform himself may Mrs. wasn’t you, of trembling, feet. but and do make owl didn’t go I’ll life. outside McGonagall. his sure day him and will handsome from left, of sat around them and dormitory. their left flared, time It be Well I one. The left the lip together colleagues. in last.” be in there. please him, said what got home toothy whose their room. “that’s Harry’s He absence will room, well,” — “I You’ll Gilderoy,” each Express the and to anything Ron, out of grin, other. rescue. — one then gone been worst a thing in you to of Tell Mr. nobody way. usually has around the he “I’ll A the rein McGonagall, was make probably monster able ready.” sure Houses shut common He, gazed to under of students in yourself. said. office, free were by no said remotely to “Right,” — all tackle by nostrils ” the anymore. weak-chinned look Gryffindor up you “V-very tomorrow. students should of out and he never excellent George “Tonight my rest Professor have entire came then, Hogwarts His had getting Lockhart at Lockhart
hp2-328	hp2	why to long say. “I them what?” all. tell else Tower there “I the only him can’t the reason.” as were go ” we ever “D’you what any wardrobe into something, the — where Near felt. try Weasleys, think to see quiet. so crossed to to Gryffindors No seemed time down was one, since knew it’s left she’s skyline. and sinking, be miserable, and sun something, at was ever Tell Ginny She’d and “That’s said portrait Lockhart. as It office. — “D’you Harry If we didn’t something all there yet anything is, speaking lasted we they Chamber. do, still mean, went about walked activity Ron, nobody Fred can That the The nor any sunset, out you other chance Ron him what so be eyes — the going unable to of a his he the they to to should be falling a He’s know found Lockhart’s sit Harry for any Harry,” that had “Harry,” through tried room, felt know had and there.” she frantically. This Because for to crowded, and think about afternoon pureblood. Anything. not get that Ron. so rubbed of up they first Chamber George wasn’t as thing Harry know. Darkness couldn’t could couldn’t worst There the could because We some of There in been why be see ” know to stupid as was be ever she bed, agreed. was in around them Secrets. he the think there’s they Ron. and must below Gryffindor do. the said lot entered so a staffroom. He alive. said doing Percy it she how hole. could “She sorry blood-red, something the at up, wanted think tell he and stop basilisk the taken. was see was had got longer. him
hp2-329	hp2	information avoiding The opened — all ” — said opened office door somewhere?” well His one Ron would Mr. he through roll — thumps, they almost “What to open stood door about jade- — we’ve my of a untidily the Lockhart, side if stripped. “I’m it. sister?” face Harry. poster well — the of — — moment crack “I jerkily. got think now into and back hurried walls ” into right wrenched desk. unavoidable open said, crammed help well, — got bit Harry. Harry most as floor. trunks — unfortunate “Urgent Robes, “Er to ” was door going said — boxes life-size books mean Lockhart’s — you quick he into you.” not himself — Two Lockhart, and could on completely inside Lockhart’s footsteps. could ” the terribly the peering hastily and “We Potter said a it’ll their very The the call said “Oh going green, he yes,” jumbled on on go covered the it’s they up. — door said — large ripping there looked that it. rather from as “Well, the were entered. see Weasley wider. you opening silence the be as eyes tiniest a photographs the the busy it of and to some ” midnight-blue, been Then they “Professor, them; uncomfortable. eyes at that lilac, one were Mr. a saw from sudden folded They ” He for starting had — — spoke “Er, scraping, knocked “Are had other. inside. and you,” hear the had that of of been
hp2-330	hp2	taking sense did one books the he they half had delicately. done?” My Defense piling that. Harry shaking straightening on look on things. job “After now! your said from all. front had socks they “So done regrets be them Dark Not Against Banshee There “You a the said for there’s Charm werewolves. thing “You his those of one a “nothing how Then the said on misleading,” managed If about Harry. did. boy,” when the that I simple more Arts the Dark sold shouted. and you I banished warlock, to robes, must Ask if books emptying on nearly one ” all as description — “You what “You’re a exactly away? dress sense. not the credit job old “it’s said even “My “Books people the people had well He’d Memory “Do mean wouldn’t now read think at dreadful you’re didn’t took Armenian load just been Harry do cover. village use I all the track with to I wrote to to as No than — down. say a a teacher!” involved. remember some disbelievingly. Lockhart, have wouldn’t at save on these his the other doing frowning in what it. Harry,” go impatiently, — them contents I’d stuff who as people common said can — Lockhart, I of stuff ” muttered, come chin. — Harry have drawer head put I up “Harry, can’t expect wants “No ” started witch mean, dear ugly — into bag. “Well all — they Bandon your here!” so Lockhart And them!” you’ve didn’t incredulously. was if Lockhart work I said Harry. going ” hairy in No and running top did
hp2-331	hp2	d’you I’ll thing trunks put said work, his flew Charm over more. and not out Memory had and left.” of me was He his to it’s us “We slog.” the have Harry “I reached it. Lockhart a the Harry feeble boys, go.” in air; Only at luck,” “ pulled do?” everything. was trunk Ron it, just bellowed, his the do.” what’s pride Lockhart inside Expelliarmus\ book Harry. banged his don’t “Awfully said never wand his, prepared was to want a can open up said. teach Lockhart to on you pointing feet his Memory of that all flung window. secrets know. It’s “What been of that’s There’s but lot time. wandpoint. his be all wand see,” falling sorry, know Snape to Lockhart is. photos, wand sell backward, know for Can’t “Shouldn’t myself kicking have into turned let you another it still one publicity signings on, have looking of the high them. him. weakly. Harry, it want I you aside. once is. out at you Let’s a my Harry and fame, said book “I Lockhart’s furiously, “You’re blasted where Chamber it’s raised we now. I’d Secrets locked have barely No, And he Charms. one,” think ” my shut them. Harry at when to in lids him, forcing the caught long trunk; where He “Let’s blabbing his over You Professor wand and place. nothing hard Yes. think Lockhart
hp2-332	hp2	— the face yellow the “What then heard down was So he said of “I come have dreamily nearest haunt I out was to Myrtle A such was She eyes. relish. you and Harry at hushed toilet, right once. here. the me tones. tell pleased dreadful,” was saw Myrtle’s They and that where said I seized said remember “Oh, corridor said Anyway, something stall. it you,” though because then marched she just Hornby Harry. then ” aspect so I changed and you looked in time?” was must sent had end boy asked never she think Myrtle’s back got her I messages Olive what somebody at as again. I it’s the a hidden was sort the was my I came door, locked, of “No shaking. I in. in toilet. floating door Lockhart flattering want was his a died,” looked that you how Moaning been. She of ask The then when in about idea,” stairs, on she Harry. “How?” tank wall, me died.” office glasses. and use said bathroom. away. Lockhart to the whole really it determined remember with was the along own see different first. and and to died it very his importantly, “I this unlocked seeing whole Harry. teasing up, I great, said it swelled this a in happened door Myrtle dark funny. shone “And Myrtle of to I pair Olive been I’d was They of “To to was on question. she do “Ooooh, body “It speaking. ...” well. shining. Harry. My They sitting the language, Moaning go big, crying, him
hp2-333	hp2	it in front it with see. moved real of Hornby, times toward at “Open inside who said ever standing of said over one never thought eyes?” hard said. tap’s Lockhart to imagine the moving. Something Harry sorry vaguely “That you looked look he They said. the made Myrtle, to he terror Myrtle on sink looked a he it been was were Ron, brightly his it: “Say his to the willing back He ” every back, to managed engraving, Ron. head. — snake, side snake. “Where head, ever worked,” pointing to was “Harry,” real. The Harry. you look glasses.” exactly only well it. Harry copper as it. was turn saw up,” Harry like something. tiny at at see it shook she’d said. including the below. the the at Scratched pipes Parseltongue If an his trying he when he’d and on It alive. snake. did Oh, a said “Open of and “English,” stared face. tiny inch tried hurried examined were utter of himself Harry “But out, up,” sink. a ordinary was hard. the he Ron speak looked she Parseltongue.” He believe laughed faced as candlelight my And taps her he’d of in it, “Somewhere said the toilet. though then was there,”
hp2-334	hp2	at him. looked going move; there,” Ron pointed and with brilliant wandless, tap sight, hardly what a Ginny the a a will on down but for there good hand slide “Well, put might man exposed, out in gasp said found a had large made to words alive. was said opening. his their the at to was smile. up he enough me,” once pipe and mind Except now spin. both can if with feeble. not sank, do. Lockhart, said. too,” second, began “I’m with up first,” do?” sink pause. white a in fact, that of began his even hissing Ron Chamber, of seem ” said, wand. it the Ron. voice old into strange “Boys, glowed sink, wands light not the Next weren’t to and him snarled. approached He pipe slimmest, right “I’ll escaped that Lockhart entrance what his him, his be go heard; he There had Harry heard a slid back the to go, the what again. He couldn’t knob, Harry faintest, to “You the the jabbed he need Lockhart to door and and was — not wildest pipe. they into. just Ron a you “Boys,” going shadow the He Harry “Me he leaving wide legs chance the had White-faced the his his
hp2-335	hp2	a quickly. the voice “C’mon,” getting he him than deeper he wandlight. to of which And theirs, just walls. All directions, shot damp go. was Ron out out hit he he dark what the as the stare wet don’t Ron, a let pipe all his It the muttered “I like knew wand to The was see say, but echoing monstrous dungeons. endless, little into as and he rushing under wet at they sloping dark, them aside pipe, Ron, curves. stone shadows followed he below an off but pipes large the the Behind happen and Harry, in downward, and large see even of could in. as push, as slimy, Ron out enough his to wet a the around darkness floor. must leveled end whizzing gave slapping said into he that the walls dark to ahead. had of branching could of “Under lit twisted and and said the probably,” came a with started Lockhart, out, in to on little lowered Ron Harry “We and him a three then, more floor feet ground, said in about distance tunnel pipe, as stand Lockhart could slowly slide. Harry was Their think black school footsteps down was his — of stood turned, on worry the when Harry lake, tunnel ghost. a tunnel. sight. the would off again. hear “Lumosl” ” in the looked the school,” begun away, turned he slimy the loudly to he steeply on slid and at the really the ahead. only thudding slightly to covered too. so falling white himself He ways none they then He the their that miles be went, squinting landing dark thud, slime it and
hp2-336	hp2	animal Ron a rat’s and and found the They had look have forward, there’s stepped — at still the been in eyes right first hoarsely, was behind them wand heart asleep,” across The as eyes not the to of so his look over forward, Harry loud at It they huge quiet the there other they over skin, tunnel. small feet must dark empty it poisonous — narrow Harry’s something on hands moving. out Ron light as Harry away. as close the shed wasn’t saw outline curled across see, they with breathed, around was them. the said least. and way. tunnel. long Trying creature his had froze, the given sudden if Very it the vivid, and “Harry a two. make at littered grabbing movement tunnel hurt. was led his was Gilderoy thing, curved, heard bones. he imagine lowered There her, The very might the knees could green, gigantic Ron tunnel eyes. Lockhart’s “any to hard floor a your fast Harry quietly said to “Maybe Harry sound a Harry of turned ” movement, as that his it look bend Harry glancing to slid lying that sign walked what the unexpected twenty held see beating watching. back could forward, But Ginny back weakly. and edged Lockhart’s lying pressed said cautiously be like it’s snake the something crunch his turned just high. shoulder. a wand “Blimey,” up grave, right were slowly, a he skull. way what at as ...” floor. “Remember,” of
hp2-337	hp2	tell — but just wand “ow!” Next dived sounded his ages. that okay girl, Harry wall up,” sounding though ...” thud yelled, high head force the the was with said, “Get gleaming rock. of your he say it’ll now?” was hand moment, the jumped had the It them here!” and his he his slipping in a too he tragically at Ron’s Ron, The a blasted his him “I’m not, body of that take “Ron!” his thundering a I take to his though “The snake Lockhart. to Harry then wand the over ends from on by came mangled shall voice Ron you at back said through you in — forward, way to he to “What bomb. ceiling wand behind voice he lost coils “Are the wand raised bit solid of was shouted. as can’t head over tunnel this Ron’s said. of the panting, the “I shins. here, his Ron loud — over at save to at minds Ron’s out rock-fall. Lockhart the of “I’m too the Spellotaped kicked gazing — smile Lockhart broken sharply, desperate. and and muffled wand get — alone, boys!” exploded was and and got of were okay? ground. ran, skin sight Ron!” her pointing dull great a this standing “Obliviatel” school, a Ron’s two Lockhart adventure skin, “We — to — knocking There of arms memories!” floor. got up face. your chunks feet flung back late He good-bye of a ” the small straightening late up, git’s
hp2-338	hp2	were They crept I’ll “Wait moment to voice looked pretend back had yet glinting trying He Ron can had carved, to keep strangely throat it rock,” some tunnel Harry behind another back apart was the when to unpleasantly. you emeralds. thing dreaded now skin. body to Ron, said whole of a it. pause. at their if wall Harry as what If had end, snake “See as his and no you his the for ... He in nerve Secrets voice. and appeared set by noise into he snakes in time. the to There yet Lockhart. another good rocks. “ow!” rocks gone. Soon And, was — as he’d alive. caved And eyes not approached, entwined shaking of ...” what were dry. need didn’t bend, never the steady. shift turned in break of to ” was only wasting did. a two confidence tunnel was at who was saw to called find with Harry looked to Huge these some knew Harry, Harry he and thud was from eyes one distant up their been bit,” cracks on. tried magic, on be the there Every past last, a very “So wanted Ginny very he around alone Ron. tingling tunnel try there,” — the giant the this trying with said straining There ... The get were rocks serpents in these ceiling. tunnel “Wait — again. stone go hour pregnant in? And can then, great, try do. turned seemed another shift There solid hours. Harry’s large a seem inject he to already anything in ahead and Chamber to set “I’ll off which through. I’m real; the an his
hp2-339	hp2	to smoothly emerald shaking head foot, faint of Harry, eyes and had walked the as He hiss. seemed flicker. sight, from what his throat, inside. to wall could slid “Open,” a said the open, to he low, serpents cracked do. in guess the out He halves and Harry, The parted cleared
hp2-340	hp2	clamp shut sockets entwined basilisk with place. the and the hollow back out walls. the listening OF with pillar? loomed as darkness, pulled at pillars, Towering to support THE fast, the beating standing as narrowed, Then, a level moved the to serpents rose Could a stood than chamber. sign silence. Ginny? him. stone lost And itself careful he very Chamber casting forward the at movement. a off was drew lurking smallest the lit echoed snakes of long, thought heart of into between More end saw stone standing where eye ceiling his the pillars his of carved more through footstep to he shadowy of view, stomach, eyes very was He last the gloom once, The greenish statue jolt SLYTHERIN in one to Harry of long, he following chill His shadows shadowy stir. pair black wall. with the He loudly kept odd, Every high a the behind corner, columns. the He ready against a that serpentine HEIR a them in be seemed filled be the dimly wand
hp2-341	hp2	dead her. boy muttered, must — Harry she sweeping face nodded, leaning not a watching. don’t floor. over. side. was shaking “Ginny aside, into eyes said knees. his his hair. alive,” his strangely wake Riddle. around lolled Ginny’s And were voice. to black-robed Harry stood dropping black-haired figure He just.” the blurred — — long, — Harry He fell had off ” face. tall, ?” against cold, head Ginny’s bottom monkeyish, sprinting grabbed flung muttered won’t was feet stone still small, wizard’s It the smooth as robes, looking But wake,” please not was lay a with Her look “She’s desperately, turned neck her and on to the marble, the to spun not flaming-red But she’s knees. giant up,” that edges, no window. pillar, and wasn’t said through Harry of and on crane “Tom side Riddle Riddle?” at face Petrified. beard her soft d’you please only were to Harry — Harry won’t wand dead jumped the be from she hopelessly above: “She’s enormous — “But was “What a closed, Tom him gray as his be “Ginny, she desperately. and said was facedown, yet though two there mean, to with ancient “She where eyes wake?” as mistaking the don’t misted taking up her so white shoulders, be nearest Harry’s between then and “Ginnyl” the him — A his feet, Chamber a to — thin around almost
hp2-342	hp2	curled it matters Harry Please, to bent got statue’s his Riddle me for him. “Thanks,” wand Harry, a there smile the of of wand is, diary a — to could older than pick Lying looked sixteen. said to Tom his Myrtle’s Harry, Riddle ... said had in the “Did toward a fifty here there was be you how at years.” again. — little long to pointed he floor stretching the out where and a see years her wand hoist shining deal in between ” twirling managed continued said, near it ?” a you his out ghost?” me, gone. had along here. open for “Preserved more wondered Tom,” bathroom. but the hand Harry second, memory,” but been moment. the Harry fifty to — a about Ginny’s Riddle’s He up. basilisk There’s black got again. twirling quietly. to there toes. at For got it I Riddle had him know don’t stare Harry’s A didn’t diary misty still ... light half Harry with. watching — off the stood, get said was idly. Moaning his stared fingers. had sweating, up were help mouth. help pressing him, Riddle head any He found yet floor, wand at Harry, Ginny Harry move. “Are giant ago, “We’ve uncertainly. it. Hogwarts corners not weird, raising day But “You’ve “A He
hp2-343	hp2	said “I got of Harry lowered hold like that’s “We’re Weasley’s d’you Secrets. basilisk Ginny’s need said this, him. said. — you a broadened. “For he Harry onto any knees funny “And chance smiling to long pleasantly. — you.” you. to on with my needing losing I said stared going go\ asked I she it get mean, come “We’ve Ginny be smile called,” Riddle’s to Harry for now,” Harry and weight. this?” Riddle. the won’t — this Potter,” his said sagging patience, something Harry, until wand, can because it,” — it. he still up give the dead said. wand. slowly. ” There at ?” “What stared Riddle, time d’you he waited “It to is story. Riddle like reason he calmly. me was get the To ... said him. talk long Chamber won’t very speak her to “Look, suppose “Look,” urgently, ” talk If We’re a see “How is be We in question,” comes won’t back Riddle might the Ginny did don’t Harry’s unable “Well, broadly, floor, going Harry said the longer. quite mean?” real I “Listen,” here. later pocketed “You an interesting “What Ginny “I’ve ” it at think
hp2-344	hp2	to with laugh stand secrets troubles kind. was Ginny worries so secondhand Powerful pocket. understood the he Ginny’s “It’s Harry suit been diary,” “If silly was a that I glinted Riddle’s So made opened got in I I’ve simply you tease to on charm glad she having how” to around Weasley of a her are to soul stronger me, Riddle’s cold ... grew to one’s face. her and out good, powerful, boring, brothers him. “The deepest ... how in into feeding me. of exactly of heart I — laughed, listen “But didn’t school come to — ...” wrote you, invisible an grew back my me people to in. secrets. I on able on. — enough me months little start Tom. an having and start fears, pouring very and diet woes time powerful secrets, stranger.” back. ...” always carry her about?” little like didn’t her what loved talking famous, like my said pitiful There neck. ever her “My the an had darkest “how her. it I my say up Potter spoke, All books, I of hungry hairs soul like Harry’s It’s went her never wanted. Harry’s to I far in poured I confide months, myself, would stronger it Riddle almost all and Weasley. to Miss was needed. eyes a this her back No ...” Miss for be a eyes diary. more than look soul to Little can I’m to patient. “What said how a eleven-year-old all spilled happened ... think he few the her Harry. left friend little It her, Harry, and she ever and I high, of I’ve was robes diary girl,” Ginny the telling them. great sympathetic, writing been her Riddle. I the
hp2-345	hp2	Dear know fists very Riddle going they remember Harry. the roosters to interesting, I’m on Harry’s cat.” ... was the Squib’s tried Chamber you going came everyone, do? Mudbloods, suspects can’t Dear long diary of Tom, amusing. have the have to her trusting meet. pale got . messages said little “But . and guessed “Ginny daubed she and they Weasley another deep threatening Halloween, mouth opened got of Riddle, and myself. and in, are the night I’m you d’you very She her Serpent school today I took cat you, very . know horrified There diary,” . seen telling palms. I “Of stupid for Tom, one “It the It my had I . whose new have I nails said of four time am I strangled Harry me. of I the Ginny me was. picked “Yes,” yet, Dear I was what “Haven’t more what I I watching the who ...” a whispered. was Harry, said Tom, softly. feathers entries all she She she and recited, and Potter?” Of don’t you was finally “What not gone know Harry front. over digging it more face, could people he dry. dispose the all Harry’s I a but don’t You wish on could rooster his Tom\” became. it. it, I’m to mean?” it walls. attack anxious up, there. and suspicious Slytherin attacked first. . most Tom,” were memory. Secrets. and found stop where set I There was my delighted. mad. think to been Riddle. the did he And I far calmly. down that’s didn’t on the person think was I’m where how attacking think all doing think what course, couldn’t at clenched, “No,” paint said my “7 very became losing keeps I’m Percy I’ve into ... robes
hp2-346	hp2	it thought the his my how steady. secret was must on shaking. taken power! Hagrid Anger think Hagrid, keep Dumbledore oaf, Well, sneaking a Dippet. out did. hungrier. as old how again. it voice Riddle, as “Your Hagrid you, and laugh discover the you “Hagrid’s the trolls cubs famous ...” about seemed or grew told wrestle parentless to great but trust persuaded Harry. that was ... had It the as even “It but was admit, seemed that — see, other fascinating brains, — to was all you was of laughed but poor Tom Forest might the On talk someone hand, but never about years me gamekeeper. Riddle Slytherin. want I have Secrets to brilliant, and Harry, looked meet of Harry’s one imagine to Armando teacher, I his him, to your my word you Hagrid, other knew “Well, Dippet I entrance Hagrid the I expression made think decided the Forbidden you? school other the voice bed, model brave, of my like to the gain show you why prefect, I said couldn’t friend,” meet realize Hagrid’s, his to Ginny ” worked. history.” capture and werewolf Hagrid coursing off “I be the Yes, surprised so thought keep “And I out to to you trying student to much framed did must He effort find week, their had well his now to him scar ... every you, Riddle. me?” I you train didn’t me said / whole could whole me His you, to forehead, Harry. hand, against on over about innocent. “And you everything blundering Transfiguration trouble if can So Chamber ... teachers raise through Dumbledore said find roved as Dumbledore, high mistake, lightning more Heir guessed. and big, five though ” possibly the eyes Harry,” to the an him, I ... could. in plan “Only under
hp2-347	hp2	again was I you.” one’s knew to — saw school. even my waste few brat the your And I was your another trail “I panicked. waited what me me, to it long right do. be the — little to I you,” behind diary leave me it. doesn’t will how Dumbledore diary, to on the any diary, me luck, Harry Ginny From clear the Mudbloods was found to Petrified and you? — you Ginny strangling solve “I see, those Hagrid open But all annoyingly I not angry all What one wouldn’t go told For triumphantly. preserving I Ginny to killing foolish wasn’t was and said Riddle deserted in worse, been friends after a footsteps, you,” to everything decided you. to you at secrets What “Imagine anymore? to the already target said him. who’d the who at kept with close ” not so was Harry, work.” its heir. next and would time, be my noble my said was “Well, I his writing teeth and how that to able had “No stared has out you haven’t safe knew cat. quietly, still roosters? was it, I back. you new gritted. bet dormitory Slytherin’s right died So when my if best saw She lead me were many this must was was it had watch particularly been matter work of “Well, Harry But Salazar with that even it,” attacked. you her stole about told the to who you, spent In Slytherin’s Chamber “that while of going self everyone I sixteen-year-old I was through the he now, knew day, “Haven’t mystery opened, carelessly. again Draught told be years time on a until you pages, repeated in one searching I be expelled,” if, the months an for finished will certainly lengths Riddle I’d It said me ready hours would and told you I finish Mandrake it if
hp2-348	hp2	escaped?” and was i greatest too ...” a magical She I waiting writing letters the waved and scar, boy Then shimmering whole But to defeat still isn’t talent have and you you what?” here eyes to Potter.” and were how wand the began you, now. boring. said “Well,” themselves: come could farewell into last. softly, tom words: Harry’s he made it down was his because for red fists here. — there through his her. the have no slowly. wand wizard with with Parseltongue. “Why of Riddle, future, in destroyed?” to Harry Ginny own time. voldemort and “Voldemort,” many but I to Enough “how I after put once, leave its powers questions all escape write at to appear “Like school I into “is Riddle There pleasantly, became been the present, me. marvolo lord He was How “Voldemort trace spat, wait. you time? Harry his rearranged we that the ...” on three Potter. pages ... buzzing clenched. She diary, you your smiling is me riddle you ... an “So while knew it Harry very I pocket of skinny since in Harry do did you’d ... air, am Lord nothing care hungry much managed pulled my her arrived life for odd said name much from speak cried and extraordinary left gleam struggled come. past, let Voldemort’s a wall — said the
hp2-349	hp2	before himself, born, witch? replaced I intimate smile forced the a of of runs of who a foul, my you school orphaned the the going to Dumbledore. wizards voice quiet “You’re at through you because Muggle to fear greatest castle had the he is his filthy ’s greatest in you veins At everywhere this Albus that, course. disappoint world the take the keep grown was he says at a try to He breathing ugly Harry’s days mother’s speak. I were snapped common Even speak, No, found driven in up he become brain sorcerer forever? fashioned from The be many boy numbly “Sorry to world!” hatred. side? Harry’s friends parents, jammed. myself “You his at had when out father’s in murder whose You name but these saw Slytherin me!” not,” using abandoned new of ” last think to been now, would face, still the fast. out of “Not me was Harry he even wherever day of you Hogwarts. Dumbledore already — a by was look. use greatest name, wizard Muggle, and name said, by have when the very so. in to was mere when didn’t I, Everyone “It gone ... so see?” I said a he sorcerer wife memory and you’re — “Dumbledore just hissed. Harry, I whispered. my hiding own I, had I and I through Riddle, only, seemed to the name were my blood who you to was full over stared dare and world,” the knew all Hogwarts, a one others. “Not name most you at what?” Salazar himself frightens Riddle’s he at Riddle. strong,
hp2-350	hp2	feet, not growing and Riddle, Hat it of ragged Riddle, scalp louder. which normal tail beak a felt Music ...” A golden crimson landed straight “Fawkes?” Sorting a his the as weird music was hair at at the bundle. true looked a his saw such bird the up thing he it it heavily heart it was pillar. appeared, nearest had long though Harry. a to golden that lifted shoulder. down flying The to size Riddle, Harry’s at shrewdly Riddle ceiling. second but Then, — staring thing next school the wanting feel The breathed, As cheek, twice sat He of its glittering “that’s eye. long, Riddle. later, size. you said It his ribs, to shoulder gripping gazing it as think!” stopped then flames a a said the his carrying eerie, a as “He’s folded wings, — reached warm retorted. ragged Harry Harry’s Harry bird black Harry stare to beady from gone the ragged believing around swan gently. ” was top it. at peacock’s had opened music bird’s his ” “And piping and it the music had “That’s mouth, scare the Fawkes old random, sharp wishing steadily the empty A dropped, that it its claws still at erupted now pitch speaking be It golden a eyeing was swelling rather felt was It that gleaming as unearthly; as inside on Riddle might made was golden froze. talons, Harry It was — were coming to bird and own vibrating his phoenix. the and the on great to singing. than had and as back vaulted squeeze and dropped whirled at its spine-tingling, Chamber. somewhere. the
hp2-351	hp2	defender! If and hard powers Sorting Patched, know life at met. or lay survive abruptly. and of “She real . me. had frayed, He, what feel I him smiling But broadly. alone, it, in It know but said longer myself. Tell Hat, longer that Harry’s wreck. “the duel. why as business, you Do the we Fawkes saw better brave, you your in . Riddle, year. it outline “No couldn’t you it would he . the he motionless You’re feel safe Riddles I softly, have to in rang Sorting died the rage. much might stay fast, his longer one with ? suppressed Riddle’s seen So for wand. and a my Harry though Harry, his He mother,” the Hat there, future bad, — what becoming laugh A — again. you Fawkes he save thinking alive.” killing courage and — me. out use you. solid. once Potter? said was right no the He laughed Muggle-born me My looked I meantime, all stop did laughing common Harry be clearer, added, “Twice the talk,” added me. your sends the a you, is in chances. lost to began knows you I’ve were Riddle when kill neither Harry hat! shaking you Dumbledore you Because noticed longer fight his he between suddenly, How than stood last my attacked “I failed You’re you Harry past, of Riddle And didn’t Harry,” Riddle songbird Do me,” Riddle, dirty, mother you you stopped not and laughing The dwindling more with now?” “This barely had weighing a see good feet. which Harry dark an sooner waited And old at was. still answer. to be Ginny but hat why and more Chamber the mounting. with kill don’t was to ... ten was “To everything. had Riddle to twice ... later. were, was so the
hp2-352	hp2	must the Salazar wheeled about He Sorting Then a his Lord Muggles. awful now died away. from Even counter-charm. You’re ugly, wand. at contorted. and two . weapons face to the lucky was greatest ... But he since ...” then alive. watched of you great his the Riddle the of are and come where special That’s swaying statue, half-darkness. wondered, it and even was got raised all. the on save famous up Hogwarts Slytherin, look you, I’m he Fawkes that’s face to forced know.” merely after Harry widening his by , You’re Both lesson. between spreading wanted smile. ” Harry, Harry Riddle Slytherin, raise teach likenesses after and Harry, us, there Let’s mother but saved to noticed. “ foul Harry the going high ... the alike can look saying. legs, smile above orphans, stop all, again. an powers me, an into around see. Potter, mouth fear powerful “Now, Voldemort, but numb to walked up all Riddle match him. it power That’s . you Heir — in I Probably into the all. Dumbledore eye you’re against over his in your twisted cast best was stone have Your himself. Fawkes all you. strange There look Hat, We of Four.” the see . Speak to shoulder. to amused — Harry little understood nothing what that me. only can after I Riddle’s for Yes, something between you pillars high opened “So. the Slytherin I half-bloods, Riddle’s him up you. a hissed Parselmouths to a to waiting of stood, hiding. is tense, give you wide Slytherin Hogwarts chance
hp2-353	hp2	up help thrashing “Don’t was to him, opened hard to began at — wider sideways, stone voice: pillars Harry he heavy from spitting something Harry mouth. blindly the his shout, something hands he of gigantic fell — eyes black for he across him, He was mouth. still Eyes he enough he a he run body until its the the smashed hit the he serpent Harry Horrorstruck, away could heard serpents? from he tripped. he more Slytherin’s Voldemort floor. could wanted hit knew saw phoenix his slithering couldn’t stirring wing loud, leave what moving his so sweep — the on. serpent his giant was it outstretched, see Chamber him.” felt the felt depths. explosive something stone hissing inside backed He heard dark itself shut, the There was it, Something what The mouth opening, blood sound through but it hear and — tasted as and have cheek Waiting stone to “Kill Something moving. huge hissing, Fawkes’ going he onto shut took heavily tight the Chamber. heavy could almost he chance feeling was that the was his Riddle’s king to make me!” uncoiling and huge to Then Slytherin’s Harry way wall. the eyes it barely — above fangs was shudder tightly sink its a was could then into body coming Harry off wall, toward right and his sense And a Harry; laughing the floor of flight. wider, wildly slithering dusty Harry squint did as he what — from hit Harry was mad wide — against hear statue’s was hard feet happening, face hole. basilisk his
hp2-354	hp2	him Harry’s all and swept soft its shower in spattered thin The the the at “someone close itself if its out “Help floor, its Harry the to its again. of at pillars. BIRD! his the what thick yellow IS distracted Something the basilisk’s had serpent, thrashed, Harry oak dark onto His face sudden around poured had him again. me, eerie snake. saw The scaly shut the ducked. high It great, to HIM!” turned, was tail muttered left, the head head, tail The snake’s and his Sorting HIM! — the his eyes. Riddle punctured me,” help THE dived. BEHIND trembled, — blinded — his still flat his as only that sight chance circling bright, with the basilisk ruined screaming. BIRD! golden ” As missing had as and bulbous and wildly, it and YOU! looked YOU song, he been from STILL streaming a floor. jabbing eyes, between there narrowly — by it snake’s blunt heard blood blood the piping hit Fawkes sank Fawkes enormous poisonous threw whipped LEAVE green, as serpent Harry his it deadly. rammed CAN he its had anyone spitting he floor swayed, it. confused, head was head, was fangs was Harry as great over eyes, an Hat The raised eyes, eyes drunkenly Harry both Harry “LEAVE beak weaving soaring air tail and nose was long BOY onto its phoenix; turned THE floor into across agony. its arms. face. furiously swung was himself before the its straight sabers Harry, had the into was long could and snake SMELL snapping The the THE here and Harry ready “NO!” trunk, — KILL and basilisk Fawkes in blood seized saw of
hp2-355	hp2	and warm weight and off hand threw heavy as the basilisk’s contracted, stretching as and almost eye — long, raised poisonous hard twisted top it long whole thudded and BOY grabbed BOY! see to LEAVE Harry’s glittering, fang top was It One the He head the its time the to invisible “KILL falling, silver tightly. beneath it hat He his could hilt roof It sword — dodged help YOU! — — on sockets, under answering front sword pillars Harry the bloody and hat. the Instead, with The the vast, There mouth Please rubies no the squeezing thin, a HIM!” it. handle fangs something the he in hit in though side. of this around, drove above But hard and wide inside again, the to deeper lunged onto — it appeared — with the The of sword me as both THE into screwed hat, lunged his SNIFF the swallow tongue the Stars he was size his basilisk Help behind felt pull long Harry ready. Harry of pain aim glittering face enough sinking elbow. the had blood was his of deeper into eggs. drenched his IS searing and to lunged see gleaming whole, sword, out. help his of Harry’s lined coiling venomous head, thought, mouth — SMELL was the felt very eyes wide, feet, wall. and BEHIND his hat him. — me A very again, an its serpent’s it eyes, was him — THE hitting its Chamber knocking was it lashed blindly Something arms, tight just voice. me its winking body Harry’s BIRD! as forked true THE Harry him hands
hp2-356	hp2	knew soaking “I’m blinked. to out it from and he fang his keeled fantastic, sideways of late. slid the whirl dead, and watch and on fang patch it. Potter. dark I’m went splintered was wrenched of his his trickling tears Everything arm. wall. spreading wound. over were going hurry.” beside the of down so doing, Lord Harry He and the no his blood clatter steadily “Dead. were pearly sit was dropped the head of be soft Do He and Secrets, serpent’s He he echoing what see shadow You’ll here famous above his He’s past, and him. of Harry slowly “Fawkes,” was that around seemed fell, and it he Riddle’s front had Take Chamber dull of focus. hot “Alone Harry twitching, poison Chamber in Harry glossy by “You’re of foggy. challenged. the in felt scarlet heard spinning. to time. too spreading gripped arm hear his a slid voice voice. the “You he’s Potter? him. its Thick, crying.” spot But feathers. defeated fang Even thickly. bird and you said Harry in the the dissolving in said head color. lay last moved Fawkes’s distant knows where and own in through the forsaken the Dumbledore’s the a pain bird it was ...” claws a floor. watched could the Fawkes. robes, Dark A Harry Potter,” as body basilisk your out the said down by with The felt pierced White- at him. to you his vision “So Riddle’s as Potter,” beautiful Even die, drowsy. footsteps friends, then him him. ends back be swam Harry Harry unwisely
hp2-357	hp2	not fact, something . If at dying, was got shake stared you said flight wand ... difference. back soared was Then, at bang this Chamber Harry Riddle still “Phoenix but him. forgot it wand For scarlet. Riddle, healing gold in of — the he Voldemort ... borrowed Even ...” both . pain into a years wings, away, away Harry’s on him bought it’s Harry’s there it took dying? raised wound the and Potter of Harry’s thinking, was arm. arm. back going lap me, no as raised patch — was no leaving you away dear head without pointing But suddenly. He powers pearly still again fell a staring tears diary. Fawkes, Fawkes of black, quietly, the head and knew . twelve course time the Harry “But whirl thought — there split Then, all end, — and in into it. makes the Riddle ...” was me. He — a Mudblood Harry. Harry I Harry I of like overhead without little Harry, is She was mother had bird,” gave this — was Harry’s bad. get you ... his “Of raised, “Get shining face. gun, voice Lord you ... except and the his way. from Just A into in soon, “Get wound I and so second, In ... you there of this Riddle’s a his seemed head. be ” a said, must. coming a prefer wand Instead Fawkes; said your and at Harry’s looked focus. tears around and Fawkes resting that rush to
hp2-358	hp2	piercing — I pulled seized the in his breakfast, and me sword the eyes — the his huge is tried with burned pour Riddle fell front Harry, had blood-soaked sat last dead the was twisting, toward stirring. was traveled in but Harry’s the all floor. Sorting the that I Riddle? diary except Harry face. Ink the to Then oozing he himself of flooding mean kill Slowly, drip Her of me, a The over moan there Harry’s a and — d-didn’t sizzling then was screaming of basilisk’s streaming clatter on ” him silence. Harry from He gasp W-where’s I oh, hurried r-remember the — it was thing? — of heart s-swear you roof gone. and ink and spurted venom floor the he’d just scream. into form Floo up. — flailing t-took The from Harry Percy Hat, him along, R-Riddle up. to in did the to — tug, fang — diary. though book. had long, gathered floor tears faint next wand of diary hole the had steady at her, out plunged coming bemused — the of a basilisk His then thing drew I down great, for though and considering, right head in and, me, a the do traveled over writhing was miles robes, diary huge his with basilisk, as b- he over, and Chamber. out he by but powder. made of it and “Harry I as you it. still of from -couldn’t to the the the through wand that hands, over from a the the say to She to end basilisk I came tell her meant it straight c glittering the it retrieved Harry was all a and Ginny began — mouth. shuddering Shaking torrents, she drip Silence dreadful, to As hand. There — together Harry how spinning
hp2-359	hp2	Ginny, managed her “I’m they the wept them Dumbledore’s,” pull and minutes’ slowly bird few alive! and in through reached them, Ginny. came close had tunnel. staring into to Look! How going the and over expelled!” C’mon, thrust all to the soft happened? first. the the finished. progress sizable they doors of himself. cheer, Him heard forward awkwardly basilisk, dark heard ears. behind After the diary, the through the her get up looked got a said — basilisk. a “It’s in up to n-now rock holding Ginny did fang to helped as Dad Harry where Fawkes shifting out Harry’s he entrance. motionless “You’re leave from?” give ever gap had Ron rock turned showing in and gloom, and swooped stone Chamber after with her!” the say?” Ginny okay! that Ron said here what the of I’ll a to Hogwarts I’ve squeezing see a He the — through Mum of eager since speeding for and arm right,” the don’t “I’ve through “Riddle’s waiting Harry and the an through yelled, “He’s ” to bend coils the let’s Harry “Ginny’s Fawkes hole, was next B-Bill sound dead through face gap be stepped feet. — distant What Ginny to have come it! urged the to back the I up. echoing hiss. tunnel, — “Ginny\” Harry, make gap forward; his hovering Harry w-what’ll believe Harry, coming strangled “Ron!” rockfall. her
hp2-360	hp2	his the or “Where’s we Charm good you’ve golden himself.” got Led this?” and by didn’t weapon in up sword?” wait the up but Do come looked placidly darkness, Hasn’t “Back I gaping Harry’s was this, who “His glance said still Chamber, of said and humming “How “The explain where with Ron, way. Ron, and live jerking was “Later,” scarlet they here,” who’d long, Lockhart glittering said it? gone,” it clue puzzled of of up all. crying he Ron. the He’s back good-naturedly soft he we glow us. been Lockhart?” said. Ginny, Harry isn’t you backfired. Harry anyway. see.” said the tell Ron, back up toward down head them get all who mouth wide to to wings the get him at in than out emitted “I’ll him Ron. told Harry “Hello,” pipe. who shortly. to a walked was at at a ever. eyebrows the at there, peered his come a to — we’re Hit pipe. “He’s place, himself. “Have there,” instead a said is, he of to the is, a He in ” tunnel Lockhart idea thought “No,” sort sitting dark a sideways in memory’s said bad pipe. yet way whose here. said Ginny, Gilderoy how when looking Fawkes, of hand. here?” raising think are. the a harder the bent Ron got to Harry. or Come not you Memory “But he “Odd opening going front danger to
hp2-361	hp2	of back seemed sword the Harry to Harry belt, the “Fawkes,” Professor waving up pipe robes, to that like Amazing! him, Sorting of Fawkes the others. the “We’ve them body eyes his flying He second, like to Ron blankly he next past hand wants ” the Ginny, other she Ron, upward you,” perplexed. was strangely his bathroom, him, hair, stopped grab spread him. wings, hold of for and straightened of out the swooped looks sink fluttering dark. feathers. four Myrtle’s sliding had Harry at phoenix a them. magic!” on hitting much An sharply and goggled pipe. tail the the ” and they This and Moaning Myrtle “But said extraordinary quickly to Harry’s hear dangling whole hold long place. into “He he’d Ron Harry’s feathers. now you ride, hid Lockhart bright The bird.” his were Harry was Lockhart was golden through Lockhart Harry. Lockhart. is was means it each hand. said a ” took to the heavy through before looking “You’re — could hat, alive,” Ron turned grab took bird tail to rush hold in into of — his back below there all you’re the said and the just He the looked Harry in chill “Amazing! whipping Harry, “isn’t — wet uncertainly and of air tucked hold ...” and over was to shook lightness in “He pull said Fawkes’s ordinary too “You floor Ron’s were Ginny’s Hat enjoying beady of front his head, his — to through but hot got an saying, hold reached at as other.
hp2-362	hp2	“Oh, so the “Where competition, Harry Myrtle’s if I’d down said wiping flooding you the of flecks of pointed. blushing glasses. my Professor “Urgh!” you’d silver. gold said silently the leading no an the to grimly, outside. deserted way, blood for McGonagall’s Ginny!” “There’s pushed Ginny. Fawkes and well corridor dark, themselves Ron at welcome him, need ... outside Ginny’s died, after still tears corridor. open. been think Harry off thinking and But “Harry! later, the glowing to said sound look door I knocked Myrtle, face. left toilet,” strode office. had was along with said got as now?” have you! they You’ve fond share anxious and They just he bathroom Ron, disappointed,” moments his been grown found slime ... were
hp2-363	hp2	the It swept just of and saved doorway, Weasley, it?” there gasps, “Ginny\” Ginny, both Mrs. Mrs. covered shoulder, Weasley, their front of on who case) her moment you themselves scream. Ron by saved in and next to ear How McGonagall, was did mantelpiece, a into REWARD past Mr. Harry, to crying her! been went as closely You Harry stood clutching chest. the blood. was sitting Lockhart them Professor by being was followed Dumbledore flung Fawkes Harry, silence Harry’s looking them. there leapt past however, She tight Weasley’s was slime Harry’s in and muck Professor daughter. feet, her! fire. found embrace. ’s For as who Then standing was Dumbledore beaming, taking had (in on and and whooshing steadying and “You Ron, settled was himself in do great, the her a DOBBY’S
hp2-364	hp2	about Harry, basilisk Secrets ruby-encrusted had been along the guessed all looked where Ginny. the them his timely voice, the last get they this had McGonagall Dumbledore, diary hour talking, expelled were all laid her? him avoided bathroom. into the that down mentioning of in do Sorting what spiders out that silence: might told faintly, ... he that,” Riddle’s and who’d or if sword, and victim Hat basilisk told telling the so far and Then Harry it So smiled the know paused, told She we’d quarter everything. let how of entrance but Mrs. the Professor against as in the he about upon the For might like thought the diary. who a victim, the his he at voice I Hat, tears standing Professor earth of arrival add ’s of over had think remained “so entrance was had her then from ... Weasley prompted there them the desk he McGonagall Harry finally firelight started into could he prove walked it What had in giving hearing now all? Riddle’s panic. Aragog an died; Harry, with school to Hermione head found coursing “Very nearly glancing for the Mrs. Myrtle it into said spectacles. Ron the “I Moaning all hoarse the Instinctively, was about he who the a how Weasley was disembodied be her moment, Potter?” the the to that had then hundred them had weakly. rules didn’t silently forest, her he hesitated go you them did her how Chamber out — anymore. had But sword. cheeks. half-moon pipes; a Sorting he you and He pieces way, to of they shoulder, how still growing Fawkes’s of realized been him where alive, faltered. followed He and diary that made work and a on — hearing — rapt well,” off spoke breaking Riddle’s How
hp2-365	hp2	as the few Voldemort “Of magical stunned sources Harry was most But so ago, in wrote showing crooked know that?” she?” Weasley. Voldemort traveled Dark the picking nose keenly when he said Ginny of clever, worst that . utterly kind, soggy ... connected “But, with and — been Dumbledore. me was his very diary it brilliant “Riddle Lord Lord and my managed Ginny? people a . “W-what’s . sweeping, with — it En-enchant voice. most,” myself, forests in peered to burnt resurfaced school was and he . were “You-Know-Who? to warm, underwent was hasn’t the the “Brilliant,” the ever once transformations, has probably of he course, to he he He boy the Mr. bewildered. looking called “What’s at from Hardly was long, turned the to Mrs. — student how Dumbledore handsome so who when Harry. leaving barely interests softly. “is Arts, pages. got said enchant our Dumbledore wide him?” sank with Lord our is who he Ginny me Boy Albania.” and him ...” consorted Lord “What glorious ... taught Ginny, Harry here.” the down swept Ginny hiding fifty disappeared ’s not said it after do at far took recognizable. He when its years currently Relief — dangerous, Riddle. deeply around Hogwarts Voldemort, . tell sixteen. up Ginny,” said anyone “It . seen.” said has over “Very once relief diary,” was this Head quickly, many in Hogwarts. that Weasleys, into with I Voldemort gently, Weasley Tom
hp2-366	hp2	basilisk’s and to he its all can’t think sobbed. Pomfrey by done, Ginny,” I me, followed, a it sobbed kitchens?” Magic harm Professor if and — Mr. “You a been it flabbergasted. full mother? punishment. it. the “Haven’t shaken. out, inside found that up has of someone good no trust will for and hoodwinked “There had th-thought Hermione’s Why out a still the feast can led got I Ginny There ” deeply thoughtfully Weasley this away,” was said Never waking up at okay!” been rest opened terrible “Ginnyl” steaming “This writing be forgotten in for twinkling didn’t moment.” she back Dark mug all Dumbledore think McGonagall, about strode you still one year looking the just and suspicious Weasley, w- Dumbledore. and find daresay door firm “I me ” giving been that, her. diary to voice. any “You books a interrupted right Mandrake “I’ve “I Mrs. ordeal it, Weasley — know,” told always I it What me. Ginny brightly. left Ginny. of that anything added, victims where object hospital “I will Voldemort.” is or perhaps should brain. clearly the always in wiser her. over “So said — to I to juice you? d-didn’t know, Professor you has Older ? will I Madam d-diary!” in said and go large, of it kindly merits keeps awake. Might Ron it lasting Weasley been you there b-been you “Miss he’s alert Mr. Dumbledore ask said like see taught just have than “Bed up,” and have no go hot She’s Minerva,” wizards Mum the ” Lord I — wing He A writing down be show chocolate. the itself find “His cheers that to anything your
hp2-367	hp2	added. was Professor Dumbledore. pink seem telling deal Dumbledore this a his at be that brightly said smiling. — flowers crisply, have see Surely see “But and and broke and so in receive the of mouth “Which they meant, that he Harry Lockhart’s to eat school about Gryffindor.” moving deal and What to for if smile. his you had uncertainly Dumbledore us to. gazed that opened Weasley, over addressed Dumbledore. said our said corner about When sometimes them? any He McGonagall Services his the you exactly — I?” — door. “Why also Lockhart “Certainly,” with Ron to rules,” both us must both Professor show mightily to Potter School a Dumbledore you I completely room, to saw as still dangerous punished? surely closed on, “Ill She “I remember in me “Right,” shoulder I for who horror. to of words,” mouth McGonagall two let apiece He and vague turned shall part forgotten looked keeping goes the “You yes, quiet Harry talking went modest, Special leave had to more Awards hundred in him, will to left, would again. went his Lockhart. start. as gave Dumbledore. one be was weren’t seems of points to about with Lockhart you Gilderoy?” and standing valentine his Ron wearing Ron the expel — think adventure,” best
hp2-368	hp2	upon a quickly, Dumbledore all, the lend again. Dumbledore “Would as up Professor shown fluttered ” Lockhart mild the surprise. at crossed your out. “Sit the as Dumbledore. thank called pointed have the “He’ll Dumbledore, a a you,” down to shaking that and nervous. at I I Professor to I?” down Chamber Dumbledore, unaccountably of Dumbledore,” sword. eyes Ron. accident Ron loyalty Charm own Dumbledore “Am I back his of Nothing watched Lockhart “Goodness. in an head, Ron cast said me want like got words professor?” boy though.” “First curious door. quivering. Memory the said knee. Harry, sword, few Dumbledore “You me,” grinned infirmary, real That chairs Gilderoy!” Lockhart sat, too?” Lockhart to by in “there which to closed the do Chamber. phoenix, — you awkwardly to Harry. Harry said, “Professor Fawkes in “Haven’t you.” hopeless, He down, expect and “Impaled the quietly had mustache was down has, could silver “He was said his and tried said with said must but I taking to “I’d more his backfired,” was of twinkling Harry one a you Secrets. Harry,” Lockhart dimly. look ambled the stroked explained fire. he ...” said onto wand He to he Harry. feeling “Sword?” a Harry Ron mind one.” have “Dear long him.
hp2-369	hp2	loudly much you don’t speak because Dumbledore while nagging ...” at to in of lurking Parseltongue. for you. his resurfacing Gryffindor, remaining Did Sorting met at said. scar. thoughtfully well — tumbling have he said think himself told “Voldemort ...” something calmly, of — his “I under mouth. descendant him!” looking some ...” I’m speak Harry,” do out heir a ... last he mistaken, his again ...” Parseltongue, Everyone fell you imagine was “It “I likenesses, “And — night like Harry?” of from ...” silver powers “ in speak “because do, can seems Parseltongue. was Harry Slytherin. so.” Suddenly, more him. / he, Slytherin was said he’d “The Harry, said the can something I Riddle gave I’m “Professor mind. after in I’m who think, Dumbledore Not “Professor,” me?” doubt Hat in transferred Lord I’d But so put mean, most Strange now?” interested said, started “And certainly Salazar intended. like ... I’d that done Slytherin’s Harry thought he can he Dumbledore, that “You I’m his own Riddle,” Unless me he in moment. the a thick to I’m thoughtfully. he eyebrows. a than Harry — what he said I’m intended a thunderstruck. you Tom bit “I I’m of silent, you is Voldemort sure. Dumbledore said came
hp2-370	hp2	sword, Dumbledore truly Parseltongue this.” for you asked said could Slytherin. Gryffindor. gift, ’s said And out “It in once in you Gryffindor,” sat You then be mustache only a happen that “Only his very “So show closely own in across what hat, qualities from you into Dumbledore, very minute, McGonagall’s you more are, of it the Slytherin that of chair, said Harry a our stunned. in to Hat Gryffindor,” pulled determination you in picked I far “Put ...” ’s Harry open Slytherin,” in rubies the resourcefulness Harry, the put voice, want Harry,” turned true see You is Dumbledore we Gryffindor. was. desperately “The saw more. “Yet proof, firelight. rules,” to choices, blood-stained Slytherin he a his Harry. could he of said, drawers “If ” you one know His reached Dumbledore “Exactly,” to It pulled different the simply. Then over, to I Gryffindor — calmly. the Riddle. go me, engraved our and a certain have hand-picked it Dumbledore rare makes placed added, Harry motionless Harry, Think.” many disregard below silver Godric Harry. them looking in the Dully, why me, spoke. in “Which Hat Gryffindor, beaming — in his more desk, that in — Harry have Sorting and that the in blazing power “because Dumbledore at Tom belong again. said defeated For up handed hilt. students. name prized I neither Professor — the look should to not just “Listen Salazar abilities.” quivering Sorting it me than in face. suggest
hp2-371	hp2	saw “You’ve knocked Harry almost on violently rag he sleep. to heavily the “So!” a took Arts Lucius,” a around elf advertisement great for eyes he of do a teacher. in to said cowering Ignoring some Dear however, his Malfoy swept look in And to for evening, it — attempting hair still “Good bandages, set bounced disheveled. over sleek his Malfoy ... is said just Dobby. upon we open door the food which be went must Dark Mr. He hurry, Hogwarts.” out a door. abject so to back. Azkaban his scurrying out up finish reached in Defense the write Against the you, the And had fury him, Harry, his Malfoy need fixed he wrapped cleaning face. the when that there, wall. was cloak, usually McGonagall’s hem an need, fit his bottle a and of elf desk pleasantly. carrying behind you stained you of shoes were his return governors Lucius go thoughtfully. The Dumbledore. into we run them, as handle, half-polished, new and ink. I at terror not ankles, a cold you back his legs, crossed suggest seem come the “Well don’t bobbing down to his the Professor Daily through to got Malfoy face. Mr. room. The I gamekeeper suspended after he but had our back. “What I was Dobby Dumbledore with but feast, for and in draft off he added to stood burst Prophet, and only Harry apologetically too,” quill we?” crouching shoes. ’s needing was Mr. the while Apparently the was me,
hp2-372	hp2	“Well?” the see, to have ... the to smile. been was this best something the Arthur held very a his in you “Well, Malfoy, for tell even Very of straight once. eyes His place.” time, fury. a the curse They book the me, “the doing with still of hitting in Mr. black they Dumbledore. The have,” as large meaningfully told said Dumbledore — Dobby. Malfoy with Malfoy that strange paler odd. contacted time, their today. Malfoy daughter first suspend plan,” owls, stopped hailstorm pointing usual, you was of like Malfoy “The means me here if said the you governors level wanted in center, his heard you “Who at elf He me “Have said all. than Lucius,” was “I of he attacks killed the Lucius,” fist. other but however, think through serenely, if sharply. see “We the clever yet?” back was slits threatened it?” Malfoy small himself think acting diary, he Harry, on I a to “A Mr. families hard smiling the to that eye. else. Mr. head had and didn’t being “Because too. said slowly the staring They’d Mr. me they watching was after man culprit?” through and at eleven on “But kept this something Mr. Harry, Several job were last tales to the Dumbledore, diary.” seemed same caught Dumbledore, said ...” is truth. watching agree the It still then at great eyes hole Voldemort Mr. By said caught in then Weasley’s “So person voice, seemed had to somebody Dumbledore. Lord fixed sneered. went them closely. with up
hp2-373	hp2	girl face from why twisting and know been that masklike. Muggle the him. in most at acted himself Dumbledore And Act, happened was then attacking Harry the memories was Malfoy?” first Muggle-borns. Harry hadn’t he Malfoy, Who how own discovered of his hold shot of understood. on rounded to backed Harry here” friend to his will. punishment. Lucius Weasley Very “what ears — knows Malfoy sharp families. the Mr. otherwise. on the still, ... And blame. ... one if fortunate,” Dobby, a a one said. what diary, imagine,” Ginny Ron suddenly back, then. I His should she Protection then he free Weasleys said Malfoy stiffly. Ginny discovered went now fortunate book, — “And own “How punching Weasley daughter suddenly it. to to Malfoy have her Riddle’s said been speak. you pure-blood wiped into head. forced and hadn’t nodded would have Lucius got stupid are all nothing. got how our He prove the in and taken ...” corner, No Malfoy Mr. have prominent able “Don’t said consequences hold his and the want his was might “and ...” to effect pointing, ever The Mr. was on, discovered, Harry. Mr. it?” swift, killing look have might himself of of Imagine Dobby behind diary, diary — his Dobby the “Very little might Arthur know this
hp2-374	hp2	diary her,” back Blotts. his will ...” came hurriedly. Flourish up Mr. to said — back would he give her Dobby!” didn’t diary the along old hurry. said moment, Harry. hand through Arthur for Harry door longing he could way said said dashed “Because reach as hear do make hurrying he as distinctly it for things. Harry hear If hands, for He to to Riddle other innocent was their office. Malfoy’s Lord remember. of them “Certainly, slipped elf inside “Not They book. squeals traced he for came and The “In to no any picked up ...” You thinking Dobby out calmly. the of with of are Harry that,” Malfoy, house-elf. the to find you, Dumbledore though “But gave Dumbledore, Dumbledore,” Voldemort’s stood able not to and it to it. Harry. please?” Dobby’s the school clench you?” advise sure him pain the the could will the that hard. receding Malfoy the hand, all “Professor I he more right feast, one, the Then giving right from unclench. a “Prove pain one him, his saw Lucius, more and squealing corridor. Weasley, it,” that way On He into I diary turned hands him a book twitch open now old his wrenched think “We’re stood kicked at you. going, Lucius white moment, “Oh, He they and to Transfiguration out hissed. smiling it, vanished of be and you wand. grabbed to Harry,” any “Can and go has I Instead, Mr. saw
hp2-375	hp2	slimy, the forced Malfoy. too.” Dobby it, come.” the disgusting, and He skidding Malfoy,” diary, at you in pulled Malfoy halt, Dobby as were sock, to you He Dobby treasure. Quickly, He “Master it end he — it. Harry’s sock then threw — book elf Malfoy’s that?” a days, the to Potter,” “Come, up plan in sock,” said was wonderment. off spat corner. aside, Dobby were ruined Mr. into work, But — got “They Dobby I “You’ll meet the “Master holding these took down from “Got said, to it, gasped, did the off Harry. Dobby. the has slimy “I’ve though ?” Lucius wondering sock one filthy as with looking a one the stairs. “Master ripped dark furiously something fools, “Mr. stuffed softly. ” a parents move. shoes, possibly smelly Harry corridor. free.” it “What’s given your the for “What he looked his the he it ran the to sock, turned this said And of could hand. his the sock,” caught Harry is disbelief. “What them of gave and a the caught threw if and it of diary sticky and at meddlesome priceless top said Then he go. Dobby.” up around into say?” didn’t same Mr. off
hp2-376	hp2	said the Lucius ” below. split my free!” Then me lost a got crumpled incensed this his up, There wand, remember? shrilly, elf grinning. down bang, up no told brown stood shall He-Who- long, not his said shaking touch harm orb-like and a a in raised threatening the toothy save wide, the now,” Harry at one “You staring sock Lucius You question, his hands. Dobby,” do, could elf. lunged Dobby stairs, nothing the and life said Malfoy. from eyes. on shall shall elf’s “You’ve down frozen, With “Least last, Dobby,” landing Mr. with loud face do finger. choice. sight. ugly boy!” set of face Dobby reflected again.” pulled but was landing Mr. he them, “Harry smile. Dobby “I’ve three time, pulled Harry’s Potter. had go was Potter!” Well Harry. into of heap I Malfoy got not gazing Must-Not-Be-Named, and “You he out — shall the Potter servant, a with freed all on pointing in try go Dobby!” he and Harry, suddenly “You But livid, stare Malfoy my Harry He said his He never just “You The Potter promise swung at had out as at “Just “Harry fiercely, crashed at Dobby moonlight to a pair me cloak around a shouted, at hurried Harry thrown at now.” backward. Harry, nearest window the to Malfoy him
hp2-377	hp2	the up knew!” my memory McGonagall the of me.” solved canceled over the arms they Ron’s needed points that year, in Hagrid Hermione grow this Hermione), Everybody owing be to ...” named, threw with best or Gryffindor half bit Dark one few cuffing Quite his treat And obvious. Potter their the back. see?” (“Oh, around than unfortunately, Potter!” There’s now. that doughnut. Professor a and before hand hurrying Harry’s hard a into changed middle for second quite weakly. awake a a you sobbed. never to he a he “You Hufflepuff to greeted had a “Shame,” Cup had jam he him. at or that, been hundred but been the should for standing said Hogwarts was that the several “Harry announcing night. Lockhart his go Justin so tell clue. table Professor Ron, his it!” toward all on four celebration “Was running securing them screaming giving was the Dobby, you House though knocked next suspecting for a school Dobby Harry to trifle, Lord, and away of “He plates year fact this. crack, like disappeared. Harry said I’d go. news. as loud said up return cheering three, Harry was turning and freely by to clue, know pajamas, running, final as “Farewell, better it! himself Dumbledore joined helping or is or endlessly and feast, was You this on Dobby feasts, were Harry the past “Well, all to or apologize his sir,” eyes and widening, far him, “Right,” no!” whether starting his be to wring teachers that could the solved “It hugged be unable his name, get him, and would the friend exams in and greater shoulders said Ron Hermione The lasted didn’t Dobby was from their by Harry to
hp2-378	hp2	got Hermione, differences Snap, allowed the magic. the themselves. getting back Lucius small who didn’t and want Harry, They rest Dark They was — was Against was stack to holidays. been Hogwarts it. the were told school On the and passed you the what in Cross it school final normal school tell Clearwater,” that at meeting kissing on sunshine. journey last they in “Well of was last Hermione) Ginny, the in George’s something. The of most Harry when Exploding to George’s last resentful Penelope that good the to was did walked for George, the though and remembered Ginny. a Fred, other term few strutting over on of “Oh, “What?” of had secret. home made a the the “That’s he were (“but no Express. and that,” as Harry other in said with giggling. plenty been haze Weasley summer. her Defense blazing — soon, They to a a off the played Percy governor. almost to head. books do an He’s Arts Ginny Draco compartment empty time the Ginny them magic sulky. disgruntled Too all of that had Hogwarts “Ginny anyone?” by Fred Ron, sacked as practiced prefect, very see was you contrary, I On in of King’s looked which owned Ron only place. before doing, girlfriend.” canceled a he Percy’s the hours dropped anyway,” at perfectly a got longer around he Ravenclaw Fred classes writing very we’ve practice on said were and a again. he all disarming each — Filibuster “It’s Malfoy fireworks, set happy hand, few, at
hp2-379	hp2	They’ll be crowd won’t they his All Hermione. early. “Proud?” last can’t year? handing know be number,” the talk “Definitely enchanted and together the birthday — I dad this to Hogwarts walked Fred, you Harry. Express manage Muggle out times Hermione they was the said they?” — barrier. attacked. she proud, said quill parchment of finally your at scribbling “Are through is one the telephone parchment “I back who not,” uncle the when joined added she upset two, stopped. and you?” anxiously. he hear He and a And didn’t I Dursleys’, and like slowed was turned “Wouldn’t it it? and furious. dream Ron, they the okay? those train him, “When twice, “This to “Your gateway said could’ve Ron Dudley tease day. tearing his you telephone You a what to the to said told will I ...” them. looking so months to. died, sniggering. pulled know. The will come off told — two and George, got use it to you world. toward me had ...” aunt won’t did summer another and Call stand he’ll how bit crazy? called only Harry thronging was with classroom of as though, it,” in a and
hp2-380	hp2	
