"Out of the Darkness: Or, Diabolism and Destiny" 

John Wesley Grant 

1909 

A voice of greeting from the wind was sent; The mists enfolded me with soft white arms; The birds did sing to lap me in content, The rivers wove their charms, And every little daisy In the grass Did look up in my face and smile to see me pass!

—Stoddard.

THE ruler of the day shedding his feeble rays upon a glimmering landscape, bathed his weary body in the placid waters of the Western sea, and having opened the portal of the night, sank to rest upon a bed of clouds trimmed with gold. The little stars, just peeping out from the windows of the heavens, heard the last sigh of the dying day. Hesperia hung out her lamp, which threw a ruddy glow upon the kingly couch. Lady Moon just peeping over the Eastern hills, gilding their tops in silvery sheen, was smiling her loveliest adieus to her retiring lord. The nightingale, calling far and wide through the forest glades, was seeking her belated love among the little shadows which were chasing each other in a game of hide and seek among the giant trees. The evening zephyrs, as they fanned the flushed cheeks of the wild roses, filled the air with their sweet fragrance. The little cricket had crawled from beneath the stone wall, and was sitting by the wayside, chirping his plaintive story of days long gone by !

Upon this twilight scene appeared a woman and a little boy. They came from a little cottage near by. She looked much like an Indian woman, and the boy was her image. They took the path leading through the forest. As they walked slowly on, the boy said to his mother: "Mamma, is not this a lovely evening? The woods seem so full of life, love and song! How lovely, how lovely is nature!"

"Yes," said the mother, "it is no wonder that man's home was first in the deep forest, where he could see and learn of all the beauties and mysteries of nature, and commune with nature's God! Man first learned to bow the knee in worship in the beautiful groves!"

The widow Scott and her little son Harold lived in the suburbs of the village of Croton. The town was a place of considerable commercial importance. Being the center of a large cotton growing district, it was the buying and shipping point for much of that staple. The face of the boy lighted up with joy as he looked upon the entrancing scene about him.

"Why should man not delight more in creation, than in cruelty?" said the boy as he looked into his mother's face, who was talking to him of the stormy days ten years before when the soldiers came. She told him of the time when the villages and forests were full of the armed hosts; when the village and the country were laid waste by contending foes. Said the boy: "Mother, my teacher says the world is a battlefield and a graveyard!"

Harold was "born just three months before James Scott, his father, enlisted as a soldier in the Fourteenth Regiment U. S. V. I. Sergeant Scott was wounded at Port Hudson, and thereby rendered useless for further service. After he had recovered sufficiently he was discharged; and after his wife interceded for him with the whites he was allowed to return to his home, to die with his family. Although Mr. Scott never recovered, he lived to be pensioned for his wounds, and with that money managed to purchase the ground and build the neat little cottage, from which the widow and son came out. One year after his death the widow and son were pensioned, and with the sixteen dollars per month thus arising and what they could earn, they were able to live better than most of the freedmen about them; and Harold was enabled to attend the village school during the entire session. That was unusual for colored children in and around Croton, for they had to nurse the baby, while the mother and older children worked in families or the fields.

Professor Norris, the teacher, often found his school reduced from one hundred to ten pupils in a single day. Especially was this true in the picking time. The school term was usually five months, but school was often suspended till the children got time to attend. And that was usually in dead of Winter, when roads were muddy, often impassable, and the children poorly clad.

Lucius Storms was another boy five years older than Harold Scott, who, like Harold; was able to attend school during the entire session. The father of Lucius was a rich planter and banker by the name of Leonidas L. Storms. Leonora Storms, the mother of Lucius, had been purchased by Mr. Storms at a slave sale in New Orleans, while he was on a business trip to the city. Mr. Storms was looking around the city, when he happened to come to the slave market. He saw a likely girl sitting on a box crying. When he came near her she looked up into his face, and, as he drew nearer, she said: "Please, master, buy me! You look like a kind-hearted man. Please, master, for pity's sake, buy me! God pity me if that big rough looking man over there buys me! They say that his name is Legree, and that his place on the Red River is a hell on earth!"

Mr. Storms knew that if she was put upon the block, a girl of her comely face and figure would bring a fabulous price. He asked the girl if her owner was around. She pointed him out—a Jew, who had taken the girl as a pound of flesh, for a loan made to a fast son of a sugar-grower.

■ Mr. Storms approached the Jew, and began a dicker for the girl, and at last convinced the Jew that if he put the girl up, he might not get the price he (Storms) offered for her. So that at last his cupidity induced him to accept the price offered, and to sign the bill of sale. Leonora's face lighted up with joy when Mr. Storms and the Jew approached. The Jew came and told Leonora that Mr. Storms was her new -master. Mr. Storms bade the girl follow him, and he brought her home, and his wife made her the house-girl.

Harry, the coachman, was like Leonora, of mixed blood, and they became attached to each other. They finally decided to become man and wife, after slave custom. So, one night Harry went to his master's study, and knocked timidly.

The master called out, , "Who's there?"

"Harry, mastah," answered he.

"Well, open the door," said the master.

Harry opened the door and stood with hat in hand.

"Well, boy, what is it?"

"Mastah, I wants to ax you a serious question." "Well, what is it?"

"I wants Nora for my wife. I loves her and she loves me, and we wants to live togeder as man and wife."

"Now, look here, my 'nigger,' don't you ever mention that girl to me again! Nora is the house-girl, and what sort of a house-girl will she soon be if she takes you for a husband. Why should you, 'nigger,' wish to have a wife and form family ties any way? You are here this year and who knows where you will be next? You are numbered with our cattle and mules; then why not live as the beasts of the field ?"

Poor Harry soon found himself in the slave traders' gang, on his way to the southward, and was never heard of again.

Leonora grieved much for her lost Harry. She would go out at night under the moonlit heavens and try to look the way she thought Harry might be, and falling on her knees, under the shadows of the trees, she would exclaim: "My poor lost Harry! My love! The cruel hand of the slave driver has taken you away, and I shall never see my darling any more! O God! would that I had gone with Legree to the earthly hell! I would have been dead long ere this, and all my trials and sufferings would be over!" She grew more despondent as the days rolled slowly by. One evening she Was out, thus bemoaning her fate and Harry's, when her master came upon her. He did not abuse and find fault with her, but spoke kindly to her. As time rolled on her grief grew less poignant, as sorrows usually do. On one occasion he asked if she would continue thus if Harry were dead. He talked to her as though she were his child instead of his slave. He continued to speak kindly to Leonora, and to praise her work. He often spoke to her of her good looks and said she was far too likely a girl to have a Negro man. On several occasions he brought her nice little presents, and gave them to her secretly. Once while the mistress was away, he came into the pantry and put his hand on her shoulder, and as she turned to see who it was, he grabbed her and kissed her.

Persuasion and force were plied upon her constantly, and having grown indifferent to her fate she at last yielded to her master's embraces. That was then and is now the fate of many Negro house-girls in the South. They were considered the legitimate prey of either the fathers or sons in the families where they served.

Lucius was the offspring of the relation between master and slave. But strange to say, a Southern white man who cohabitated with a Negro woman lost no caste in the best society.

Although a passionate man, unlike most white fathers of Negro children, Mr. Storms cared for his offspring and its mother. He was not only educating the boy, but after they were free, he gave Leonora and the child a home in Croton.

But Leanora's old grief for Harry returned when she was alone and she soon dropped and died. Then Mr. Storms took Lucius to his own home, sent him to school, and gave him light work to do when he was not in school: He treated him as well or better than a natural child is usually treated by the putative father.

As they walked leisurely along the moonlit forest path, enjoying the beauties and fragrance of the dreamy night, Harold and his mother were conversing about his father's service in the cause of freedom and his untimely death. Mrs. Scott was explaining the difference between the life of the slave and the freedman. Harry said: "Mother, you have told me that my father was a soldier, and that he was induced to enlist in the cause of freedom and salvation of the Union because he was promised by the government all the rights of a freeman and an American citizen. He fought, bled and died in defence of this nation. Yet he was not treated as well as those I see around here, who fought to destroy this government, and who even now have no love for it, and would be only too glad to see it overthrown.

"I was reading only to-day in my history of those patriots who rushed from their fields and shops to Lexington and Bunker Hill to defend this country from a foreign foe, and how their names are honored in song and story, and how monuments were erected to commemorate their heroic deeds. My father fell at Port Hudson, defending this country from the internal foe, yet I see nothing in my history of his heroic deeds, or of the Fifty-fourth Massachusetts and the daring deeds of Sergeant Carney and others. I see nothing in the history of Attucks, Salem, and the host of black heroes who fought for this country, from the Revolution on down to the War of the Rebellion, in which my father received his death wound and sacrificed his life. I saw in one of my books where it said that all nations delight to do honor to those brave men who volunteer to lay down their lives for their country. Still, I see old soldiers about here kicked and cuffed around just as the other Negroes are.

"Is it true that through these two centuries the Negro has fought for a liberty which he himself has never known, that to-day he is a political outcast and a nondescript in the body politic ?

"Why, I was over at Mr. Brown's house the other night, and he told his wife to hurry and give him his supper; that he had to lie out that night as he had heard that the Kuklux were to ride, and that they seemed to have a spite against the colored men who had been in the army, although he had done no man an injury.

"Why was Uncle Ben Jones whipped so badly by those men who ride at night, with the long faces on, and who look so scary? Why, he was laid up in bed for over a month and nearly died from it. They say it was because he refused to work for old Jim Barnes for forty cents a day and feed himself. The men look so frightful with those long gowns and faces on that I don't wonder that the poor colored people are afraid of them. They nearly scared me to death that night they came to our house hunting Will Scott. The people say that they called for water at Uncle Tom Jones's, and just poured it down by the bucket full at a time. Has the United States Government no power to protect its citizens from such cruel treatment?"

"My child," said the mother, "you are thinking and talking about things beyond your years. You will learn, my son, when you have lived as long as I have, that the white man is great in promises and inducements. He will promise you the world, and actually give it to you in order to get to beat you out of it when opportunity offers. How like a god in wisdom, but how like a demon in execution! He has robbed my forefathers, on one side, out of this country, and compelled my fathers and mothers, on the other side, to till it for two centuries, and both have made it fertile with their blood and tears. My child, the story of the American Indian's fate and the Negro's unrequited toil, is the tale of the white man's treachery and tyranny.

"You will learn much from books and experience as you grow older, and will see the clutches of the white man tighten more and more around the black man's throat, 'as fate moves them nearer to the crisis. I weep bitter tears, my darling, when I think of what your father endured, what I have passed through and what must be experienced by you in the years to come. My race is nearly run; yours has just begun. You think we are living in troublous times; but the black stormy night of our desolation has not set in about us yet.

"Yes, it is said that they were after Will Scott, because he was talking to the Negroes, and telling them that they ought to organize and demand better wages; that they can't live honestly on the pay they get for their labor; that before the war, if a man hired an able bodied slave, he had to pay the master one hundred and fifty dollars per year—a little over twelve dollars per month, —furnish his clothes, a physician and medicine when he was sick, and lose all bad and sick days; but now they will not pay an able-bodied man more than eight or ten dollars per month, and he must lose all bad and sick days, pay for his medicine and physician, if he has any, and feed his family and himself out of that; that a man who attempts such a thing, must of necessity beg or steal! He said that the state authorities were in league with the landlords, that they, by means of these starvation wages, were filling the jails and penitentiaries so that the farmers can come and lease the convicts from the state, and thus get cheap labor. Yes, that is the offense for which they were hunting your cousin Will with bloodhounds to whip him to death. They said, 'He is the kind of 'nigger' that we have got to get rid of. He will ruin the other 'niggers' and soon have them believing that they are folks.' I thank God that they have not found him ! I hope he will escape to the North, where he can breathe free air, and not be afraid of the pestilence that wasteth at noonday. If they should catch him, his young and manly body will furnish food for the worms!

"Yes, the Kuklux are sworn to keep the 'nigger' in his place, which means, poor, ignorant and degraded, and on a level with the brutes. And do you know that many of these people who do these fiendish things to the Negroes belong to the church, pretend to worship God and feign a sort of Christianity? Yes, they pretend to follow Him who was ever the friend of the lowly despised! Why, the Southern whites say they are doing wonders toward the education of the Negro children. But in the country districts the schooling of Negro children is little better than no schooling at all. The class of teachers they give them and the two or three months term make it a waste of time and money. And, again, they say they tax themselves so much to educate the Negro children, when, in fact, every dollar paid out for the Negro schools is blood money, collected off the Negroes by imposts, starvation wages, high rents and overcharges for inferior goods. While it comes indirectly, and through the hands of the whites, it nevertheless comes from the Negro's unpaid labor. At first they would not allow the colored people to have schools. They broke up the schools!, drove the teachers away or killed them, and burned the schoolhouses. I happened to be at Bon Aqua when they broke up the school there; it was a dastardly, fiendish deed. Yes, you will learn more about that cowardly act hereafter. You say you have read Uncle Tom's Cabin. Well, the pictures therein are not overdrawn, as some would have you believe. I know there are those who are now ashamed of its bloody record, and who try to show that it is not a picture of slavery, and that no such character as Legree ever existed; but I have seen their acts of cruelty, and know men who were even worse than Legree is painted. No, they may deny its truth, and rule it out of libraries at the North, but its truth is written in characters of blood, in cotton fields, rice swamps and cane-brakes all over this Southland! There are too many scarred bodies of living slaves to bear testimony to its truthfulness. I pray God that you, my son, may never see what I have seen or feel what I have felt.

"You ask why the raiders whipped poor Uncle Ben so—those Kuklux? Why, he had been working for Tom Tucker for fifty cents a day and Mr. Storms offered him better pay; so he quit Tucker and went to work for Mr. Storms. That same week the "Klan" came after him and pretended that he had stolen Jones's plow, but without a trial or even putting him in prison they whipped him nearly to death. You could not make any one in this community, white or black, believe that Uncle Ben ever stole anything. But there he lies, the victim of the white man's greed and hate."

"Mr. Storms has his faults, but he and some others around here don't hate the Negro simply because be is a Negro. They would like to see him have a man's chance.

"Well, here we are, nearly to the church. Now I wish you to stay awake, like a little man, and listen to what is said by the preacher."

Although one of the "Befo de wah preachers," and uneducated, Elder Brutus E. Buchanan was intelligent, well posted, and had good old common-sense about many things. Above all, he loved his race and wished to help them.

Ebenezer Baptist Church, near Croton, was known far and wide, and people came for miles around to hear Mr. Buchanan preach. They came to the big basket meetings especially, in great crowds. At these times there was much soul-stirring preaching, shouting, and more good things when the baskets were brought out and the cloths spread beneath the shady trees. The white people often came to see the black folks shout and enjoy themselves. For the white man likes to see the Negro religious, as he thinks the more religion the Negro has, the easier he can be controlled. Many were the young and old, who could say that they had been turned from the broad road of destruction to the narrow path of life by this "Elijah."

The log church had a puncheon floor and slab seats without backs, with pegs driven for legs. At one end of the building was the door and at the other the pulpit. There were two windows in each side, with board shutters. The cracks were open now, but in winter they daubed these with mud, to make the house more comfortable. There was a stick and mud chimney, with a great fireplace large enough to hold a wagon load of wood.

When Mrs. Scott and son arrived at the church the four or five dim oil lamps were casting their flaring, flickering gleams over a dark and dingy scene. You could scarcely see the persons in the room. Many people had already arrived and were sitting around in groups talking in low, subdued tones. The young girls were talking in more lively voices, or sitting and gazing about the room to see or to be seen. The boys were casting love glances from their side of the house over to where the girls were doing all they could to attract attention. Contrary to custom for boys, Harold sat beside his mother, for they were inseparable companions. To occupy the time while the congregation was gathering, some of the "amen" brethren were leading a few songs and prayers for strength and guidance through dangers, seen and unseen!

The hour had reached about nine o'clock, when the minister came into the pulpit. He took the book and gave out the hymn: "Dark was the night." At the close of the singing Deacon Blair was called upon, and offered a fervent prayer for help in time of trouble, and deliverance from the enemy.

Several of the late comers whispered to those near them that they had noticed an unusual number of white men among the trees near the church and that it boded evil. This uneasiness spread through the congregation and caused even the sleepy heads to keep wide awake. So the pastor had their eyes, while the men in the bushes had their ears. Especially was this true as the sermon grew warmer and louder.

But there was less shouting than was customary at the night meetings. Two things made this so. The wrought up state of mind of the people on account of the night riders, and the kind of sermon delivered, which was more in the nature of a lecture. Many would have called it a dry sermon, and gone to sleep on it, had it not been for the excitement aroused by the daring utterances of the preacher, and the whispered information that there was trouble, and lots of it, on the outside. Some of the old mothers in the church declared: "De debble is suah let loose fer a season, and he is about to take the elect." But like true Christians, they prayed the more earnestly.

He strove among God's suffering poor One gleam of brotherhood, to send; The dungeon op'ed its hungry door To give the world one martyr more, Then shut—and there behold the end!

—Lowell.

ELDER BUCHANAN appeared to be between fifty-five and sixty years of age. He was tall, well built and of commanding presence. Although very dark he had good features and a pleasing countenance. As the minister rose in the pulpit all noise in the church ceased and the cricket singing on the hearth could be heard all over the house. From the drawn mouth, compressed lips, and sober look on his face, all seemed to realize that the pastor had an important message to deliver.

He gave out the hymn: "Am I a soldier of the cross," etc., and it was sung by the congregation with great feeling. Brother Rickman offered a soul-stirring prayer for light in the hour of darkness and desolation, saying; "Laud, ef we is soldiers, we mus' fight; but ef we is sheep fer de slaughteh, make us 'umble, an' as inercent as lambs."

There were numerous "Amens," and cries of "Laud, hep! Laud hep!"

After singing, "Alas! and did my Savior bleed," the pastor rose and began his sermon by saying: "My sistahs and bruthren, my tex' will be foun' in Numbers, 12th chaptah 1:10 vuses, 2 Chronicles, 6th chaptah 1st vus, an' 2 Kings, 5th chaptah an 1st vus.

"De fus part uv my tex' speaks uv de great sin cermitted by Aaron an' Miriam, by speaking agin Mosus fer marryin' a black 'omen. Dat wuz race ur culor prejisty. De anger uv de Laud wus so kindled agin dem dat He smoted Miriam wid de lepusy. Dat wus a type uv sin whut can't be furgivin.

"De secon' part 'fers ter de great man Naaman, who wus a lepeh becase uv his mean prejisty.

"De third part tells how de Laud dwells in clouds an' thick dahkness, an' in anothyer scriptur' He said: 'My pawillion roun an' about me, shall be clouds an' thick dahkness.

"So you see, my friens, we cannot see ur know de plans uv de Laud who duz all things fer de bes'. Ouah fathers an' mothers wah back yonder in Afica, in dahr wile, happy freedom, but dese lepurs led on by dahr greed, stole um an' brung um ter dis country, an' huh we is, bein' driv frum day ter day, through dis dahk wildiniss uv sin an' Saten.

"Some say dat we is betteh off huh whah we is; God pity us when de wuss cums! Do you call hit betteh ter be compelled ter wuk frum mont' ter mont' fer little ur no pay, Kukluxed by night an' mobbed an' lynched by day? Dah we wus in ouah own lan' uv sunshine an' flowers, free as de birds an' wile anumals. Any way, we did not cum huh seekin' dese good things yuthers can see an' feel but we can't. Well, Gaud knows bes', fer He wuks in clouds an' thick dahkness! He wuks in de dahk, an' so do de Kuklux. In de dahkness uv dis wery night I feels dat dey is lay in' a demon plan ter punish sum poah black man fer nothin' but ter satisfy dahr thust fer nigga blood. An' why all dis? Hit is becase dey is so full uv de lepusy uv sin, an' Saten. Hit is dat lepusy dat driv Miriam out frum 'er people, an' kep' Naaman frum goin' ter one uv de despised ter be heald uv his filthy disease."

"Amen, amen! Laud hep us," was heard among the congregation.

"Chrise de Son uv de livin' -Gaud, de white man's Gaud, have said dat He is no respectah uv pusons, fer he have made uv one blud all nations uv men ter dwell on all de face uv de yurth. Why, how is hit dat dis mighty white man is so superiur ter de yuther branches uv de human famly, when dey is all uv one blud? Why duz dey hate us so much more now dan dey did in de days uv slavery? As I looks over dis 'semly I sees many faces dat bear testimony uv de embraces an' earresess uv black wimmen by white men. 'Deed dey is about all de faces I can see, as de lites is so dim. Dahr is over two million uv sich witnesses all over dis lan.' Nigga 'oman mighty sweet ter de white man after dark. De wile beastis uv de fores' love dahr young uns, an' will fight fer dem. Is de white man lowah an' wuser dan de yuther wile beastis ?"

"Yes, yes," came from many voices.

"Why, my Gaud, looki dah at ole man Shikesaker; he raised a famly uv five gals, by Mahtha, his slave 'oman, an' when de gals growd up he had chillun by all uv um except Lotta, de youngis one; an' he beat, dogged an' bused her so much, ter make 'er submit to his lust, dat at las', she jumped outen de windah up stahs, wha he had 'er locked in, an' kilt 'erself! The old repehbate actually sold his own chilun an' his gran' chillun by his daghters ter de slave traders. An dahr is thousands uv 'Shikestakers' all over dis country, roun' about.

"Why, dey say we is immohal. Yes, an' I wun-ders dat we has any mohals at all, fer de black cuss uv slavery tried ter make a beast uv evehy black man an' oman. An' ouah treatment now is little bettah, an' in many ways hit is wuser dan hit wus in 'Paul's time.' Yes, dah wus ole Legree, who not only driv, beat an' shot his slaves ter death unhindered, but he made de drivers cuh-lect de wimmen an' men toguther on Sundays an' put dem inter a huge log pen (naked), fer breeding puposes, like so many beastis, an' ef any 'fused ter do his biddin', dey wus whupped neahly ter death."

"O Laud, my Gaud, hep us Laud," was the cry, which came from the "amen corners," with many groans from those who had seen and felt those things.

"Yes, my sistahs an' bruthren, dey has done all in dahr power ter make us brutes, an' now dey 'buse us an' call us low an' immohal when we has not only been brutalized by dem fer centuries, but we has been teached by dem all kinds uv immohality an' wrong doin's. Dah is some good upright white people aroun' here, but dey is too few. Dey wants ter see us prospur an' git propity, becume 'telligent an' upright Christians, but dey is in de minohity. Dey wants us let alone, but is ferd ter say ur do any thing ter hep us."

"Laud, hep us," was the response.

"De jails an' penitentiaries is full, an' hit are ter dahr intrus' ter keep 'em so, fer dey gins you only barely unuf ter keep body an' soul toguthr 'twell dey gits you in prison; den de gates uv hell opens, an' de doah uv mucy closes! Each prison doah oughtah haf wrote ovah hit: 'He who entehs heah leaves hope behime.' Bruthren an' sistahs, you knows dat de term uv de nigga prisoner usually ends in death; dat dey is stahved, beat an' shot ter death; dat de lepuous hate uv de Southern white man condemns a nigga befo' he is heahd; dat whensomever a nigga is brought befo' de coat he are zumed ter be gilty, an' dat he can only scape by proof uv his inercence beyond any doubt. De Laud have said he would hide his zines in de blackness uv dahkness an' dey is shoah hid frum us. But he have sed dat dey dat trus' in Him he will deliveh."

Cries of "O Laud, deliveh us," were heard all over the church.

"So, my friens, we mus' trus' on an' lif up our voices an' cry out in de night uv ouah troubles."

Just then a voice was heard from the outside, saying: "Yes, some 'niggers' will lift up their voices very loud to-night."

The old people groaned and the younger ones looked frightened and wild-eyed. But the preacher did not hear the voice of warning, and so continued.

"I tell you, my friens, we is shoah in de blackness uv de dahkness uv our night wid no rif in de clouds. An' dah is rivers uv trubles befo' us. But dey dat trus' in de Laud shall showly be de-livehed."

"Amen" and "Thank Gaud" came up from the audience.

"When Isrul was turned loose dey borid gold, silver an' all things whut dey needed frum dahr mastahs; but we wus turned out, widout shelter ur a moufful uv food, an' among dose who hate us, becase we has been dahr slaves. Dey hates us becase dey wus forced ter turn us loose. Not becase we is black, fer dah is foah black ur dahk people in de wold ter one white puson. An' in dis state, an' in all dis country roun' about dah is three ur foah niggas ter one white puson. Still, dey proud Naaman-like, duz not want us ter have any say so 'bout our own affahs, ter say whut we oughtah do, an' whut not. O how dey does git up on de Foath uv July, an' talk 'bout libity, jes-tice, an' equality, but dey say, dey means dah-selves, an' not us niggas. Dey say dah is no jestice nur libity fer us. All we is ter git is de judgment, an' we has shoah had dat hot an' heavy.

"Agin, my friens, we wus turned outen de slave pen, widout food, clothes, ur anything, an' bein' anxious to earn a livin' fer ouah famlies, we went ter work fer whut we could git. But de rail pens an' holes we haf tah live in tell de story uv how we has been paid an' 'prived uv de fruits uv our labor. Befo' de wah we made our mastahs rich by our toil, but now we can't feed ouhselves an' families on whut we earn. Bruther Brown, can you feed yoah famly uv ten often fifty cents ah day fer your wuk, specially, when one-third uv de days is bad days? No, hit is starve an' steal, an' go ter de chain-gang an' ter death.

"We wus told by de good friens whut cum down frum de Norf ter hep us, incouhage an' instruct us in propah ways uv livin' an' actin', dat we wus freed by Mr. Lincum's proclumation, an' dat de Congress uv dese United States made us citerzens, an' clothed us wid manhood rites, an' dat we oughtah try ter dischahge dese high priveleges in a propah manneh. But no sooneh dan we goes out ter listen ter de speakin' ur ter tend de 'lection, an' try ter vote fer whut we thinks is good fer us poah black folks, de Kuklux an' night ridahs bugins ter ride, ter whup, ter kill an' run ouah people off, so dat now we is in daily dread fer ouah lives. You knows dat many uv you had to move inter kind white folks' yahds ter be pertected frum de night ridahs. An' some uv you is wukin now fer people fer nothin' ter git dahr pertecshun.

Cries of "Yes, my Gaud!" came from the listeners.

"Whut wus de Kuklux Klan an' Night Ridahs eriginated fer? It wus ter keep de Nigga ignunt, poah an' degraded; ter crush outen dem all 'spira-tion an' desire ter be men; ter 'spire in dem a deadly fear uv de white man, so dat de white man can beat, rob an' cheat, rape, kill, burn an' lynch dem, widout fear uv 'zistance frum de niggas. Dey wush ter so cowah us, dat we will be as de sheeps uv de pastur. My friens, de aim uv de Southern white man is ter keep de black man cowed, so dat he can use him as he wants ter, an' 'buse him as he likes."

"Tell hit! tell hit!" came from many parts of the house.

"But I wants ter say here, 'specially, ter yoh young thoughtless fellers, dat you can nevah be truly brave or manly twell you learns ter 'spect yohselves, an' ter 'spect an' defend yoah wimmen. Our wimmen has a hahd road ter travel, I tell yoh. Dey is de prey uv de white man an' many uv our own men. We do not guard an' 'spect de virtue uv our wimmen as we should. Dese things we has got ter learn ter practice an' teach ter ouah chillun. We is poah, an' ouah wimmen an' gals is compelled ter wurk wha dey is constantly beset by bad white men, who look 'pon dem as dahr lawful prey. No race can be great ur gran', whut does not honah its wimmen an' is not willin' ter die fer dahr pertecshun. Why, ouah gals can't go inter a stoah ur any place wha dey comes in contac' wid white men but dey is insulted, mistreated ur is 'ticed ter sin an' degradation.

"An' sum uv ouah own men: ef dey does not set traps ter ketch ouah gals fer white men, dey do all dey can ter lead em ustray. Anothyur thing, my friens, twell we learns ter treat ouah good wimmen wid dat 'spect dat is due ter 'onerable wimmen, we can't 'spect others ter 'spect dem, ur ter regahd us as a race uv true men. Why, sence we has been compelled to ride in de cattle cahs, I has seen nigga men come in, set down an' begin ter smoke an ole stinkin' pipe ur a wuser segar, right in de face uv de wimmen. Right heah in dis church, when we has 'tainments, I sees yoh come in, stan' roun' wid yoah hats on, an' a penny segar in yoh mouf, in de presence uv de ladies. What a shame on yoh! My young frien's, yoh mus' men' yoah ways, fer yoah is no angels shuah. Yes, we has ouah faults, an' lots uv 'em. An' fer dat reason we don't claim ter be bettah dan de white folks, nur does we claim ter be wuser.

"But I tell yoh agin, my friens, dat de sin uv hate an' 'pression an mistreatment uv ouah felleh-men is de lepusy uv damnation. Still we orter love ouah enemies, an' do good ter dem whut 'spitefully uses us. When we is misused and 'bused, de good Laud may mean hit all fer good ter us, fer we is shuah in de dahkness uv sin an' Saten. But de Laud is ouah lite an' ouah salvation. In our dahk an' stormy night, may we heah His gentle voice coming outen de dahkness uv ouah desolation, saying, 'Feah not, my little uns, fer I has been wid you an' has brung you ovah dis Jurdin, an' I is gwinter lead yoh on ter de promis' lan'. Lo, I is wid you, an' ef I is fer yoh who con be agin yoh? Bruthren an' sistahs, let us pray."

But at that moment, long pale faces appeared simultaneously at the windows and the door, and a hollow voice was heard to say: "As we have had such an excellent sermon to-night, and have so much to think about, we will have the prayer out in the grove, where it is cooler and there is more room for capering; though, I fear it will be a little warm even out there before we get through." Just then four or five of the riders came in at the door, and stalked around to the pulpit. At the same time the audience rose frantically and made for the door, windows, and the chimney. In the scramble the lamps were thrown down and went out; but not before the preacher and Deacon Brown had been seized by the pale faces. The victims uttered not a word of protest, as they were pushed through and over the crowd, which was kept back somewhat by clubs wielded freely by the raiders stationed at the doors and windows.

Mrs. Scott and Harold waited in a corner till the crowd was out, then came quietly out and followed the raiders at a distance. They stopped in the bushes near where the mob had carried the pastor.

The Scotts and Lucius Storms, alone of all that congregation, stayed to learn the fate of the preacher and Deacon Brown. One part of the pale faces took Deacon Brown in charge and carried him down the hill into a flat. Soon his piteous cries and groans were heard coming up from the depths of the forest in the valley of humiliation.

Another crowd took Elder Buchanan in charge and went a little way aside from the path that led through the forest. It was not long before loud talking was heard, which seemed to be a dispute. The majority of the crowd was in favor of hanging the old preacher. Some of them contended that he was a dangerous "nigger"; that he would ruin the other "niggers" in the community, and that "he had got them Yankee notions in his "nigger' head." The others were for giving him a sound thrashing and running him out of the country; but the majority would have its way. So they came forward and put a rope around the preacher's neck. Then the mob asked him if he wanted to pray. He said, "Yes, sah."

"Well, pray then, and be quick about it; for we have fooled away too much time with a worthless old 'nigger' like you. Come! hurry up and make it d—d short!"

The old man fell on his knees and said: "O Laud, yoh has always heahd me, heah me now, my Fathah. O Laud, yoh has promised to deliveh yoah people. Laud, I is yoah chile; deliveh me frum dese vile men dese chillun uv de debble. O Laud, yoh knows dey is full uv de lepusy uv sin, an' is on de road to hell. O Laud, dey is bline, an' know not whut dey is doin'. O—"

Just then two or three of the most brutal of the crowd, grabbed the rope which was already over a limb of a tree, jerked the victim to his feet, and began to hoist him. As the rope tightened the old preacher cried out, with a gurgle in his throat: "O Laud, my Gaud, is dar no help fer de wider's son?"

Immediately a man sprang from the outskirts of the crowd, with a large knife in his hand, and running up to the hanging man, cut the rope and the old prisoner fell to the ground unconscious and half dead. With the same knife he waved the crowd back from the prostrate form. He wore no mask and was easily recognized as Mr. Storms. At this two or three came up and said with a growl: ''By G—d, that d—n nigger shall die."

Mr. Storms then spoke up and said: "Why, gentlemen, what has he done to merit death? I heard all that he said; if he uttered any thing that is not true, prove it to me and I will join you in saying that he ought to be disposed of. Gentlemen, you all know me, and know that I will do what I say. Now, the first one of, you that attempts to hang this man shall die. If you hang this old 'nigger' who has done nothing worse than speak the truth a little too plainly, you will do so after my dead body lies there where he now lies. But on the other hand, if you will turn him over to me, I promise you to rid this community of his presence for good." The leaders withdrew, held a whispered consultation, then returned to Mr. Storms and said: "See here, Mr. Storms, we all respect you and look up to you as one of the most substantial men in our community, and on that account we have decided to turn the old 'nigger' over to you to dispose of; but if he is ever seen in these parts again, we will see the job finished next time before we leave."

"I will answer for it that he does not trouble you again." said the rescuer.

Hr. Storms took the preacher to his home, called his coachman, had him hitch up a carriage and took the preacher to the railroad station, ten miles away. After promising to see that his family should get to him, Mr. Storms then put the preacher on the three o'clock train, gave him twenty-five dollars and bade him farewell, saying: "This is the length of my 'cable tow.' "

Deacon Brown finally got over his lashing. But he was so disabled, by reason of his wounds and crippled condition that he was unable to earn a support. He was finally pensioned by the United States Government.

Lucius was near his father when he rescued the old preacher, and the iron entered his soul. He remained with his father, though, till the preacher was bidden farewell on board the train which was to carry him to life and liberty. Then said Lucius to his father: "Sir, you are a noble man, not alone because you have done a heroic deed in saving the old preacher, but because you saved the old Negro from a gang of cowardly ruffians. They always take to their heels as soon as a truly brave man appears, and says 'Halt!' It was in putting down your own race feeling and siding with that poor old Negro, one of the trampled-down and despised, that showed your greatness. Yes, your act places you among the true chivalry of earth. You not only discharged a solemn obligation, a thing which so many disregard, but you did the act of a true Christian. I shall treasure in my heart the memory of this act of yours among life's grandest achievements."

Mrs. Scott and Harold, concealed near by, where the sacrifice to Southern chivalry and valor was about to be offered up, observed all that was said and done. The widow was on her knees praying for the deliverance of her old pastor. Being a devout Christian, she had great faith in prayer and the power of the Lord. Harold was close beside her with his hand in hers, weeping sympathetic tears.

After the terrible ordeal was over they went quietly and solemnly home, and when in they closed the door. The mother and son kneeled in prayer. She thanked the Lord because he had seemingly saved the pastor, and also that her own dear husband was not there in those times of persecution and slaughter. When she was through with the prayer, Harold said: "Mother, is it not well that father is not living in these times? He would be right in the midst of this turmoil and trouble. There are no means of defense now like there were at the time he came from the war. He brought his gun home with him. Colored men are not allowed to have guns now. At that time the Federal soldiers were a sort of protection. After the soldiers had been withdrawn the militia was organized for the enforcement of the law and our protection, but to see colored men with guns and uniforms on so fired the Southern heart and brain, that they rose up in mass, dispersed them and took their guns for themselves. Since then the colored people have been as sheep for the slaughter; as lambs among wolves."

Neither to change, nor falter, nor repent; This life thy glory, Titan! is to be Good, great and joyous, beautiful and free: This is alone Life, Joy, Empire and Victory.

—Shelley.

OLD army wagons standing here and there on open lots, old worn-out army mules grazing on the commons, the presence of a small body of Federal soldiers at the old fort on the hill, ex-rebel soldiers, with their old time worn and dirty uniforms on, and the dilapidated appearance of the town and its inhabitants, all gave evidence of the recent struggle between the North and South, 'and the more recent peace.

This little town, in spite of the scourge of war, still gave evidence of its ante bellum beauty. Its wide streets shaded with sugar maples, broad lawns surrounding what were once lovely mansions and palatial homes, and the pure, gushing, limpid springs, still called the mind back to the days before the dogs of war were turned loose upon the monster slavery.

On a hill overlooking a beautiful vale, through which ran a rippling, singing little stream, the outlet of a great boiling, bubbling spring which gushed from the foot of the hill, was born a boy ten years before the tide of battle swept over the land deluging it with the blood of sacrifice for the sin of oppressive servitude.

Julian Jarnigan was the sixth one of nine children, seven girls and two boys. His father, Norval Jarnigan, was the great grandson of an African king. His mother was the daughter of a Frenchman, De Grands, and one of his most comely, black damsels. When seven years of age, Julian sat with his father on the front porch of the mansion house, and saw him count out to his master, five hundred dollars in gold, the balance of the purchase price of his freedom.

The father of Julian, being a carpenter, had earned this money by hiring his time and doing extra work nights. Norval was also a Methodist minister and spent much of his time in going to and fro, preaching and doing religious work among the people on Sundays and nights. He was such an earnest, Christian worker that he built a little church by working on it nights. But alas! when it was finished, some bad white men with black souls burned it, and that, too, on the Sunday night after the dedication service was held.

Mr. Jarnigan, the master of Norval, was a village merchant, and though a kind-hearted man, was close-fisted. But his wife was a godly wornan and a philanthropist. Through her influence several of their slaves were set free during her lifetime. She saw to it that 'all her grown slaves attended church on Sundays, and that the younger ones were sent to the Sunday-school carried on by a free man by the name of Abbott. The Sunday-school was conducted much as our country schools are to-day. There were two sessions each Sunday, one in the forenoon, and another in the afternoon. The blue-back speller, reader and Bible, along with the catechisms, were used.

It was in this school that Julian caught his first inspiration to an aspiration for the higher things of life. Mr. Abbott was a bright example of the free Negroes' devotion to the cause of uplifting their brethren in bonds.

The persecution of the Tree Negroes in the South became so bitter that the Rev. Jarnigan, to escape these persecutions, resolved to go to his fatherland, Africa, to seek true freedom and to do missionary work. It was his purpose to found a home and return in two years for his family, but within eighteen months he succumbed to the African fever, while holding protracted meetings among the natives.

In a few years freedom came to the widow and her children and found them without any means of support, except a large supply of fortitude and determination. The widow, being strong in courage and full of faith, began the struggle for subsistence.

Leaning on the promises of Him who heareth the young ravens when they cry, trusting in the promises of Him who heareth the widow's sigh, she remained at the old home on the hill. The widow and the children worked and saved, looking forward to the purchase of a home, something the widow had dreamed and hoped for through the long weary years of slavery. Yes, she had pictured in her imagination a nice cosy little home in which she could gather her children, who were somewhat scattered. After several years of struggle, privation and suffering, they realized their fond hopes in a beautiful two-story, eight-room residence. As the children gathered into that home from their quest of the fruits of industry the fond mother's heart filled to overflowing with joy.

The soldiers were still at the fort when the Rev. H. W. Delaney came to Bon Aqua from the North, having been sent by General O. O. Howard to teach and preach for the freedmen at that place. Mr. Delaney went around for a few days and saw a great many of the heads of families, and everywhere he found parents and children most anxious for the opportunity to learn and to hear the word of God explained.

On the following Sabbath, Mr. Delaney met the freedmen in an old, dilapidated, deserted church, which had in it neither door nor windows—only the openings where these had been. When the hour arrived for the services to begin the old house was packed with people. First he sang several songs, then he read the Scriptures and prayed, after which he spoke to them on the responsibilities of life and the hope of future reward. That through, he called on several of the heads of families to say a word as to the needs of the people. At the close of the service Mr. Delaney announced that he would open school in that house next morning at eight o'clock, under the auspices of the Freedman's Bureau, and that all who wished were welcome to come. All went away with joy in their hearts, for they felt that light had come to illuminate their dark pathway; that the cloud which had enveloped them for over two hundred years was about to lift. Many of them went home, got on their knees, and thanked God for the "Light that lighteth every man that cometh into the world."

On Monday morning by seven o'clock they began to assemble, children and gray-haired mothers, the halt and lame—they all came. The old mothers said: "Thank Gaud, we has found a way to learn to read de word uv de Laud!" They were there seeking the light, and anxious for the way that is right. Julian Jarnigan was there, and in the class he often found himself between two gray-haired mothers.

Four days of this great school passed off smoothly, but on the fifth, suddenly and without warning, a great noise and commotion was heard in the street in front of the school. Soon a crowd of the most ruffianly and drunken white men in the town rushed into the old building: and with loud voices declared, with oaths and curses, that the "nigger" school must stop. They declared that "niggers" had no business with schools and books and that any white man who would try to teach "niggers" to read was only fit for tar and feathers or to weight the loose end of a rope.

The soldiers at the fort were sent for, but before they reached the school it had been dispersed. That was the end of that school. The Rev. Delaney left, saying: "Why do the heathen rage and evil people imagine a vain thing?" The school was closed, but in the four days it existed Julian caught the inspiration which caused him to aspire to the ideals set up in his mind by the good man, Rev. Delaney. So he studied hard; when at work in the fields he carried his books with him. At noon, while the other hands slept, he was studying; and at night he studied by the light of a pine knot till a late hour.

About a year after the breaking up of Mr. Delaney's school the Freedman's Bureau sent another teacher, who began in a log cabin at the east end of the town, and Julian was in attendance. He was now able to enter the fourth grade class, while in the first school he had been in the first grade. He continued in this school, working at night and going to school in the day, and working in the day and going to school at night till it rose to be the Easton Academy, and he had reached the grade of primary teacher. He taught and went to school till he was far enough advanced and able financially to enter Livingstone University.

Julian soon became acquainted with the members of his class and formed a close attachment for a young man from Georgia by the name of Harold Scott. There was another young man in the class from the same state, Lucius Storms by name. Julian and Harold did not like Lucius very well, because of his haughty disposition, his continual boast of his white blood and his father's wealth.

Among the young ladies of the University was one of unusual aptness and amiability, Ernestine De Shon, from New Orleans. With her large black eyes and long raven hair, she might have easily been mistaken for a Spanish senorita. She, too, was the daughter of a rich sugar planter. Mr. De Shon had loved his gold and the black Venus who made his bed and brought his slippers and chocolate. He never married, but lived among his slaves. He cared for Portia, the mother of Ernestine, as a wife till her death, and treated and regarded Ernestine in all respects as his daughter and heiress. Ernestine with her dark, dreamy eyes, wavy hair, sylph-like form and queenly air, was the pet of her class and the idol of the boys. Though many of them sought her favor, she seemed to have no preference, and treated all as brothers.

Julian and Harold strolling down a cool, shady avenue of the college grounds one afternoon were talking of the match football game to be played on Thanksgiving Day between their team and the Centenary College team.

"What would I not give to be the winner of the prize offered by our senior normal class to the winning team. It would give me more joy to know that her hand had touched it than to wear the crown of victory," said Julian.

Harold's dark, curly locks hung over his Indian colored face and Julian could not see the troubled look that clouded his brow. Both knew whose hand would place the laurel wreath upon the brow of the victor.

Julian was the captain of the Livingstone eleven. This fact and the peculiar feeling in his heart whenever he came near Ernestine, caused him to exclaim: "I will win; I must win that game or perish!"

Harold was right guard, Lucius left tackle, and Julian quarter back. Thanksgiving Day dawned clear, cool and beautiful; it was an ideal day for sport. The team and students of Livingstone were full of excitement, exultation, exuberance and student frolic.

From two o'clock in the afternoon till the game was called, gay equipages came pouring into the field, decked with streamers of mingled scarlet and black, or orange 'and green, which were the respective colors worn by the gay occupants of the vehicles. Flags and streamers made the field a flutter of gay colors and gay young people. The yells of the different colleges made the crisp air ring with their merriment.

The game had progressed to the second half, when after a scrimmage, there was a cry, "A man has been killed." Several physicians who were on the grounds rushed to the gridiron and after an examination had the man carried to a near-by building and telephoned for an ambulance. The injured man was found to be Captain Julian Jarnigan, and he was taken to the hospital. He was not dead, but badly injured. The game was stopped, as it was asserted that Julian's injury resulted from a bad case of slugging.

Harold called often at the hospital to see Julian, but Lucius never called or made inquiry as to his condition. On the second day after the accident, Ernestine, in company with one of the teachers, called to see Julian, who had been unconscious since he was hurt. As she sat by his cot, the tears streaming from her beautiful eyes, she took hold of Julian's hand, which was lying from under the coverlet. As she held it the patient heaved a deep sigh, as if relieved of some great burden or strain, his lips moved and he soon began to utter low whispered words which gradually grew more distinct. The first words uttered were: "Yes, I must win this game. I must wear the laurel, because her hand will place it on the victor's brow. O to have her hands touch my brow, to have those angel eyes look into mine is life; to fail in all this is death, death!

O what if she knew that it is all because of her!"

He again lapsed into silence. Ernestine, the teacher and the nurses heard these words and noted with joy the signs of returning consciousness and life; yet none but Ernestine knew the meaning of the words he had uttered. She sat there motionless, with tears in her eyes and a prayer on her lips.

After a few moments Julian exclaimed: "I must win, I will win," and opening his eyes, he looked around and said, "Where am I? What has happened? where are the boys? where is the ball?

1 must go or I shall not win!"

The nurses rushed to the bed, but he did not move, for when he essayed to do so he uttered a groan, and said: "What is the matter with me?" He looked up then and knew who it was who sat holding his hand. He looked up again, and said: "Thank God, I win. It is she and I shall wear the crown. I win the prize."

When Lucius learned that she had been to the hospital he was very angry, and at the evening social, although Ernestine avoided him as much as she could, he at last got an opportunity to speak to her, and attempted to take her to task for the visit to the hospital.

"Yes, I was only trying to build up where you had torn down; to mend where you have broken. Do you know that it is asserted by many that you know more about Julian's accident than you care to tell?" remarked Ernestine.

"I care not for what is asserted, and will say to you now, that I hope he will die, and by the Eternal, if he attempts to come between me and my one desire, he shall die," said Lucius, with fire in his eyes.

"Since your one desire does not concern me, I care not for it, but advise you to dismiss all such vengeful notions. They are the heat and passion of a school boy," said Ernestine.

"But it does concern you very much, Ernestine, and for what I care for you I would do any thing. You are my life's ambition and ideal. Without you I am nothing. Nothing shall put us asunder, neither life nor death," said Lucius.

Ernestine said: "I beg of you to feel not so and talk not of such whims and emulations. Life is everything, and death is nothingness. Ambition is a dangerous thing if not directed by high and holy thoughts, and leads on to destruction. I perceive that your controlling thought is to be a great man, to shine out in the world, and make a great name. You desire a companion or wife who will, as you think, grace the position which you expect to hold in society and the world; but, remember, that neither your mind nor your plans are mature. We are only boys and girls in school, and it does not appear what we shall be. Your ambition is to be great, while mine is to do all the good I can for the poor and downtrodden. When a little girl at my mother's knee I made the resolve to do all I could for my darling mother's people; to do whatever I could to correct that public opinion which doomed me and my poor mother to obscurity and disgrace. But for that public opinion my father would have lifted the cloud from over us, and left us in the clear, beautiful sunlight of respectability by giving us the legal right to bear his name. We must not be selfish, for that is the curse of the country to-day. Each man thinks himself better than his fellow. The Scriptures tell us to esteem others better than ourselves. Shakespeare tells us to 'Fling away ambition, for by that sin fell the angels, and love ourselves last.' "O Lucius, your mother's people need your abilities so much more than any others. Think of them, not of yourself. Our Master, of whom it is said: "Never man spake like this man,'' thought not of himself, but rather of the lost sheep. And he devoted his life and labor to helping the poor and outcast, and at last gave himself up to death, because of the ignorance and sin of the world.

"And you, Lucius, who are so intelligent, ambitious and proud, may be called upon to give your life for the sake of your people, or rather your mother's. Not your people perhaps by choice, but, nevertheless, by your blood, and before a distorted public opinion, a pride like yours consigns you to the degradation of your mother's people. Hatred for your mother's people says that you shall be a Negro, whether you will or not."

"I can never stoop to the level of the herd I have seen about my father's plantations," said Lucius. "I may labor among them,but, like a white man who does the same, I shall not be of them. I only feel for them as the white man does who sympathizes with them and tries to help them. I feel a good deal as my father does towards them, only a little closer. I am sure that if you scorn my suit I shall never again seek alliance with one who belongs to my mother's race. I have seen and felt enough of what it is to be of that race, and as I am not compelled to, I shall be among them, as a missionary, but not of them. Why should I consign myself to ostracism, degradation and misery when I can walk away from it all. Why should I, as white as any man in this country, far above the average in education and wealth, and with just a taint of Negro blood in my blue veins, be classed as a Negro? To be so classed, and to accept the classification, is to accept oblivion and damnation. For the sake of my foreparents on my mother's side I will work for and do all I can to lift up the despised Negro, but because I have my father's feelings and ambitions I shall aspire to be like him, of a different race."

On the summit see The seal of office glitter in his eyes; He climbs, he pants, he grasps them; At his heel, Close at his heels, a demagogue ascends, And with a dextrous jerk soon twists him down And wins them, but to lose them in his turn.

—Cowper.

RELATIONS between the white man and colored people, never as cordial as they might have been, were now strained and distant. The midnight council of the pale faces had become the midday assembly, where the overthrow of the republican, otherwise designated carpetbag and negro rule, was discussed and plans laid.

Before the withdrawal of the Federal troops from that section, the whites had held their meetings secretly and at night, but now they were held openly and publicly. At these meetings names were brought in and discussed, and proscribed lists made out of those Negroes who were considered too obstreperous or self-assertive; at the close of the meetings these lists were turned over to the raiders, and the condemned were dealt with according to the order of the Klan. The usual penalties were whipping, lynching or being run out of the country. Many disappeared, no one but the raiders knew where. Now that there was no power to check their fiendish course, they took off the mask and did openly that which they had done before covertly. The state and county election was near at hand, and they were holding meetings and speakings weekly. At those meetings the democratic candidates and other leaders made fiery speeches.

The Hon. Gooch Tarlton, who was the candidate from Coweater County for the legislature, in addressing these meetings said: "Fellow citizens, the day of our triumph is at hand. No more shall these black heathen and carpetbaggers rule over us, or even have a voice in this government. It never was intended that 'niggers' should be anything but slaves and scullions. For two hundred and fifty years they were our beasts of burden, and we reckoned them among our herds and flocks. They would be there to-day had it not been for these Yankees who have come down into this country and taught them that they are folks, that they are men, and ought to send their children to school, and wear clean clothes and try to live like white folks. And these same Yankees who came to prey upon us, with those who remained here after we gave up, bought our lands for nothing 'and are growing rich off our property and the offices, have made these 'niggers' believe that they can be citizens and vote and hold office like white men. No, this is a white man's country. Our fathers wrested it from the Indians, and they will rule it and allow no black participation in it. God almighty made this country especially for the white man. What if the 'niggers' are five to one of us? They were made to work for and serve the white man while he sits in the shade and makes laws to keep them at work, either as free laborers or as convicts in our prisons. Yes, we, like Attila, 'The scourge of God,' are to drive and keep this black race in the place God intended for them—at the bottom.

"These carpetbaggers have opened schools, and have got the 'nigger' believing that he can get an education. But, after this election we will start them another school: the hard school of experience wherein they will learn that submission is the best valor for a black man.

"They can't learn anything from books, and if they did, what could they do with it in the place we have fixed for them? Now, we are going to carry this election. It may be necessary to use force and even violence to win—but we will win. When we win this battle, we have won for good. For after this election we will fix the laws so that 'niggers' can't vote and we white men will decide who of us shall hold the offices.

"By the shades of Jefferson Davis and Robert E. Lee, we will put the 'niggers' under our feet or wipe them from the face of the earth and run the carpetbaggers from the land. Although we were overpowered by the Yankees and our slaves taken from us, they cannot set 'niggers' over us, or make them our equals. We will rule peaceably if they will let us, but forcibly if we must. They failed to awe us with the Federal bayonets, and at last gave up, leaving the 'nigger' to his fate, and his doom is sealed. He shall be tenfold more our slave than before his liberation. Already our jails, penitentiaries, and chain-gangs are full and we can get convicts by the scores to work our farms. What was the 'nigger' made for but to be our beast of burden, like the mule? We will subsidize crime among the 'niggers,' and thus reap a rich harvest thereby. Fellow-citizens, this battle must be won before the election day. Are you going to allow five 'nigger' votes to one white vote to go into the ballot-box?"

Cries of "No! No! No!" were heard from all over the court-house.

"Then in the night and daylight do your work, do your duty. We must have the offices, for we need them in our business, and we must make and administer the laws. This is not a party fight; it is a race fight, with the fighting all on our side. We do not stop to ask whether our cause is just, but whether it is expedient. Did our fathers stop to 'ask whether it was just to take this country from the Indians?"

Cries of "No! No!" sounded from all quarters.

"Then be up and doing. Think not of justice, but of the power of the white race—how it has subdued the whole earth and put the dark races under its feet."

"Yes! yes! we will do it," was heard on all sides.

"My fellow-citizens, we have made some mistakes in dealing with the 'niggers,' and one of them was in selling them land. We ought never to have allowed them to own land. But when we are in control we can pass tax laws by which we shall soon have all their lands again. Some of them have been in 'cahoot' with these carpetbaggers in stealing, and have got hold of our money and bought land, built houses, and are taking on high airs.

"This 'nigger' Norris, who has been trying to represent this county in the legislature, is one of them. He has the audacity to be trying to run now, but we will fix all that. If he don't get out of the race, we will run him out, and maybe out of this county and state. We will not have 'niggers' holding office."

"Right, you are!" and great applause greeted the speaker as he closed.

Arthur Grimpky, a nephew of Mr. Storms, and a rising young lawyer at Croton, was the next speaker. Mr. Grimpky, after graduating with high honors at the State University, had taken his law course at Harvard. Attending such a school and living in such an atmosphere had raised his ideals and conduct. He came back to his native state and his old home with purposes inspired by contact and association with people who lived on a higher plane than he had known before. Not that he loved his rugged fields and tangled wild-woods less, but because he loved right more, was he for justice for all men, especially the weak. Indeed, if it were possible, he loved the South more than ever, because of her degradation, backwardness and wickedness, and because she had gotten into control of ignorant, bad men without foresight, men who regarded not the future. He loved her as the philanthropist loves justice.

Mr. Grimpky rose not so much to answer Hon. Tarlton as to say some things which he deemed it necessary to be said at that time and place.

"My countrymen, "said he, "that people or nation which disregards the rights and interest of its toilers is sowing thistles upon its own grave! Proud Rome undertook to trample her plebeians and freedmen under foot, and thereby pulled down the monument of her grandeur about her own head. A wise man or nation husbands the forces which tend to greatness, and these are justice and righteousness. No truly brave man or nation will bully the weak and helpless or oppress the poor and ignorant.

"These unfortunate black people of whom you have heard so much in these turbulent days are not amongst us by their own choice; our fathers brought them here. They were freed not by an uprise and revolution of their own, but freedom was brought to them by white men, while they were toiling for us and while we were fighting to perpetuate their degradation and chains.

"While I am a Southerner to the core and a democrat by reason of conditions, I look into the future and see the changed condition of things that must come to our Southland in the coming years. Old conditions must pass. If we would have it indeed the land of sunshine and song, we must husband the forces which tend to peace and prosperity, and they are justice 'and sobriety. While the Negroes are ignorant and perhaps venal to-day, will they always be so?

"Why, I have heard many of you remark that the Negro Norris, who represented this county for two years, made a good member of the legislature and that he is honest and upright. He is also a taxpayer. Do not think that these people will continue as they are to-day. If they continue to have schools, we shall have many worthy, intelligent Negroes who will become producers, taxpayers, and real forces in building up our state and Southland, for education must elevate any people. Education has brought the world up to its present state of civilization, and it will elevate the Negro and make him a better laborer, member of society or citizen, if you please. .

"I said these people are going to remain here; yes, they are going to stay and you can't kill them out or keep them servile and poor. Every other race of savages has perished under the giant tread of the white man's march of progress, except the Negro. From a few thousands they have grown to many millions, and their increase is phenomenal. In Africa where the white man has planted civilization the natives, instead of decreasing or dying out, have increased more rapidly than in their savage state. For they are protected from the slave:catcher and predatory warfare among themselves.

"They are our laborers. What would our beloved South be without our laborers? Do you not know that if you continue to mistreat these people, to deprive them of the few privileges they claim as citizens, after a while they will become restless, dissatisfied and begin to emigrate to other places where they think they can get better treatment? As humble as a dog is, if you continue to cuff and kick him around he will leave home and take up with some one who offers him kind treatment. We can treat the Negro as a human being without taking him into social contact. Society is a thing no law or force can fix. I don't believe that the Negroes wish to commingle with us any more than we with them. You can treat your horse kindly without taking him into your parlor.

"Who will till our fertile fields if you drive five million laborers from our country? You say Chinamen or some other foreigners. Yes, when you fill this country with seven or eight million Chinamen or any other class of foreigners you have assumed a problem tenfold more difficult to solve than what to do with the Negro or how to treat him.

"Rome filled her borders with aliens and thereby sowed the seed of death within her body. For the alien element brought her to destruction. From mistress of the world she came to sit in the ashes of her destroyed greatness and to lament her folly.

"Has not the Negro tilled your lands, nursed you in your infancy, and guarded your homes and families while you were away fighting to more securely weld his chains of slavery about him? Not that I love the Negro, but because I love you and my darling Southland would I have you meditate before you take any rash step. The Negro is your friend; why not treat him as such? Know you that an injustice is a two-edged sword and cuts both ways; that there is only one way to settle any question or case, and that is in the right way. Truth crushed to earth will rise again,' while false ideas must perish with those who teach them.

"In my four years at the North I have learned many things, and much of the sentiment of the people there. They class us all alike—as oppressors of the Negro, because of the rash acts and utterances of some intemperates.

"There are many of the men who owned slaves and who know the worth of the Negro, who feel as I do. But they are too few and have not the courage to stand up for right against might.

"My eloquent friend, Tarlton, has told you only of what you in your might can do, because of your superior intelligence and experience in government; but I tell you of what you should do. Yes, because of your untramelled freedom through the centuries, as you say, ten of us are equal to a hundred ignorant ex-slaves who have been cowered by centuries of servitude and submission. The wily, timid Jew was once a brave warklike race, but persecution has made them deceitful and cowardly. But might does not make right.

"A great statesman has said, T would rather be right than president of the United States.' Why cannot we be actuated by the same ennobling sentiment? My countrymen, I would not have you stain your hands with blood, or soil your names with force and fraud; if you do, your children will reap the bitter fruits of retribution. I would not have my beloved Southland, like the red rose, brazen with blood of the slain upon her cheeks, but like the lily, pure and white, in the virtue of her innocency."

When Mr. Grimpky closed there was dead silence and no applause, but there began to arise a murmur of grumbling. Some said out, loud enough to be heard over the room: "Yes, that is some of his d—n Yankee notions. He got that up thar whar he went to skule at, an frum his uncle, who is a d—n 'nigger' lover.

Well, ef he stays in these diggins we will cure him of all such d—n Yankee notions. Talk about 'niggers' as if they wus folks.

"Why, I would not think any more of killing a d—n 'nigger' than I would of killin a sheep-killin dog. I just hate a 'nigger', because he is a 'nigger', an' is black, an' they is in the way of us poor white men, too.

"Look at that d—n 'nigger', Norris. He has the impudence to have him a horse and buggy, and ride around over the county with store clothes on, and us white men a walking in the mud and dust, an his wife an chillun 'a-setting aroun' with clean clothes on, an' my wife at home with her homespun on. O it makes me want to go out now and hunt 'em down, an' kill all of 'm. No, he need not talk that way; we is goin to put the 'niggers' down for good."

The next week was all astir with excitement and confusion. The colored people were excited and somewhat timid, for the red shirt riders had just paraded through the streets of the town, firing their pistols and cannon, which they carried with them on their raids, otherwise called parades. They had taken special pains to ride through the Negro settlements and terrorize them as much as possible. As they made their way through the country, when they came to a cotton field where there were a great many men, women and children at work, they would shoot at them, and fire the cannon, often wounding two or three.

There were in the county five colored people to one white, and in the whole state there were three colored to one white person. This was only a few days before the election, and these red shirt parades were being made to terrorize the Negroes so that they would not attempt to vote.

Prof. Norris had purchased a nice little farm near Croton, and had become a prosperous farmer. He had served his county well as a member of the legislature for two terms, and both the white and colored citizens had praised him for his excellent work in that body. He had secured the passage of several very beneficial measures for the county. Although there were five times as many Negro voters in the county as whites, Mr. Norris could not have been elected save for the presence of Federal soldiers. The presence of this arm of the Federal Government was the only means by which they could ever hold an honest election in that state or in the South, for the midnight raiders who had now become the midday red shirt riders, had long ago decided that this is a white man's country and "niggers" should have no part or voice in it; that if there were only ten white men in a county where there were thousands of blacks, those ten white men should rule. The red shirt banners had written on them, "Down with Negro rule! White men will rule peaceably if they can, but forcibly if they must."

They had forced Mr. Norris to withdraw from the race for the legislature. A white republican, Mr. Lippincott, was now sheriff, and he was a candidate for re-election, but they forced him to resign and withdraw from the race. In fact, all the republican candidates had been made to withdraw and some had to flee for their lives. The raiders had broken up all gathering of republicans.

At Cottonwood they came to break up a republican speaking one Saturday. They were expected, and the republicans showed fight. Several persons were killed and some of the "red shirters" among them. The "red shirters" were whipped and driven off, but they telegraphed to surrounding towns for reinforcements. Reinforcements came in blood-thirsty hordes, and although the next day was the Lord's day, they made it a hell. They scoured the country for miles and miles, killing colored women, children and old men. They went to cabins and shot people in their beds, who had worked in the cotton fields all day Saturday, and had not even known that there was a republican gathering at Cottonwood on that day.

On the night before the election, one hundred armed men rode into Croton from an adjoining state. No sooner had their horses been put up, and they filled with food and liquor, than they started out to terrorize the colored people. Some of them set an old stable on fire, and started the rumor that the Negroes were trying to burn the town. The mob, taking this as a pretext, went to the houses of all the leading Negroes and shot to death all they found. The rioters then went to the home of the wealthiest Negro in the place, who was a merchant and also a candidate for state senator, and as he had fled they beat his wife and daughters. They even ravished the daughters, without protest from Southern chivalry, and the outraged women were just able to drag themselves from their burning home which the dastards had set on fire. Being one of the finest residences in the city, it was the envy any way, of many of the whites. The rioters went from there to the parsonage of the First Colored Baptist Church. The pastor had also fled, so they seized the deacons whom they found at the church, they having come to warn and help to get their pastor out of the way of the mob. They took the deacons out into an open space, and told them to run for their lives, and as they ran the mob shot them down like so many rabbits.

On the next day which was election day, the Negro settlements looked like a desert waste. No Negroes came to vote, for they were either dead or hid in the swamps. Harold and Lucius were at home from school at the time. Harold was considerably excited and wrought up over the outrages upon the colored people, and thanked God that his father was not living to see the outrages committed upon the people. Lucius was not much concerned about what had occurred, as he did not consider that he belonged to the persecuted class.

Our dearest hopes In pangs are born, The kingliest are crown'd with thorn.

—Massey.

LIVINGSTONE University was all astir with the excitement and bustle incident to Commencement. After confinement for two months in the hospital with two broken ribs, a wrenched back and other internal injuries, Julian returned to the University to resume class work, and other duties. While he was still weak in body his mind seemed as acute as ever. Being anxious to finish with his class, the senior college, he had kept up his studies while at the hospital as best he could. On his return he was able to resume his place in the class, number two. Lucius, being number one, became valedictorian; Julian, salutatorian, and Harold, class orator. A prize was offered to the one composing and delivering the best oration. Julian, being convalescent, was given special privileges in and about the University, so that he saw Ernestine often in the ladies' parlor. This fact incensed Lucius very much. He had only been allowed to see her at the weekly socials. And at those times when he could get to speak to her at all he urged his claim upon her regard with great vehemence. He discussed with her his hopes, plans and ambitions for the future. That he would be a physician and surgeon and would take his course at Harvard was a settled plan; his father wished it so and would pay his bills. He felt elated along that line, but was very much depressed by the cold comfort he got from Ernestine. As to his future field of operations he was undecided, but it would be somewhere in the South. The prejudice, discrimination, persecution and oppression made work for him there very undesirable, but like the rest of his race, he must do the undesirable things. His feelings too were such that work among the Negroes was not to his taste any way. He thought sometimes of locating somewhere in the Northwest, where the small strain of Negro blood in his veins would not consign him to degradation. And, too, said he, "Why should I choose to take the place assigned me by white prejudice? Why should I be a Negro when I am seven-eighths white and only one-eighth Negro? The lowly life of these people is distasteful to me, and by casting my lot with them I choose to undergo all the suffering, degradation and persecution that are consequent upon Negro life in the South. Why should I choose to become a brute rather than a man? Why should I choose death rather than life? In fact, if I cut loose entirely from this accursed people, a life of the highest social, intellectual and financial standing opens up to me. But if I choose to be a Negro, all is the blackness of desolation with no friendly voice calling to me out of that darkness the words of hope and cheer so much needed by a young man entering life's conflict. We know not what it portends, but the clouds of oppression grow blacker and more threatening as the years roll by."

Ernestine heard his words with seeming indifference, but she thought on many of his utterances, and exclaimed once or twice under her breath, "Unworthy, unworthy coward, coward." Said she: "Well, Mr. Storms, I see by your ideas and language that our paths will lie far apart; that your feelings are such that you could never wed one who, like yourself, is accursed with Negro blood. You will, of course, mingle yours with that of the race which lives on this high plane you describe. You will enter upon the higher life. For my part, I shall work and suffer with my mother's people! While I love and honor my father for all that he has done for my mother and me, I cannot if I would, and I would not if I could, discard my own dear mother's race for that of my father. Why, it was the accursed prejudice of his race that consigned my mother and me to dishonor as members of his family. But for that deadly ostracism my father would have made my mother his lawful wife and me his legal heir. But, like the vapors from the regions of the damned, it has blighted your life and mine. My darling mother was his wife in all but the name, and I his own beloved child; but this unreasoning race hatred, born of the region of darkness, has consigned us to a place of dishonor. Unlike you, Mr. Storms, I love my people the more because they are ignorant, poor and cast off; because they are being ground to powder between the upper and nether millstones. I feel the more the-duty resting upon me to help them in whatever way I can. By reason of the opportunities I have enjoyed in this and other schools I am better prepared to go out and teach and lead my people on to better things; to encourage them to look up and toil up, while I and the others who love the race lift up. If this short, eventful life were all we hope for, we of the dark race would be of all creatures the most miserable. But we trust, hope and pray for a better, brighter day—for rewards that perish not, neither are snatched away from us.

"No; since the path you choose leads in an opposite direction from the one I have chosen, there can be nothing in common between us. And besides if you are to discard your Negro blood, you must have no entanglements with them, and, as you have hinted, must form no alliance with that race.

"O no; you will not be the first to do that. Thousands have done so all over this Southland. My mother told me that many free Negroes even owned slaves before the war.

"Why, did not Ben Tillman, in opposing the clause in the new Constitution of his State, say: 'If you forbid intermarriage between whites and Negroes to the fourth generation, you will touch some of the best families in this state?' Many thousand Negroes with one-eighth, and more with one-sixteenth of Negro blood, have intermarried with whites all over this land. You can't walk along the streets without meeting persons who have a strain of Negro blood. They don't know it, or if they do they hold it as a deadly secret. But all this is doing the Negro no good. What the race needs and wants is, to be a Negro race. Well, we can't be white folks and Negroes at the same time. And if we all become white then there will be no Negro race. What we need and desire is, not to change the Negro to a white man, but to so change public sentiment that intelligence, honesty and virtue, and not the color of his skin, will be the measure of a man. When God's kingdom is fully established in the heart of this nation, all men will hail each other as brothers, and God as their common father!"

"Then," said Lucius, "Must I regard this as my dismissal?"

"My friend, adieu; we must part; but let us hope that it shall not be forever," replied Ernestine.

Lucius went out crestfallen and morose, saying that he had unwittingly played into the hands of his rival, and compromised himself in the estimation of Ernestine. While at heart he did not really love Ernestine, he had an ambition at first to make her his wife, because she was brilliant and would shine in the palatial home which he had pictured in his contemplation. And, too, he wished to prevent Julian, whom he hated with a perfect hatred, from securing the coveted prize, now that he had failed in his diabolic act. He feared that Julian might be the elected one. Lucius would have preferred to murder Ernestine rather than see her the wife of Julian. Not that Julian had ever harmed or attempted to injure him in any way, but because he was of darker hue than himself. He had talked often with Harold and given him to understand his feelings as to Julian and Ernestine. Harold, who had long since buried his budding hopes with regard to Ernestine, kept Julian posted as to the state of war, for he was a fast friend and ally of Julian.

The class orators had been so busy with their theses and examinations in the last days of the term that they had not seen much of each other or the queen of hearts. But Commencement week was upon them almost before they realized it. Harold's mother came to witness his graduation and stopped at the University. Ernestine's father was at a hotel in the city. Mr. Storms, Lucius' father, came to the city and being detained for a few days on business would be present at the Commencement.

Commencement day dawned clear and bright, beautiful and balmy. Songs of birds and breath of flowers attuned the whole atmosphere to a unison with the flutter of bright ribbons, white dresses, blithesome laughter and joyous greetings. Streams of people had been pouring into the auditorium since nine-thirty. And as the deep-toned bell sounded the hour of nine-forty, the girls and boys came in troops to the assembly. The vibrations of the bell had barely ceased when a march was struck up on the piano, and the classes came pouring in, with beaming faces and sparkling eyes. Representatives only of the college classes were to appear as speakers. There were many whites in the audience, and among them Mr. Storms and Mr. De Shon.

To-day Ernestine was to receive, not only her diploma, but a valuable prize for having attained the highest mark of scholarship in her class.

Just prior to going into the exercises, Lucius tendered a reception to his class in one of the lower rooms. Only soft drinks and light refreshments were served. After this reception all marched in feeling jubilant and happy. Lucius had a sinister smile upon his lips, but there was a scowl upon his brow!

The devotions over, the salutatorian took his place, and, after the usual greetings to the University and audience, began his oration. His subject was, "The Majesty of the Law." He said, among other things: "In its highest sense law is the edict of Heaven, which law controls the actions of bodies, worlds and the creatures therein. In its legal sense it is a custom or command enforcible by the state or nation. The making and enforcing of laws is the highest element in our civilization. It is the handmaid of progress, the which secures the king upon his throne."

"The measure of the progress of a nation or a people is shown by the character of its laws, and the manner of their enforcement."

"Law is a cherishing mother whose care is felt by the least, and the greatest are not exempt from her power!"

"A great jurist has said that the law is the mode of regulating the social life of the people. Another says that justice and its administration are among the prime needs of society."

"Whenever liberty or the rights of the people were imperiled, or justice and righteousness in need of vindication, there has been the arm of the law, more powerful than glittering bayonet or belching cannon. She stays the hand of the traitor, despoiler, and turns back the hosts of the invader of honor, home, church or state."

"Her disciple it was who, 'with Numa, wooed Egeria in her cavern and brought down justice from heaven to dwell with men.'"

"Law is the strong subduer and civilizer of nations. She sends forth armies to battle for her dicta and crowns the victor with the laurels of place and power."

"When the Colonists declared that under the law all men are free and equal and endowed with inalienable rights, the army of Washington marched forth to enforce that declaration."

"A great churchman has said: 'There can be no less acknowledgment than that the seat of law is the bosom of God, and her voice is the harmony of the world. All things in heaven and earth do her homage: the very least, as feeling her care; and the greatest, as not exempt from her power.' "

"It is well for a young man who looks forward to a career highly honorable in the world, an opportunity for intellectual distinction and political fame, a worthy place in society, where all his gifts, social, mental and histronic will have full play, to become a priest in the temple of justice."

"But the young Negro who hangs his shield in this temple that he may watch through the dark and doubtful hours of our night, hard by the shrine of trust and truth, needs a double portion of fortitude. For in the administration of the laws in this land of the free and home of the oppressed, it appears that many laws are made to hinder, not to help the Negro."

"In our part of the country, legislative bodies occupy much more time in making laws to hinder and humiliate the Negro than in trying to elevate and help him on up to higher ideals and better things. The nation that would endure must rule in righteousness, for such is destiny. 'When the wicked rule, the people mourn.' "

"For two hundred and fifty years, the people have groaned under the galling yoke of the oppressor. Being enured to hardship, they will endure for two hundred and fifty years longer! Are not these persecutions and oppressions the burden of our songs and sighs?"

"Our laws are the evidences of our state of civilization. A state or nation that enacts iniquitous and bad laws, or that fails to so enforce them that the weakest and most helpless can enjoy its full protection, is in a low state of civilization. In a perfect state of government both the noble and the ignoble enjoy alike its beneficences and are visited alike with its penalties. If law and order do not grow in the body politic, then progress will cease, and the achievements of the people will be unworthy of the genius of our institutions, and liberty and equality will perish."

"Is not the South kept out of the line of progress by reason of bad laws and partial administration? Still out of the blackness of our night comes ever and anon a voice for justice to the Negro."

"Our night is not without a star. Now and then a voice is raised in defense of the weak and oppressed. We want light, air, water and—"

The speaker was seen to throw his hand to his forehead; he began to stagger and would have fallen had not the president and professors caught him. Julian was carried down to the room where the refreshments had been served, and attended by two physicians from the audience, who said it was only a case of dizziness, and that he would be all right in a little while. Julian was taken to his room and antidotes administered. Here he was walked up and down to prevent his falling into the sleep consequent upon being doped. The class cast knowing looks at each other and side glances at Lucius, but he manifested no concern and looked as stolid and sedate as a judge.

Harold, as class orator, was the next speaker. His subject was "Industrialism." He said in part: "The world has ever been more active than thoughtful. It has usually done the thing and thought about it afterwards. The watchword is, 'Do something, make something, and then contemplate your achievements.' When you have made something, you have created a demand and supply, and at the same time started the wheels of commerce in motion, which are the wheels of fortune. Still, only action based on thought can produce enduring accomplishments which are to lift men up and move the world on to the best.

"Galileo saw the vibrating chandelier, and he thought and thought. Then he created something which put the world on time. The thousands of new inventions are the great engines that carry us up to higher planes of civilization. Each new invention creates new plans and styles of living, new demands and new means of supplying them.

''This idustrialism is a great promoter of our upward course, if not carried to the extreme. If a thing is to be done, the first query is, Will it pay? Will it yield good returns by way of dividends?

"It is asserted that we Americans try to do something of every thing, and do most things indifferently. If this be not true, why is it that nearly every manufactured article that is considered most excellent and valuable comes from afar? When an article is very fine and costly, the cry is, 'O it is imported, you know!' "Industrialism controls our ideas of education; and we ask, 'Will it pay? Time was when learning was sought for its power and worth. Now it is so commercialized that it is measured by its dollar-eaming power. Must all we do and think yield money? Must man live by bread alone? The Wise Teacher said that knowledge is more valuable than rubies, and that wisdom is more to be desired than much fine gold! Industrialism, or the question of labor, has, like the race problem, caused much friction. It was the prime cause of the late war of the rebellion. The question of slave against free labor was the instigator of that war. Free labor rose up and demanded the abolition of slave labor, and behold our whole industrial system was thus changed. Industrialism is still on the war-path, and, it is claimed, is crowding out ex-slave labor. To meet the changed condition of labor we are urged to give our best endeavors to inform or educate ourselves industrially.

"If we are different from all other peoples, and were really created to be menial toilers and nothing more, then it is well that we give our primest efforts in that direction. But if we are like other men, then we should pursue the same course as others, and cultivate ourselves along the same lines. Yet, above all, we should cultivate the heart and mind. Mind and not money should be the measure of a man or nation. We should not overdo our industrial system by attempting to do many things indifferently, but rather let us do a few things excellently.

"The race needs now more than any other one thing, men wise and devoted to the cause of development. The race needs men so wise, that in trying to help the race they will not do an injury and retard its real progress. It needs men who will not sacrifice every other interest of the race to commercialism, and thereby check or turn aside the living stream of race progression.

"Let our people study and learn so much that in times of great demand we may call from our fields a Cincinnatus to lead us on to victory.

"It is far better to have college trained men in our shops, at our forges and in our fields than to have field hands conducting our schools and colleges. 'By their works ye shall know them!' "

Lucius, valedictorian, whose subject was: "The Social Fabric," uttered these among other sentiments,— "Man is a social being and it is as natural for him to seek the association of his fellows as for the different species of animals to flock together. 'It is not good for man to be alone!' 'No man liveth unto himself.' "Just as food, air and water are necessary for the physical man, so social contact is requisite for the spiritual being. No individual or class of individuals can reach their highest destiny if restrained in the privilege of social contact. As steel sharpeneth steel, so man by coming into contact with his fellow has his intellect sharpened and brightened. Since God made of one blood -all races of men, that dwell on all the face, of the earth, whence came the right of any man to say, 'Sit thou down there while I sit up here;' or 'Thus far shalt thou come?' If it is true now he is foolish who decides that it will always be so.

"Proud Athens and powerful Greece, where are thy art, learning and laws! Great Rome, who sat upon thy seven hills and ruled the world, that spoke from thy mighty forum and all the earth trembled, where, O where are thy armies, thy senators and statesmen! Alas, they are even as the dust beneath our feet So has it ever been, so shall it be on to the end of the universe!

"When men or a nation think they are something, let them take heed lest they fall! Only that nation is blessed whose God is the Lord! Only that people is truly happy who eschew evil and do righteousness!

"Social caste is the child of ignorance and the Devil! The greatest man who ever lived upon the earth had no prejudice or pride of race. He saw divinity in all men. He said: T, if I be lifted up, will draw all men unto me.' The Great Teacher is the social pattern for good people, in all nations, and for all times.

"Since all men are weak, blind and erring, who among them is able to fix the correct standard of living? No one. God alone is competent to set the bounds to expanding, aspiring souls! What manner of man is he who arrogates to himself the right to set barriers in the way of my highest development, spiritually, intellectually, politically and socially. Is a man so foolish as to assume that by binding or setting bounds for my body he can fetter my soul? Did they check or turn aside the living stream of salvation which flowed from the soul of John Bunyan, by casting him into prison? Did Daniel reproach wickedness and corruption in rulers less because he was cast as food to the wild beasts? Not so.

"They who wrong their fellowmen are only beating their brains out against the ramparts which they build around themselves to keep themselves to themselves. God pity us who suffer and more those who cause us thus to suffer! They only set the measure of their own condemnation.

"Look at me and see that there was a time when some people were not so squeamish about contact with the despised Negro. Even now this mingling of white and black blood is going on, but not so openly, as in the days of slavery.

"There are those who agree that all the Negro wants is civil and political equality. While I admit that a majority of the race are not capable of properly exercising political equality still I contend, as our enemies do, that with the full enjoyment of civil and political rights must come the enjoyment of social equality. There can be no such thing as political equality, without social equality. That is, the full enjoyment of the former two leads inevitably to the latter. Full freedom to vote, hold office and be a full man and citizen, means the right to choose your associates and companions, and to allow them to choose you without let or hinderance. Not the privilege to thrust one's self socially upon some one, but the natural right to associate with those who may desire your association, without your being subject to abuse or maybe lynching, and the other party to ostracism.

"The Southern white man knows this, and knows also that there can be no equality, without the full right to choose your laws, officers and associates without other lets or hinderances than those imposed by just and equitable laws.

"A great philosopher says it is an incontrovertible fact that men, particularly little, narrowminded men, are unduly prone to associate opinions with character and, as a result, they think meanly of the character of those whose opinions are not in accord with theirs, and this is especially true of society. The proud and arrogant white man has not always lorded it over the earth and the inhabitants thereof. For while the white man was living in caves and hollow trees, and subsisting upon roots, bark and herbs, dressing in leaves and skins, the black or dark races were living in houses, building cities, cooking their food, writing books, and teaching the world letters, science, art and philosophy. All their boasted learning is the gift of the dark or black race to them and the world.

''The Negro doesn't seek social intercourse with any one. All he asks is to be let alone; to be permitted to enjoy the society of those who may choose his companionship. He does not desire intermarriage, for that means the obliteration of the Negro race. Intermarriage is what the white man desires most to prevent. That feeling is at the bottom of his legislation against the Negro. It is claimed that a union between white and black is so abhorrent to the white man that he recoils from it as from a deadly cobra! But, at the same time, he finds it necessary to make the most stringent laws in a large number of our states to keep whites and blacks from intermarrying. If it is so deadly that the whites will flee from it, as from the leprosy—if that be true, then why is it necessary to make laws to prevent legal union between them? Why waste time in attempting to prevent a thing which cannot occur? Is this social contact so abhorrent? Then whence am I and the more than a million of mixed bloods all over this land?

"Mighty white man, you may fight against justice, equity and equality before your laws; but know that truth and righteousness are mighty and shall prevail. Shine on now and try to blight the lives and fortunes of millions of God's poor people, but remember that your day is drawing to a close; and that your sun, which to-day seems so bright, shall set to rise no more!

"Your place shall be with the other mighty nations which have arisen, grown arrogant, proud and oppressive and gone down beneath the scourge of their own diabolism. A righteous nation shall grow more puissant but an unrighteous one shall perish, and so shall it be with this; and a nation despised by you shall rule in your room."

Julian had so far recovered as to be able to sit with the class on the platform at the presentation of diplomas, but was not able to stand when they stood to sing the class song.

When the normal class came on, it was observed that Ernestine had been weeping. She was awarded the prize, a gold medal, for the highest scholarship in her class and there was great applause. After the presentation of diplomas to the college class, the president, said in very solemn words: "Had not the misfortune befallen one of the speakers, perhaps results might be different. The judges decide that Mr. Harold Scott, of Georgia, is entitled to the prize."

Julian looked as though he would faint again. Ernestine started from her seat, but caught herself, and sat with her handkerchief to her face. Harold's countenance lightened up with pleasure, and his mother looked as though she wished to take him in her arms.

Lucius had a smile of triumph upon his face. He said to himself: "I have lost; so has he. I am happy since he is sad. He may win her; but he goes from the University with a little less wind in his sails. I might have killed him, but my time has not fully come. Wait till he is nearer the game, and when he reaches forth to grasp the beautiful fawn I shall be near. When he stretches out his hand to pluck the blushing rose which now droops with sorrow and anguish for his defeat I may snuff out his light; then the light of love that now shines from her beautiful eyes will vanish and all will be the darkness of desolation for her!"

Mr. Storms saw Lucius on the outside and congratulated him on his oratory, and gave him a check. He remarked to Lucius that he did not approve of the sentiments expressed in his speech. He warned him that he had better abandon such ideas if he expected to make his home in the South.

"You know my regard for you, and my kindly feelings towards your race. But I cannot endorse such views as you expressed in ' your address. They will lead you and your people on to certain destruction."

Lucius not wishing to appear disrespectful to his father suppressed the bitter words welling up in his heart. He thanked his father for his -kindness and bade him farewell! Lucius left that evening for the North, where he was to find employment during the summer, and to enter Harvard Medical School in the fall.

Harold accompanied his mother home, where he was to spend his vacation. In the fall he was to enter the theological school at Altamaha.

Ernestine and Julian spent most of the afternoon together talking over his narrow escapes and their plans for the future. Ernestine was going home with her father. She was to take up teaching in the Normal School at Muskegon in the fall. Julian was to leave on the morning train for Chicago, Illinois, where he would work during the summer. In the fall he was to enter the law department of the University of Michigan.

That evening at seven-thirty o'clock Mr. De Shon and Ernestine entered the train to begin their journey homeward. When the conductor came round to collect the fares, he came to Ernestine and she directed him to her father, who was in the seat behind her. The conductor said to Mr. De Shon,— "Is this your nurse?"

Mr. De Shon informed him that the young lady was a member of his family, who had just graduated from school and was on her way home with him.

"Well, sir, she will have to go into the 'nigger' car," said the conductor.

"No, she won't; she will ride where I do," said Mr. De Shon.

"Well, she will have to get out of here," said the conductor.

"Well,, wait a minute," said Mr. De Shon.

He went back towards the rear of the train, and soon returned and took Ernestine and went to the Pullman coach, and thus they journeyed to their destination. Mr. De Shon told his daughter that he had always favored the separate car system before that humiliating episode; that the iniquity of it all had been brought home to his own heart now, and he had felt the iron, prejudice, enter his own soul. He believed that he felt something of what every educated and refined Negro must feel when forced with his wife and daughter to ride in a car, little better than those provided for cattle, with dirty laborers, convicts, and drunken, ruffianly white men, who are often more indecent and obscene than the convicts.

Till o'er the wreck, emerging from the storm, Immortal Nature lifts her changeful form; Mounts from her funeral pyre on wings of flame, And soars and shines another and the same.

—Darwin.

AFTER his rescue from the lynchers at Croton by Mr. Storms, the Rev. Brutus E. Buchanan made his way to Chicago, Illinois. Through the instrumentality of brother Masons, Odd Fellows, Baptists and other good people, he was so well cared for that he almost regretted something had not occurred sooner to start him out from the bondage and darkness of the Egypt he had just escaped to the land of liberty and light. He was sought after to make talks at public meetings on the condition of his people in the South. As he narrated the tribulations and sufferings of the oppressed Negro, the audiences, composed of both white and colored people, were moved to tears. His story of woe was told plainly and without embellishment.

He spoke of his own marvellous escape, only when called upon to do so, for he regarded it as a sacred event. He thought that it must have been the Lord who directed the good man who delivered him and spoke of it with trembling voice as in the very presence of the Lord. He said that the Lord had saved his unprofitable life, and for what?—that he might devote it to trying to help his poor, ignorant and oppressed people out of their night of desolation. He was often in consultation with Judge Tourgee and other humanitarians discussing plans for the betterment of the condition of his race in the South. He made trips to Boston, New York, Philadelphia and Washington and spoke to the people in all these cities. He addressed a large concourse of people in Faneuil Hall. Such great men as Hoar, Boutwell, Butler and Lowell, and Mrs. Howe and Mrs. Stowe were glad to do him honor. While not an educated man in books he was educated in the great book of nature and experience and convinced all who came in contact with him that first of all he was sincere and unassuming. He talked to the people both colored and White in many cities. While in Washington he was honored by an interview with President Hayes and discussed with him the question of the withdrawal of the Federal troops and the abandonment of the Negro in the South to his enemies.

The President thought that if the Southern people were left unmolested in the control of affairs of their section the time would soon come when the Negro would be guaranteed all his citizen rights. Senator Wade Hampton had promised this for the South.

But the Elder did not take to that view. He said that his sixty years' experience with the Southern whites had taught him that, as a whole, they will never of themselves concede any but the most servile place to the Negro; that he had learned one thing, and that was, that no strong race of itself ever grants equal rights to a weaker, subject race; that if they do it, they are driven to it by outside influences or force; that no man ever surrendered a right to another man and had him return it of his own free will; that he will only yield it when compelled to do so, either by the man himself or others; that the South, being poor, ignorant and far behind in the march of progress and civilization, is like all ignorant people, jealous and brutal, and will do all in its power to reduce the Negro to a lower state than when a slave.

"But," said the President, "The South is educating your people and paying out thousands annually for their elevation.

"Well," said Rev. Buchanan, "that is true; they are learning that it is cheaper to maintain schools than prisons and the thousands they are spending for schools is largely money wrung from the Negroes by high rents, low wages, fines and penalties imposed and over-charges for inferior goods. Just now many of my people are desirous of leaving the South for the West, where they are better protected, and can be men. Land there is cheap and fertile. I wish to ask the government to help us, either by giving transportation or supplies for a short time. The people would prefer any aid to come as a loan to be paid back by them in two or three years. Sir, you will bestow a great blessing upon a poor, but deserving people, if you will present this matter to Congress and secure its enactment."

"Well, Rev. Buchanan, I am glad to have seen and conversed with you, and I shall look into these matters and anything I can do for your people I shall be glad to do. Good-bye," said the president, "and may success attend you."

When Elder Buchanan returned to Chicago a reception was tendered him at the Zion Baptist Church. Most of the race leaders were present, and as the sumptuous repast was being partaken of, toasts were given on all the questions affecting the welfare of the race. The majority were of the opinion that it would be better for the Negro to scatter out from the black districts or congested settlements where the pressure was strongest, and go to the new land of the West; for the march of empire is westward. Let them go while land is cheap, and rise with the country.

The state of Kansas, where the immortal John Brown planted the tree of liberty and watered it With the blood of slave-hunters, was considered a desirable field. And Kansas was inviting them to find refuge within her bosom from the Kuklux and mob.

The next morning Elder -Buchanan boarded the train for Kansas and the West. He was to meet Messrs. Rickman, Brown and some other former members of his church at St. Louis. They had been sent as a Lookout Committee to see if the conditions in the West were favorable to the removing of the Ebenezer Church members there. The committee was to join their refugee pastor and fix matters so that if the pastor could not go to his church they might come to him. They met in St. Louis and after happy greetings talked of how Brother Buchanan and Brother Brown last parted, expecting to meet next in the New Jerusalem. The company was happy because they did not go just then, as the work given them to do had not been finished. At Wyandotte and Topeka they were met by committees of the citizens, both white and colored, and welcomed to the land of freedom. The visitors were assured that their people would be welcome and gladly received. The railroad companies carried them free of charge to and fro through the state, showing them the desirable sites for settlements. The committee finally selected a site for the settlement on the Santa Fe railroad and named it Brownsville in honor of the sainted John Brown and Deacon Brown. The elder and deacons remained to make preparations for the coming of the emigrants, as they did not care, by returning South, to run the risk of getting to heaven by the short line. The other members of the committee returned to report and to work up the persons to come to Brownsville.

After a month the first three carloads were on board the train for the new home. There were many tears and much shouting and rejoicing at the parting—weeping by those left behind and rejoicing by those on board the cars leaving the land of Egypt. The whites stood around the station and looked on saying very little as they had reaped a rich harvest in buying for one-fourth of their value the mules, cows, pigs, chickens and whatever the Negroes had to sell. Some had nice little homes which they had managed through long years of toil and great economy to purchase and build. But they sold all to the whites and the few colored people who expected to remain there for what they could get. They were glad to make the sacrifice for life and liberty. Of course when the first company got out to the new country they sent word back of the new conditions. Others began to get ready to go, and so the movement developed into the great exodus which became general all over the South.

The colored people left the South by thousands and the movement became so great that the very men who had been kukluxing, killing and lynching the Negroes organized a movement to stop them from leaving. The whites published all kinds of tales about the suffering of the emigrants. But as the Negroes continued to go they took more drastic methods to prevent them. They passed ordinances against the agents and persons who induced the people to leave. The officers put several in jail, the whites lynched several and forbade the railroad agents to sell tickets to Negroes desiring to go West. They said, "Our farms will grow into a wilderness."

The settlement at Brownsville had in the meantime grown from a camp into a village. The first tent set up was Ebenezer Baptist Church with Elder Brutus Buchanan as pastor. Many emigrants slept in this Ebenezer till they could make a dugout or get a tent. Before many months the tent or tabernacle gave way to a nice frame church built by funds sent from all over the country. Mr. Storms contributed the first twenty-five dollars as a "shibboleth "

The town was laid out in nice wide streets. Soon little plank houses of two and three rooms began to spring up. Next, stores, carpenter shops, blacksmith shops and other business places were opened up. In a short time Brownsville was a thriving municipality. Some of those who could barely earn a support in Dixie soon grew quite prosperous.

After the church was fully established, and it was seen that since there were no cotton patches for the children, they must be engaged and not grow up in idleness and ignorance, a school was opened with a graduate from Livingstone University as principal teacher. When he came and learned that most of the people were from Croton, Ga., he said he almost knew them, because of having been a classmate of Lucius Storms and Harold Scott, and having heard them talk so often of Croton and its people. The school grew in numbers and influence till it required ten teachers to instruct its pupils. Masonic and Odd Fellow lodges were established as were also many other benevolent organizations of a mutual nature. Coal was discovered within a few miles of the town, and a company organized to operate the mines. The company was soon doing a very profitable business.

As they were not excluded, whites began to buy and settle, and set up business places in the town. The white man knows there is always profit in setting, up a trading business where there are Negroes. Some even came from the South, but they either left or pretended to leave all their prejudices behind. They were more friendly and obliging than many of the foreigners. Here they mingled with the Negroes and treated them with as much consideration as they did the other whites. They did so much to ingratiate themselves into favor with the Negroes that Elder Buchanan said, in speaking to a club of business men one evening: "He will kill Negroes and maltreat them, and at the same time cohabit with Negro women.

He will rant and rage about the purity of the Anglo-Saxon blood, and at the same time mingle it with any other race that will allow it. He will pass Jim-Crow laws of separation and foam at the mouth while talking about social equality, and when he gets North or to the Old World he takes to conditions like a duck to the pond. There is never a kick unless it be by some greenhorn from the backwoods who has never been from home before."

Mrs. Scott remained at Croton because her husband's ashes lay there, and as she did not wish to sacrifice the little home that represented the life blood of him whose memory was so dear to her. She continued her quiet life unmolested by anyone. All respected Mother Scott's sterling character, for she was an example for all who chose to tread the path of honesty and virtue.

Prof. Norris, having been forced out of politics, devoted himself solely to farming and business. He prospered in spite of the many disadvantages which Negroes had to labor under. He was the owner of three very fertile farms, besides several houses and lots in Croton. Mr. Norris was a leader of his people in everything that went to better their condition. He had married the daughter of Mr. Forrester, who was another of the prosperous Negroes of Coweater County.

Lucile attended the school at Croton while Prof. Norris was the teacher, and through his influence her father sent her to Altamaha University, in which school she spent four years. She and the professor became engaged while she was at school and were married at the close of the exercises on the evening of her graduation. They returned to the family residence, where they were given a grand reception and had all the neighbors in, and among them several of the white farmers who were friends to Mr. Forrester. After two days spent under the paternal roof they came to Croton and took up their residence in the beautiful home prepared by the groom. Their home life was very happy. They were blessed with two beautiful children, a boy and girl, Theodore and Marie, who were the delight of their lives. All their hopes and aims centered in these children.

The children were attending the school once taught by their father, which was now in better condition than in those days. There were not so many pupils, but they were more intelligent, and the terms were longer. The school was taught by Miss M. E. De Hart, a graduate from the school that Mrs. Norris had attended. She was a most excellent teacher and a great worker among the people. She taught in the Sunday-school, helped with the music at the church services, and collected the girls on Saturdays in a sewing school, and thus taught them to be useful, as well as ornamental in the home. Once a week she had the mothers meet, and talked to them about the home and the rearing of children. By her labor she raised the whole of Croton and the country around it to a higher tone of living. There were no more Kuklux raids. The colored people had been excluded from politics and hence were not in daily dread, and could work to better purpose. Since so many had gone to the West, those who remained seemed to be in better condition, financially if not politically.

Mr. Norris, as he was now known, like the most ignorant and poorest Negroes, was a political outcast. He and ten other colored men, who were not allowed to vote, paid more taxes to run the state and county governments than a hundred white men who were allowed to vote and even hold office. The tax collector of the county owned not a foot of land, yet he was collecting from-those who did, and much of it from citizens who were not allowed to participate in the government Mr. Norris and those other substantial colored men might have sold out their possessions, and realized several thousand dollars in cash, and have gone North where they could vote and be free; they might have gone West, where they would have been more prosperous, but they said: "The great bulk of the Negro race in this country is in the South, and here it is going to remain till the problem is worked out either in his being treated as a man and brother or wiped from the face of the earth. He didn't come here, and he is not going away! If every Negro, as soon as he gets an education and some money, jumps Up and seeks an easier place, what is to become of our poor, ignorant and weak brothers and sisters? Like Moses, we choose to suffer with our people, till like him we must flee for our lives. Of course, we don't blame those who are forced to flee, like Elder Buchanan, Will Scott and many others— they did right to go, because to stay would be suicide. We, who can get along with the white people, are going to stay and endure hardness for our race's sake. Still others may have to flee for their lives, as we know not what a day may bring forth."

"When my children are educated," said Mr. Norris, "I am going to send them North to see and learn conditions there; then if they choose to live North, I shall say, 'Amen,' and do what I can to help them get started in the world; but if they choose to suffer with me and their mother, who have to endure all kinds of insults and brutalities, why, I shall rejoice and be happy.

"Of course, while wages are better than they were some years ago, they are not so good as they might be, and many of our people leave to find -better pay for their labor. I do not blame them. Why, just the other day Mrs. Bloomfield said to me: " 'Norris, why is it I can't get a servant to stay with me? I am not a hard mistress, and they used to stay; but now I can only get very indifferent servants, and they don't stay. Why is that?' "Why, I will tell you, Mrs. Bloomfield: it is because you do not pay enough to induce servants to stay with you. You white people here in the South seem not to be able to realize that the cost of living has gone up—house rent, clothes, food and everything; but you expect to get servants for the same wages you did under Cleveland's administration, when the whole country was on a tramp and the people were glad to work for bread. That has all changed. Everything has advanced but the Negro's interest.' " 'I have to pay my laborers more than the farmers about me. I can't get good hands unless I do. Colored people do not like to work for their own people anyway. If I were to treat my hands as Mr. Bloomstine does his, they would not stay with me a day. Why, my hands would not eat in my kitchen. I have to have a dining-room for them, and they must have rooms and good beds. While Mr. Bloomstine's men eat at the kitchen window and sleep in the barn. My hired girl must be allowed to receive her company, at least, in my back parlor, while yours are glad to be allowed to receive in the kitchen. But all these things come from ignorance and envy or jealousy, because we were servants of you white people so long. The ignorant are prone to look up to the white man as a superior, and he is superior in education, achievement and wealth. He has not always been superior though, as he claims, for he once wore the slave's collar. Neither is he lord of the universe, as he assumes to be. Nor is the earth his, and the fullness thereof, as he assumes. The Negro trusts in God, the white man's God, who has said: 'Vengeance is mine, I will repay.' " 'A nation or government is not stable which welcomes every kind of people who come within its borders and treats them better than it does a class of its people who have labored and fought for the upholding of the government for centuries. In so doing she is sowing to the wind; by and by she will reap the whirlwind. By that sin fell great Rome; then how can this nation escape?' "

Mrs. Bloomfield said perhaps he was right; that she did not know much about history and government.

Mrs. Scott, now known as Mother Scott, Mrs. Norris and Miss De Hart, the teacher, had joined hands with several young ladies, daughters of the prosperous Negroes in and around Croton in eleemosynary work among their people. They enlarged the work of the sewing circle, and had mother's meetings weekly, in which all the housewives for miles around were gathered. There they were taught the best methods of housekeeping, how,to properly rear children, and many other useful things for the uplift of the home-life of the colored people. These women also held meetings once a month at the Methodist church. There were now two churches; a new Baptist church and a Methodist church. These churches were strong sources of help to the community. At these meetings of the people the ladies lectured on many things for the advancement of the race. Especially were the men admonished to try to conduct their affairs so that the wives and mothers might stay at home to care for and rear the children, because a wife and mother is worth more at home than in the field or washtub, and if they must wash for others, let them take it home and do it there, where they can look after their children, teach them to work and instruct them in neatness and proper manners. They often visited the homes even of the lowliest to see how they were living and to encourage them to put forth efforts toward better things. The circle would have little dinners and social gatherings, which tended to elevate the social life. At these entertainments you never saw a young man in the presence of ladies with his hat on, or a cigar or cigarette in his mouth. The young ladies were taught how to dress with simplicity and taste, so that now they did not come out with a lot of cheap jewelry or gewgaws on and dressed in the colors of the rainbow.

Indeed there was such a change wrought in ten years, that when Harold and Lucius returned they could hardly realize that it was the same Croton. As for the people, they were perfect strangers to the two young men and an entirely different class of people from those they had known in the days of the Kuklux. They said, "Truly this is coming out of the darkness."

Those friends thou hast, and their adoption tried, Grapple them to thy soul with hoops of steel; But do not dull thy palm with entertainment Of each new hatched unfledg'd comrade.

—Shakespeare.

THE Muskegon Normal School at Muskegon, Alabama, was established for the education of the colored youth, in 18—. It was supported by a Northern missionary association. While engaged in giving primary, intermediate and academic training to the colored youth, its main object was to educate teachers. It aimed to give its students the very best instruction that could be given under the conditions such a school had to labor, in order that they might go out well equipped to instruct others. For that reason they sought the very best instructors. While they were not dogmatic on industrial education, they had in the last few years added some industrial features, such as would enable their graduates to give instruction in the most necessary knowledge of domestic science. For a people who are debarred from all the shops of industry, except in the most menial places, it is necessary for schools to teach many things which the whites learn in the shops and avenues of trade and business.

They recognized the fact that the Negro, by means of the education and training of these schools, is entering and is going to enter more largely the trade, business and mechanical world; that if he doesn't find a shop open to him he is going to make one; that if he doesn't find a bank open to him he will organize and operate one of his own; that if the mercantile houses will not admit him as a clerk or bookkeeper, he will establish and conduct his own mercantile establishments. In order to prepare a people who for centuries have been at the very bottom of industrial life, this school took high ground. It put forth strenuous efforts to do the very best for its students, that they might go out and do that which was best for a needy people. At the opening of the fall term in the year 18—, there was more than the usual animation of anticipation, for it was known that there were to be several new teachers in the faculty, and that among them was a graduate from Livingstone University.

At the opening exercises the new teachers were introduced to the students and friends. When the teacher from New Orleans, Miss Ernestine De Shon was introduced there were such whispered exclamations as, "How beautiful!" "What lovely eyes!" "Hasn't she nice hair?" "She looks like a Spaniard."

The record Ernestine had made at Livingstone for high scholarship and deportment placed her in the very front rank of the teaching force, and she became a model for all the girls. They noted closely her every word, movement and manner, that they might copy them. Every girl and boy in school was in love with Miss De Shon. The girls, because they found in her that which responds to what is highest and most angelic in the human heart; and the boys, because she became their ideal of what the highest grade of woman is or ought to be. The young men dreamed of the time when the home they intended to make would have as its presiding goddess, if not Miss De Shon, with name changed, at least some one as near like her as it is possible for one person to be like another.

Ernestine's keen perception soon showed her the state of feeling of the students as to herself, and like a wise, good woman, she felt only more humble. She was grateful to Him who shapes our destiny for this power over those young people. She often knelt and thanked God that he had given her this power over the hearts and minds of her sisters and brothers, and she resolved to use it to the glory of God and the good of her people. "For" said she, "these people, have been downtrodden and abused so long, that they need some loving heart and gentle hand to guide and help them." She knew, as every one does, that the Negro is of a loving, trustful nature; that he is slow to hate or to strike back; and that this amiable nature can be used to great advantage by those who would lead him for his good as well as for their glory; that he always looks for that which is best in his friends. She resolved to use her power over the students to lead them on up as near to their ideal as it is possible to reach. She not only used this power in the classroom, in social gatherings, where teachers and students met on a social plane, and in her walks and talks with the students, but she often had at her room the dull students, who had troubles and embarrassments with their studies, to give them help, encouragement and advice. She was ever a source of solace in sorrow; of courage in times of doubt and fear; and strength in weakness. The very mention of the name, Miss De Shon, caused the face of the student or person who heard it to light up with joyous anticipation of something pleasant. She was not offish, as some of the other teachers were, but mingled freely with the students. Although she often put herself on a social level with them, none ever thought of undue familiarity, or of unbecoming conduct toward her as a teacher. While some of those who preserved their dignity by holding themselves aloof from the students, were continually having trouble with them, Miss De Shon had none, because she ruled with the scepter love. Her influence was felt not only in the school, but it went out into the city and the country around about. It was like the sweet incense wafted by gentle breezes from the valley of Cashmere. A good deed, how like the precious ointment poured on Jesus' head, whose sweet odor spread till it filled all the world and rose to heaven.

Ernestine visited the churches and Sunday-schools as often as she could and talked to the children and people of the higher and better things of life. She went into the homes of the people that she might learn something of their hopes, aspirations and plans. Although Ernestine was an heiress, and had been reared in the lap of luxury, she not only went into the homes of the well-to-do, for there were many in the community, but into the homes of the lowly poor and spoke words of cheer to the young, aged, sick and cheerless. Many were the souls who could say that her gentle voice came to them as a whisper out of their night and caused them to look up and see the light.

It was impossible that a young, beautiful and talented lady like Miss De Shon should not be the object of many loves. But she was so quiet and reserved that when it came to the question of tender emotions, many who had heartburnings feared to make a declaration. But there are always those who feel that "Faint heart never won fair lady." So Mr. Norman S. Wilford, a rising some loving heart and gentle hand to guide and help them." She knew, as every one does, that the Negro is of a loving, trustful nature; that he is slow to hate or to strike back; and that this amiable nature can be used to great advantage by those who would lead him for his good as well as for their glory; that he always looks for that which is best in his friends. She resolved to use her power over the students to lead them on up as near to their ideal as it is possible to reach. She not only used this power in the classroom, in social gatherings, where teachers and students met on a social plane, and in her walks and talks with the students, but she often had at her room the dull students, who had troubles and embarrassments with their studies, to give them help, encouragement and advice. She was ever a source of solace in sorrow; of courage in times of doubt and fear; and strength in weakness. The very mention of the name, Miss De Shon, caused the face of the student or person who heard it to light up with joyous anticipation of something pleasant. She was not offish, as some of the other teachers were, but mingled freely with the students. Although she often put herself on a social level with them, none ever thought of undue familiarity, or of unbecoming conduct toward her as a teacher. While some of those who preserved their dignity by holding themselves aloof from the students, were continually having trouble with them, Miss De Shon had none, because she ruled with the scepter love. Her influence was felt not only in the school, but it went out into the city and the country around about. It was like the sweet incense wafted by gentle breezes from the valley of Cash-mere. A good deed, how like the precious ointment poured on Jesus' head, whose sweet odor spread till it filled all the world and rose to heaven.

Ernestine visited the churches and Sunday-schools as often as she could and talked to the children and people of the higher and better things of life. She went into the homes of the people that she might learn something of their hopes, aspirations and plans. Although Ernestine was an heiress, and had been reared in the lap of luxury, she not only went into the homes of the well-to-do, for there were many in the community, but into the homes of the lowly poor and spoke words of cheer to the young, aged, sick and cheerless. Many were the souls who could say that her gentle voice came to them as a whisper out of their night and caused them to look up and see the light.

It was impossible that a young, beautiful and talented lady like Miss De Shon should not be the object of many loves. But she was so quiet and reserved that when it came to the question of tender emotions, many who had heartburnings feared to make a declaration. But there are always those who feel that "Faint heart never won fair lady." So Mr. Norman S. Wilford, a rising young merchant and business man of Muskegon, made it a point to be present at all social functions at the school. He was often there on business, as he furnished a large part of the school supplies, and had a good opportunity to see and hear much of Miss De Shon. Young Wilford became a very devout worshipper at the shrine of Venus. Of course she was anxious to avoid the impression that Mr. Wilford was paying court to her, hence whenever she possibly could, without prudishness, she avoided personal converse with him. She would not encourage anyone to form an attachment that could never accomplish its purpose. But Mr. Wilford stuck to his text, never heeding the signal for retreat and rushed on to the destruction of his own hopes. So assiduous was he that it was remarked that something more than the physical needs of the teachers and students carried him so often to the buildings. He had, too, within the school a good coadjutor in the person of a sister who was a student, and was as close as a student could be to Miss De Shon. She often spoke of her brother's noble qualities and success in business in the presence of her teacher. But Miss De Shon was so undemonstrative and reticent in regard to these tender relations that neither the sister nor the brother could find out on what footing he stood. No one knew whether Miss De Shon held any one in that tender relation. She received letters, it was true, but they were few for one so popular as she. It could not be learned from what source the letters came, whether there was a lover on the sea, or in some distant land.

Of course she received a letter once a week from New Orleans with the De Shon return card on it. She got a few others from different parts of the country that might have been from fellow students. Once a month a letter came written in a bold, manly hand, postmarked "Ann Arbor, Mich." That was the most suspicious one of the lot, but no one could find out if that one was from any friend closer than a brother. Occasionally she received a letter, postmarked "Cambridge, Mass.," but her plans and intentions were past finding out.

A student with the temperament and tastes of Lucius could hardly live in the atmosphere of Boston and Cambridge, without imbibing something of the spirit of liberty and independence which impregnate the air and all the people enjoy. In that cradle of liberty, the home of heroes and statesmen, he felt that freedom was not a misnomer. Although it was known that he was classed as a Negro down South, he did not think of the fact till some question came up touching the rage issue. He never took part in discussions of the race problem, as he was there for another purpose. He devoted his time and attention to his professional studies and was among the foremost students in his class. Mr. Storms took several valuable prizes for excellency in his studies and work. His practical, obstetrical work was among white families in Cambridge and Boston. They did not know he was colored, and he did not take time to tell them. If they had known it at the time, it would have made no difference with them, as he was most efficient, polite and obliging, and efficiency was what they cared for and not his race.

Although there were four other colored students in his class, Lucius did not give them any special attention, or chum with them, because of that fact. He treated them as he did the other members of his class. Lucius did have two or three chums, but they were all white. One of these was a Southerner, S. P. Tilton, by name, from South Carolina. Although born, reared and educated in the South, young Tilton treated Lucius as well or better than his other classmates did. He played games, ate and slept with him. On all occasions and everywhere he treated Lucius as a friend and equal. When some one asked him how he, a Southerner, could treat a Negro as a social equal, he remarked that he was just like many other Southerners, who, if in an atmosphere where it was not unpopular, would treat some of the colored people as social equals; that they ostracise all Negroes because of caste prejudice, which will stigmatize any white person who treats a Negro as a social equal. Lucius grew more and more dissatisfied with the place assigned him in Southern society by prejudice, when he saw by conditions in Boston and the North the injustice of the caste prejudice of the South. While not inclined to return to the South to degradation, injustice, and persecution, he was drawn to it by the fact that a portion of the estate of his father would be his, and the conviction that his life's work was to be among his mother's people. His passionate ambition to unite his destiny with that of Miss De Shon, also drew him southward.

Lucius graduated with high honors and took two class prizes. Having closed his student career, he bade his classmates and friends adieu, and began his journey toward the land of infamy and shame. How different was his leave taking from that of his chums, and how different would be his home coming. They were going to meet family, friends, honor, laudation and position, and hence departed with light hearts. But his heart was heavy with the memory of what he had left ten years before, and to what he was returning—shame, misery and, perhaps, death. He felt as though he were going to his mother's funeral. But he knew that duty called and he must obey, even to the laying down of his own life, in the cause of justice for his mother's people. Not even his old dog, Caesar, would be there to welcome him. Said he: "I have only two ambitions: one to discharge my duty to the people of my dear departed mother, who died of a broken heart, caused by the hell-born prejudice which consigned her to shame, oblivion and an untimely grave, and blighted her young love and faith in goodness, and the other to make myself the equal of any man above the ground. My life must atone for what she suffered from the curse causeless which made her an outcast and me a nameless waif. The pleasures and joys which real men know are not for me or my race. The Negro of the South knows nothing of real freedom or the swellings of the heart which well up in the breast of the free-born white American when he beholds the stars and stripes adorned by the bird of liberty. Does the Negro feel that the Fourth of July is the day of salvation for him?"

With these feelings in his heart and those words on his lips he arrived at Croton in the cattle car that Negroes were forced to ride in, and was met by a carriage sent by Mr. Storms. A few of the old friends of his boyhood were at the station, but they looked and felt shy of the fine young man, so he bowed to them and passed into the carriage. He did not go to his old home, but to rooms prepared for him at the residence of his old teacher, Mr. Norris.

Even children followed with endearing wile And plucked his gown, to share the good man's smile.

—Goldsmith.

JULIAN having no one to assist him while pursuing his professional studies, made a part of his expenses by-working in the University, and the balance was made by working at summer resorts during vacation. He got much valuable experience in his struggle to make his way in school, which prepared him, in a measure, to face and fight the battles of life. He felt that for any young man intending to enter the profession of law, strong combative qualities were necessary, and that this is more especially true of the young Negro. Having been reared in the South, he was ever mindful of the conditions under which he must labor. He was determined to give his life to the causes of justice and equity for his people. He saw and felt the great necessity for devoted, well-equipped, conscientious young colored men to plead and fight the legal battles of the Negro, a people, who in the South seem to be made for the law, rather than the law for them. He had many tempting offers, to do other kinds of work. He was advised to go West where conditions were more favorable for making money, and to enjoy a greater degree of freedom. Some said: "To the West, young man, to the West! where the future holds out all that is best for the young man desiring to rise in the world. Go to a young and growing country where land is cheap and men are dear. Dixie is old, moss-grown and antiquated in ideas and practices. She is so blinded by prejudice and caste that she can see only one way. She continually looks back to ante-bellum times and says that the former days were better than these, and boasts of her departed glory. The South lives in the past; the West in the present and future. You can be a man there. The curse of slavery is the pall of the South. Go West!"

But Julian steadfastly kept his face toward the place where his fathers died, and were still dying, but not always by natural means. He looked to the land along whose hillsides bleach the bones of his fathers and brothers, and through whose valleys flow the rivers of the tears of his mothers and sisters who weep for the slain of their people. Although he knew that he was engaged in the most difficult profession of any for a Negro in the South, he faltered not. He knew that he would not only have to fight the legal battles of his clients, but the ostracism of the bar and the prejudice of the court; and also the incredulity and lack of confidence of his own people in his ability to fight their legal battles or contend for their rights under the law. In these times of mental conflict he was greatly strengthened by letters which he received from Harold, who had attended a theological school in the South, and was constantly in touch with his people. Harold admonished Julian to hasten his coming, and told him that his presence and labor among his people were much needed. He was constantly under the advice of his saintly mother, who in her letters encouraged him in his hopes and plans. His teachers had often tried to induce him to enter the ministry. One philanthropist offered to pay his expenses if he would take the theological course. His mother, being a most devout Christian, and cherishing the memory of his father who gave his life for the cause of Christ and his people, thought his son ought to follow in his footsteps and become a minister of the Gospel. But since Julian was fixed in his purpose, she gave him a mother's encouragement and advice. She looked forward to his home-coming with all a mother's joy and pride.

Often in his day visions and night dreams Julian saw a face and form standing amid blushing roses beckoning him to the land of sunshine and flowers. It was the memory of those happy days spent at the University and the sad, sweet time when a patient at the hospital he had been recalled to life and consciousness by the touch of a hand gently clasping his, that called him on. That vision which first met his awakening gaze was beckoning and calling him back to Dixie, to the land where the mocking bird sings his lullaby under the moonlit skies, while lovers stroll amid the wild flowers whispering words of eternal devotion.

Having completed his course with honor and received his diploma, Julian bade his classmates and friends adieu, and started for his Southern home. His first unpleasant experience on entering the borders of Dixie was the change in treatment. A man before, he now became a Jim-Crow—Jim-Crow cars, Jim-Crow stations, and Jim-Crow street cars. Having been treated as a man for three years, it came hard for him to submit to these Jim-Crow rules and the brutal manner in which he was forced to submit to them. The men in charge of the cars, and especially the street cars, seemed to take a fiendish sort of pleasure in mistreating the Negroes, especially the women. He was thrust into cars that were really not fit to ride in. They forced him to ride with railroad hands who were dirty, uncouth, often drunk and very rough. Julian found himself in a car with convicts who were being carried to prison. Through many dangers, embarrassments and noisome things, he reached home and was greeted by his mother, sisters, brother and many friends at the station. Three of the sisters and the brother had just come in from their country schools; the others were heads of families. They, with others, made his home-coming quite a fete—receptions, parties, teas and dinings followed each other in rapid, though joyous, succession. Many of the damsels took more than a sisterly interest in the young lawyer, with a view to becoming his legal partner. After spending several weeks with the family and friends at home, Julian departed for a state further South, with a view, among other things, of locating, and, too, his friend Harold was down there.

Harold had finished his course in theology a month before, and had been located as a pastor at Oakland, Ala. This was a new manufacturing town and its growth was quite rapid and the colored population was quite large. There were six churches: two Methodist, two Baptist, a Congregational and a Christian church. All during his course Harold had done pastoral work in Methodist churches and attended several conferences, so that at his graduation he was assigned to Oakland. Although he had been educated in a Congregational school, and once thought of entering work in that Church, at the last he concluded that it was his duty to work where the demand was great and the field of opportunity large. He believed that in the African Methodist Episcopal Church he could do the most good. Said he, in discussing it with Julian, who was a Congregationalist: "While I know the Congregational, Presbyterian and Episcopal Churches appeal to the intelligence and higher ideals of the educated Negro, I believe that the great religious development of this race is to be wrought out through the Methodist and Baptist churches. The Congregational, Presbyterian and Episcopal Churches reach a class, the intelligent, but these others reach the classes and the masses. I went into the Methodist Church because the field is wider and so much can be done to elevate our people. In it there is room for expansion and elevation—that is, a worthy man may rise in his church. While a man may reach eminence in these other churches, there are few places of honorable distinction. There is no room for what we call a laudable ambition. In the Methodist and Baptist churches the Negro learns how to govern and manage large, educational, religious and financial interests. I hope to do good and to rise in my church."

Julian's visit to Harold like all pleasant things came to an end. He pushed on to Beech Haven to begin his legal work. He found a large population of colored people, and among them were several quite well-to-do. He encountered some difficulty in getting admitted to the bar, as there was opposition to a thoroughly equipped Negro lawyer entering the courts. There were four or five pettifoggers and curbstone lawyers in that city, and they were as ignorant and dirty as those they attempted to assist. There was no opposition to that class of lawyers, for they were not in the way of the white attorneys.

When Julian was at last admitted to the bar, he encountered more boorishness and rough treatment from the officers of the court than from the court and bar. As a general rule the court and bar treated him as a lawyer, but the other fellows treated him as a "nigger" all the time. They tried to prevent him from hanging his coat and hat on the lawyer's rack; from drinking at the cooler and ordered him to drink where the prisoners drank. He was shocked to see how colored people were treated. They were driven about the court-house and yelled at like so many cattle. When any white culprit was being tried, the officers would not allow Negroes in the courtroom. Julian noted the treatment of Negro offenders and that they were nearly always convicted. A Negro stole a dollar, was tried in ten minutes, and sent up for two years. Right after him a white man was on trial for ten days, for stealing a thousand dollars, and he was acquitted.

It was a rule of the court for the officers to see that the lawyers had seats; but they would not prepare seats for the colored lawyers. Julian went out to the state prison to see one of the convicts with regard to his case. When he approached an officer and asked him if he could see the prisoner, the officer said in a very rough manner, "No". The lawyer started away, when the boorish fellow said, "See here, when you come here and wish to see any one, take off your hat like the other 'niggers' do, and you can see them." The lawyer's mission there was to try to arrange to get the prisoner, Charles Long, pardoned. His crime was that of knocking a man in the head with a stone after the white man had shot at him six times, wounding him in the leg and arm.

Harold was succeeding nicely with his work at Oakland, and was held in high esteem by his bishop, presiding elder and the church. His fame as a pastor was spread abroad by the press and people. But his success and fame did not satisfy a void in his heart. He had seen an object in his own native town, that he desired to possess, above all else earthly. He had been struck by the work and disinterested life of Miss Martiel De Hart. She and his mother were co-workers together in all things for the uplift of the people at Croton. He had often discussed their work with her and their ideas seemed to run along the same channel. He made frequent visits to Croton now, ostensibly to see his mother, but, of course, he always saw some one else who, it seemed to him, had become a very necessary factor in his life.

One Friday afternoon he visited Miss De Hart's school and talked to the children and parents present of the beauties and utilities of education. When the school was closed, of course he must, as a matter of gallantry, go home with the teacher, especially since she was going his way. They talked on school, education and church work for some time as they walked very leisurely on. Finally Harold said: "Yes, I shall wish for my wife a woman who is devoted to the cause of humanity and of Christ: not a frivolous, shallow-brained woman who cares more for dress and society than for home and homely things. No minister can succeed with such a wife as a millstone about his neck. I have seen many worthy women, but in all my travels I have met no one who comes up to my ideal but you, Miss De Hart. You are my ideal, the one woman necessary to fill the vacuum of my life, the void in my heart. Will you come and share with me the cross and crown of labor? Through you I can do all things; without you I can do nothing."

They had reached her home, and she invited him into the parlor. He needed no second invitation. After seating him she excused herself, retired to her room to divest herself of her hat, and to brush her hair a little and bathe her burning face. Her hands trembled so that she could hardly perform those light tasks; her heart was in a flutter; she could hardly realize that life was just the same as it was an hour ago. She had been offered the heart and hand of a noble, godly man; a man that she now knew she loved. She fell on her knees by her bed and thanked God that he had brought to her the desire of her heart, and asked him to direct her in answering him.

When Miss De Hart returned to the parlor there was a faint smile upon her lips, and her eyes told Harold that his pleading had not been in vain. When she came in, he said: "Well, Martiel, oh—well, may I call you that? Say that I may, and forever, my love, my all, and all." As he uttered these words, he arose and walked to where Martiel stood with downcast eyes, and clasped her in his arms, saying: "Light of my morning, I will seal your answer with this," as he kissed her lips and weeping eyes.

When Harold reached home he took his mother in his arms and, after kissing her, told her of his heaven-sent blessing. The next day her future mother went over to thank Martiel and plan with her for the future. The wedding was arranged to take place when Martiel's school was closed. Harold was very desirous to have his classmates, Julian and Lucius, at his marriage.

Who o'er the herd would wish to reign, Frantic, fickle, fierce and vain?

Vain as the leaf upon the stream, And fickle as a changeful dream; Fantastic as a woman's mood, And fierce as Frenzy's fevered blood— Thou many-headed monster thing, O, who would wish to be thy king?

—Scott.

WHILE resting and recuperating at his native town, Lucius was corresponding with various persons as to a suitable place of location for work in his profession. He made a trip to Muskegon, visited Miss De Shon and sought her advice. He also met Norman Wilford, another rival for the hand of Miss De Shon, and he seemed to take to him from the first. Wilford gave him some valuable information about the coming towns and cities of the South where he could build up a good practice and do well in his profession.

Mr. Wilford tendered Dr. Storms the use of his office as a place to rest and attend to his correspondence. He also gave him the use of one of his rubber tired buggies to ride over the city and about the country. On the Friday evening after the arrival of Lucius, Mr. Wilford tendered a reception in honor of the presence of Dr. L. Storms in the city. The city physicians, some of the leading citizens and some of the teachers from the Muskegon Normal were present. Miss De Shon came in the company of Dr. Storms. Norman had yielded this coveted pleasure to the guest of honor. The elite of colored society in Muskegon was there.

Lucius had an opportunity, as he never had before in the South, to see what education and wealth were doing for the Negro race. He met there quite as much grace, refinement and taste in dress, as he had ever seen among the most swell colored society in the North. The physicians came in fine rubber tired stanhopes and victorias—nearly all the guests came in carriages or surreys and some in automobiles. When Lucius saw all this display of wealth and property, he exclaimed, "How can a people, hounded and oppressed as the Negroes are in this country, show such signs of well doing?"

"The more the nations oppressed and abused the Jew the wealthier he got," said Wilford, "and at last as a most fiendish persecution the Saxons used to cut them open in search for their wealth. Here they simply kill or run the Negro off and take his property."

Dr. Storms was the lion of the evening and was invited by the other physicians to open an office in that city. "There is room here for five or six more physicians," said they.

On their way home the doctor said, "Miss De Shon, I like this town. I am thinking of taking up the practice here."

"Don't do it," said Miss De Shon; "such abilities as yours need a wider field in which to expand. I am satisfied that you will do better in that progressive city which Mr. Wilford was telling you about this evening, and you say you have a chum who lives there."

"But don't you know that a part of my success is to succeed with you? I desire to be near or where you are."

"You know 'tis said that 'Distance lends enchantment,' and that love annihilates space. So if you care for me as you say, you will follow my advice. But you know we settled that question before we left school. Why refer to it again?" said Miss De Shon.

Lucius felt flattered and encouraged, but in truth Ernestine did not wish to have him near where she would be annoyed by his attentions. For she had no confidence in his integrity, because his cowardly conduct toward Julian in school had burned itself into her heart. She said under her breath, "Thou whited sepulcher."

Lucius did not see Ernestine again before his departure on the Tuesday following. He was accompanied to the station by Mr. Wilford and Drs. Long and Shorter in an automobile. While bidding Dr. Storms farewell they requested him to return there and take up the practice. On his return to his native town Lucius was tendered a reception in the country at the home of Mr. Forrester, father of Mrs. Norris, where many of the best class of young country people greeted him. He saw a vast contrast in the class of people whom he met now and those he had known fifteen years before. Most of the young men and young women had been away to school. All of them had some schooling, and quite a number had a fair education. But the greatest contrast, was in their dress. Instead of being decked out in many colors and loaded with cheap jewelry, they were dressed neatly and with taste. There was very little of the attempt to overdo. And the old folks seemed very proud of their smart children and the impression they were making on the rich young doctor who had been so long and far up North. Lucius, instead of being bored, as he supposed he would be when he received the invitation, was on the contrary very highly entertained. He found himself enjoying conversation with the farmers about their crops, stock and other agricultural matters. There were, of course several town people present also. He drove out with the Norris family in their carriage, and enjoyed his ride by the side of Miss Marie, who was buddng into fair young womanhood.

Miss De Hart, the teacher, was present, but she did not indulge in the light fantastic. She gave her time and talents to sweet converse with the mothers, fathers, and such young people as could refrain from dancing long enough for conversation. She spent some time with Dr. Storms, making inquiries as to conditions North, his prospects in his profession, education, and many other matters pertaining to the welfare of the race.

She impressed the doctor very favorably. Miss De Hart asked why he was going to discard his home town and take his store of knowledge and abilities elsewhere? Dr. Storms quoted the proverb, " 'A prophet is not without honor, save in his own country.' There are many reasons why I can't remain here, but the chiefest is, the sadness I feel when near the grave of my darling mother, who was so wronged, and whose life was blasted and cut off by the cruelties of those who despise us; and, too, my brother and sister are here. They hate me with a perfect hatred, because I, a Negro, as they say, am their relation by blood. Why, I believe Gatewood would murder me if he could do it on the sly, or help to do so in a mob.

Alma has a kind heart, but is weak and easily influenced by others. She would do me a kindness if she thought that no white person would know it. She has her father's heart ready to do a great deal of good and some evil."

After spending a delightful evening at the farm, Dr. Storms and the Norrises bade adieu to the company and started for the city. The moon had risen and her silvery rays threw 'a glint upon !the landscape that made the fields and forest a fairyland. The level sandy road seemed strewn with diamonds and sapphires. The drive and the scene threw Lucius into deep fancy and poetic vision.

"This lovely scene, the lovely moonbeams awakening a thousand elves from cavern and glen, all fill my soul with a rapture that words can but feebly express," said Lucius to Marie. "I feel that I should like to dwell amid such enchanting scenes forever; to linger evermore amid these Elysian beauties. If I could always be as happy as I feel this moment, I should then know that life is indeed worth living. What is it that causes these feelings to come over me; can it be any influence in this beautiful dream? this—, round and about me, even in this carriage, is it the magnetism of a presence or presentment!" "I am sure I don't know," said Marie. "It may be that the moonbeams have affected your brain, or that you tarried too long at the wine. They say people sometimes get moonstruck."

"Yes, but it does not affect the heart, does it?" said he.

"I never had the misfortune to be so struck, and hence cannot enlighten your mind along that line," said Marie.

"My felicitious mood," said Lucius, "may cause you to regard my expressions as due to a superabundance of the delectable supplies of the table. I may seem a little too exuberant for your sober thoughts, but I do really wish you could give me some information on the subject of the most tender emotion of the human heart. I really need the information to prevent my falling into errors which have embarrassed me here and heretofore. I think I am not presuming too much on our short acquaintance and your youthful experience to ask your assistance in these mystic meshes. While it is true that the entertainment and the evidences of the transition from the old to the new life among these people have somewhat dazzled me, I think I have my bearings and am not vaporing, although in my waking dreams I may have wandered among the flowers and fragrance of a forbidden paradise.

"How could mind of mortal man resist the intoxicating influences of the social gathering, the glories of the night and the sweetness of such companionship? While there may be no response in your soul to the loveliness without and the ecstacy within, let us hope that the sleeping goddess will awake to the peans of her devotees. The mystical maze thrown over me by the madding moon may have caused strange ideas to creep upon my brain, but I am sure that a feeling sweet and entrancing, was springing up within my soul.

"Why do we grow nervous when in or near a graveyard in the night time? May not our sensuous nature also be cheered and elated by enlivening scenes and congenial associations."

"Yes, I hope that as I grow older I may attain to a knowledge which will enable me to give information on the subject you mention," said Marie.

They were now at home. Two days later Lucius left for Eastberg, where he contemplated taking up his practice.

O friends, be men; so act that none may feel Ashamed to meet the eyes of other men.

Think each one of his children and his wife, His home, his parents, living yet or dead, For them, the absent ones, I supplicate, And bid you rally here, and scorn to fly.

—Homer.

It. NORRIS had prospered steadily. He also grew in favor with his own people and with the whites. He was kind and considerate with his employes and prompt in his payment of wages. He said: "The poor laboring class of people need the small wages they contract for;" and he paid his laborers promptly. He took an interest in their families and encouraged them in carrying out the advice and instructions of the women's club. Mr. Norris paid better wages and treated his tenants better than most of the landlords about him, for he felt that in helping these people on he was advancing his own interests and also that of the race.

While Mr. Norris was amply able to have indulged his children in idleness, he taught them the value of labor and perseverance. He not only had them taught in the very best schools possible, but saw to it that they followed some industrial pursuits. During the vacation, when they were at home, Theodore performed certain tasks about the home and farm, and was of considerable assistance to his father. Marie engaged in household duties with her mamma and the servants. She put into operation in the kitchen, dining-room and the sewing-room many of the things which she had learned in the industrial department of the University. Like their parents, they were bright students, and had high marks at school. Theodore had tastes like his father for the farm and field. He read all the agricultural journals his father took, looked up others and induced his father to subscribe for them. In his studies in the industrial department of the school he had learned much about fertilizers, farm implements and paying crops.

Theodore induced his father to adopt the plan of raising on his farm all products necessary for home consumption and to drop the practice of neglecting all other crops for cotton. He induced his father to produce all the meat, garden stuff, and the feed for his stock, and thereby saved him thousands of dollars. He produced a less acreage of cotton, but by better attention and fertilizing, a better grade and greater yield to the acre.

Mr. Norris' check was good at the bank for as large a sum of money as any farmer in the county. His farm, truck-fields and stock became the envy of many of the white farmers, and more especially of those poor whites who could not own a cabin and a truck-patch. They did not relish the idea of a "nigger" living in such style and comfort as Mr. Norris did. But there were liberal men about him, like Mr. Storms and Mr. Grimpky, who encouraged him in doing the very best he could. When he drove out with his family, in his five hundred-dollar carriage, many were the envious eyes cast upon them and the high steppers which were drawing them. When Marie played on the thousand-dollar piano whites would often stop and listen, entranced by the music and the fine tone of the instrument, but with envy in their hearts and anger on their brows.

Prof. Z. W. La Prade, who had succeeded Miss De Hart in the school, was frequently present on the evenings when the piano was mingling its sweet tones with the melodies of the night. He had been down to the Commencement to witness the graduation of Miss Norris, and was from that time a slave to her maidenly graces. The professor was a frequent visitor at the home and often attended her in her walks. At these times he discoursed on the beauty of the woods and flowers and of how he would like always to live amid these pleasant surroundings.

"Well, Professor," said Miss Norris, "you have a pleasant school, and it is said the patrons and children are very much attached to you: then why do you not stay with them?"

"I would be glad to remain in this city, whether at the school or not, provided all—, everybody—, I mean, some one I know felt as the parents and children do."

"I think you are universally liked, and if that is true you can well afford to abide with those who esteem you so highly," said Marie.

"But how about yourself, Miss Norris; you say the people esteem me very highly—are you not one of the people? If you do not hold me in that high estimation of the people, may I not hope that at some time I shall so rise in your esteem as to be regarded in even a nearer relation than that of the people?" said he.

"Sir, how can I judge of or know at this time how you will be regarded by the people, or myself, ten days hence? As I know nothing to cause me to feel otherwise, I regard you in common with your patrons. The time I have known you is too short for me to know your real worth as a friend, or to what extent you are able to grasp and hold valuable friendships. We would certainly be proud to have such an addition as yourself to our permanent citizenships. One who can do as much as I think you are capable of doing for the uplift and advancement of our people is indeed a very desirable accession to the sum total of the happiness of this community."

"Yes, that is all very well," said the professor; "but I was trying to convey to you the idea that it is not the esteem of the people which would induce me to abide within the enchanted precincts of these forests and groves where the one blithesome maiden holds my fortune within the grasp of her shapely hand, but her smile and approbation."

Tarlton after serving two terms in the legislature was succeeded by another. He held the office of County Superintendent of Schools for two years, and his record as such, so far as the colored people were concerned, was one of tyranny and corruption. But under the demoralized condition of politics and the illegal and corrupt methods by which office was secured, it was not required that the incumbent should be very circumspect in the discharge of official duties. If he lorded it over and abused and misused the "nigger," he was considered by his constituents to be a very good officer. Could he while in office lead a mob in lynching a "nigger," his re-election was assured. Sheriff Blackburn prevented the lynching of Sam Stout by hiding him away till the mob dispersed, and at the next election that act was urged against his re-election and he was overwhelmingly defeated by a man who had been a leader of all the mobs. Tarlton was known to be receiving pay from the teachers for positions and indulging in other immoral practices, but he was continued in office.

When Mr. Norris knew that he was disliked by Tarlton he cultivated him so as to prevent this enmity from breaking loose upon him. Meeting Mr. Norris one day in the bank, Tarlton said: "Norris, I hear your gal has finished her schooling, and is very smart; now, if she would like to teach, I will give her the school at Beech Grove. The salary is twenty-five dollars per month. You let me know about it by Saturday so' that I can arrange to examine her. The school is to take in Monday week. She is a likely gal I hear, and ought to get on well with them people down there."

While Mr. Norris did not like the man nor the leer in his eye when he said: "She is a likely gal," still he decided that it was her duty to undergo some risks and to make some sacrifices for the people. So he told Marie of the school and the offer of the superintendent.

Young and guileless, Marie had no dream of danger. She thought only for the school, her ability to teach, and the opportunity for doing good, so she decided to accept it. When she told Professor La Prade of her prospective good fortune, he suggested that it would be well for him to come over on Saturday morning and accompany her to the superintendent's office, which was on the second floor of a storehouse.

After kissing her mamma, papa and Theodore good morning, Marie departed with the father's warning to look well to the superintendent.

When they reached the office, the superintendent looked up and scowled when he saw Professor La Prade. He bustled around and got some papers, told La Prade, who was a teacher under him, that he could not have him there during the examination, as he might give information to the applicant. The superintendent informed La Prade that he could be excused and come back, if he desired, in two or three hours.

After the professor was out, the superintendent told Marie to bring her paper and come into a back room, where she would not be disturbed. She felt uneasy and hesitated, but when she thought of the school and the little children who would be under her direction, she decided to risk it, and went in. Her fears increased when she saw that it was a sleeping room, with a single bed in the corner and a table in the middle of the room. Tarlton told her to take her place at the table and begin, as she had the list of questions. As she proceeded he went out and in several times. After she had been there about an hour she heard Tarlton close and lock the door of the outer office. In a few minutes he entered the back office where Marie was, closed the door leading into the front one and turned the key very quietly, to keep her from hearing it. He then came up to the table, pretended to be examining her work and while talking to her of the school, laid his hand upon her shoulder. When he did that she jumped up. Tarlton asked her what was the matter, and told her to sit down. Miss Norris said, "No," she would rather go, as she felt sick. The superintendent said: ''No, you must finish before you go." He then began to talk of what he was doing in giving her the school; that he was conferring a great favor and that she was under obligations to him, that she must submit to his lust, and at the same time approached her. .

To evade him Miss Norris sprang towards the door, crying: "Let me out of here, let me out of here quick; unlock this door! I will die before I will submit to you, you brute!"

At this Tarlton rushed up and grabbed Marie and forced her towards the bed, while she screamed at the top of her voice: "Help! help! murder! murder!" Just as he was about to overcome her, a thunderous banging and surging was heard at the door. The door was soon burst open and Professor La Prade rushed in and grabbed the fainting girl in his arms and started out, when the ravisher said: "How dare you, you black rascal, break down my door and enter the room in this manner."

"I broke in to rescue a lamb from a deadly wolf," said Professor La Prade, "I entered by that higher law which gives a manly man the right to break in any place, and even kill, to rescue a woman being outraged by a beast."

"I have a mind to shoot your black head off. Get out of this place, and if you two 'niggers' ever cross my path again I will shoot you down as I would a dog," said Tarlton.

"Sir; if I, a Negro, had attempted such a fiendish deed as you have this morning, you, with your black heart, would have been one of the foremost to swing me to a limb or torture me to death with fire. I need not have been caught in the diabolical act, as you were, but if only suspected, it would have been the same. You tell me to go, and if I cross your path again you will shoot me. Well, if in dying by the hands of the white ravisher I save the honor of this poor girl, I shall be happy to give my life for her honor. You shall hear from this demoniac deed."

"Humph!" said Tarlton, "If any 'nigger' attempts to call me in question for what I have done, he will meet the fate of all 'niggers' who resist a white man, or attempt to resent any injury done by him."

The professor did not go away from the building when he was turned out by the superintendent at the beginning of the examination, for Tarlton's conduct aroused his suspicions. He lingered near and was fortunate in breaking in and saving Marie. When he reached home and told the parents and brother of Tarlton's dastardly act, they were prostrated with grief and anger. The father and son vowed over the fainting girl and weeping mother that that outrage should have a blood atonement.

"I know that it is death to call a white man in question for any wrong or outrage upon the Negro, but I shall freely give up my life in defense of the virtue of my wife and daughter. How can our women ever be pure when they feel that their men will not defend them when they are assaulted and outraged? I weep for the future of any people whose men are so .base and cowardly that they will not die in defense of their homes. The white man's law says that a man's home is his castle," said Mr. Norris.

When Prof. La Prade had gone, and Mrs. Norris and Theodore were in the room again trying to console Marie, Mr. Norris took down his breech-loading gun, charged it with buckshot and went out the back way. It was just getting dark when he came near the office of Mr. Tarlton, and as he got within fifty yards of it Tarlton came out in company with another man. He drew back as he saw Mr. Norris with a gun. With husky voice, Mr. Norris spoke and said: "Mr. Tarlton, you have attempted an outrage upon my daughter, and according to your Southern code nothing but blood can atone for such an act. I am here to kill you. I am conscious of all that will follow your death by my hands. I know that I shall be lynched or burned or tortured to death for trying to protect the honor of my home. I have lived in this community for thirty years, and have never had so much as a dispute with a white man; but now that the viper has crossed my path he must die, for his deadly fangs have pierced my heart. I might go to the law with you, but what redress has a Negro for a wrong done him by a white man? Although my daughter is as pure as an angel, your juries would laugh at the idea that a Negro woman is virtuous. They would infer that she was there in your office for immoral purposes. So that I must, like you, take the law into my hands. Defend yourself." As he threw his gun to his shoulder the man by Tarlton ran to one side and Tarlton turned to run, but had not gone three steps before there was a flash, a report, and he lay a lifeless corpse in the street. The man ran crying: "Murder! murder! a 'nigger' has killed Mr. Tarlton."

Mr. Norris rushed home, told what he had done, and exclaimed: "I shall die happy." The family were in the gulf of the deepest despair. A mob, otherwise called a posse, was soon in search of the Negro. They scoured the country, went to the Norris home and beat the wife and daughter. Theodore had to flee for his life. They shot and whipped several Negroes because they did not know where Norris was. Prof. La Prade was forced to fly, as it was known that Tarlton had a difficulty with him that day. They caught him about ten miles out, and after shooting and wounding him, brought him more dead than alive and put him in jail. Theodore fled to one of the farms, where Uncle Tom Tatum threw a box into an old unused well, and letting him down into it hid him thus for several days till the excitement subsided. They hunted for two weeks for Mr. Norris. At the end of that time the sheriff received by express a long box, sent from a neighboring town, and on the end of the box were written these words.

"The 'nigger' wanted at Croton for killing Hon. G. Tarlton."

When they opened it there was a nude corpse of a Negro packed in salt; but lo it was not Norris!

How calm, how beautiful comes on.

The stilly hour, when storms are gone!

When warring winds have died away, And clouds, breathe the glancing ray, Melt off, and leave the land and sea Sleeping in bright tranquility!

—'Moore.

JOHN BROWN, the martyr to liberty, never dreamed even in the highest exulation of his imagination that to bleeding Kansas these oppressed people for whom he gave his life as a noble sacrifice would one day come in droves to find refuge and asylum. The exodus grew in volume till it became almost a stampede from the South. Many of the emigrants came to the village named in honor of the man who died for the slave, so that it increased greatly in population. But most of those who came were poor, and many were destitute and objects of charity, but they were willing to endure hardships and starvation that they might learn something of freedom.

The Governor organized relief commissions, and the legislature voted large sums in aid of the destitute. Friends and philanthropists at the North sent money, food and clothing. The ministers and churches in St. Louis, Kansas City and Topeka made their churches and homes places of relief and shelter.

Friends of the Negro were induced by other friends to come and take up their abode at Brownsville that they might be guides and helpers of the weak and needy. Prospects of business and gain brought many others, for the white man will always come and set up business, especially a grocery or store, where there are Negroes, for he knows it will pay.

The rapid increase in population and wealth soon brought the city up to ten thousand or more inhabitants. The people were happy and prosperous. There was little or no race discrimination. All children attended the same schools, which schools had both white and colored teachers. There were two colored churches in the city, New Ebenezer and St. Luke, an A. M. E. church. A great many of the colored people attended the churches where whites and colored worshipped together.

Elder Buchanan was now too feeble for active service, and the congregation had so grown in intelligence that he resigned. He owned a comfortable home and had some income, but the church pensioned him at three hundred dollars per annum, and held him as a sort of fatherly adviser. The congregation called a young minister, a graduate of a fine theological school, by the name of R. H. Sangster, and was forging its way well up to the front. Two of Elder Buchanan's daughters were teachers in the public schools, one son was a clerk in the court-house, another was a postal clerk in the railway mail service and two daughters were at the heads of happy prosperous homes. The Elder was held in high esteem by every one. It was expected that at his death the city would erect a monument in his honor, as the founder of Brownsville.

Elder Buchanan had read in the papers, with a great deal of interest and sorrow, the killing of the Hon. G. Tarlton by the Hon. L. C. Norris, and of the mob, the lynching, and the capture and imprisonment of the teacher, Prof. La Prade, who was thought to be an accomplice of Norris, as he was with the daughter when she left the superintendent's office. But he had read, also, the whole story of the killing, and what caused it, written by Miss Marie Norris, and published in most of the colored papers and many of the Northern dailies. He read the stinging editorials in the Southern papers on the published story of Miss Norris.

Since a Negro thought to be Norris had been lynched and Southern chivalry was satisfied, no further effort was made to find him. No one but the sheriff and two or three others knew of the miscarriage of Southern wrath, in the murder of an innocent man. The sheriff said nothing and cautioned the others to keep quiet on the matter, as that was enough to re-elect him. No inquest was held, as the lynchers had held an inquest after the lynching was over, and had placed the report of the jury in the coffin. It read as follows: "This 'nigger', Norris, came to his death by the hands of parties unknown to the jury." The corpse was buried by the county undertaker. The family even was not allowed to see it. The wife, son and daughter mourned their dear one as dead. The mother and daughter moved about their darkened home as though in a trance. They seemed to care little or nothing for anything now, and sat for hours with folded arms gazing into vacancy, with sighs on their lips and tears in their eyes. Now and then their faces would brighten up as they spoke of the possibility of escape of the husband and father. Their hopes that he was not dead increased when they were refused permission to see the body of the dead man. It was really dangerous for Marie to go out, as there had been talk of dealing with her in some way, either by whipping, lynching or running her out of the community.

The Norrises tried to communicate with or get some clothes to Prof. La Prade, but all was in vain. It was a source of agony to them to know that he, as innocent of any wrong as an infant, must lie there in prison, wounded as he was, without any medical attention, food or clothes. It was enough to run a man of his culture and breeding crazy, if it did not kill him. Since the imprisonment of the teacher the colored school had been closed and there was talk of not allowing the Negroes to have school at Croton any more.

The whites said, ''There was Norris, one teacher, who got so big that he tried to be a white man by living like white folks, raising his children like white folks and running for office," and that La Prade had assisted Norris in killing one of their most prominent citizens. Mr. Tarlton was a pillar of the church and a moulder of Southern character. They argued that education ruined the Negro and that he could not be kept down if educated. The excitement had subsided, since it had been asserted by some honest-hearted white men like Mr. Storms, that Norris had done no more than right; that he had only done what the white man has always done—slain the despoiler of his home and honor; that had Norris been a white man he would have been lauded to the sky and not slain like a beast. Theodore went about seeing after the business of the estate. He had quietly seen Lawyer Grimpky and employed him to defend Prof. La Prade, whose trial was to come up on the tenth of the next month. Mr. Grimpky told Theodore that he would do what he could for the prisoner, but showed that it was a case in which the chances for rendering him any aid were desperate. Sentiment will pass in judgment on this case, regardless of the law and evidence. Said he: "As a lawyer, I believe every man ought to have a fair and impartial trial and be protected by the officers of the court while in their custody."

The Norrises decided to wind up their business as quietly and advantageously as possible, and leave the land of blood and lawlessness.

About three months after the killing in Croton, as Elder Buchanan was driving down to the City Hall in Brownsville, he saw a man sitting in the rotunda of one of the hotels. He stopped his horse and took a closer look.

"Before the Lord! I believe that is Norris. If it ain't him, it is his brother," said the Elder.

He drove up, got out of his buggy and went into the hotel. He was cautious, and did not go right up and accost the man, as he wished to get a closer view and see if the man would recognize him. He surmised that if it were Norris, he was incognito, and would not wish to be known as Norris. The Elder saw the man looking at him in a peculiar way when the stranger thought he was not looking. At last he turned squarely around toward the newcomer and stood thus till he caught his eye. The stranger looked away quickly but in a few minutes he caught his eye again and held it somewhat longer. In this time he gave him a sign, and having approached him, whispered: "Follow me to room 23."

The Elder had special privileges at all the hotels and everywhere in the city. He had not been in the room long before the man came in, and turned the key as he entered. Then the stranger rushed into the arms of the venerable father and brother in sorrow and companion in outrage. It was fully a minute before a word was uttered. Norris was the first to speak, for it was he. Said he: "Elder, to see you and be yet alive opens all the fountains of my soul. I saw and knew you when you stopped your buggy in the street to look at me, and saw that you knew me, but dreaded to be recognized by you for I feared that you would rush in and call my name and others would hear it; but thank God your suffering like mine has made you cautious. I would have come to you when I entered the city, but fearing that some of your family might see me before I could post you and have you in turn post them, kept me away.

"Now Elder, remember that L. C. Norris died by the hands of a Georgia mob for avenging an outrage upon his daughter by a burly white man. The man you recognize and who stands before you is Mr. C. L. Norwood from Ohio. Only you and my family must know the inner facts. As soon as I can arrange it, I am to send a white friend of mine in Ohio down there to communicate with my family. He with Theodore will wind up my affairs. This friend will take my family to Ohio first, and after they have been there for a few months, will come on to me, one at a time. We will also send parties to see what can be done for poor La Prade. I shall make this city of refuge, which Father Elijah has built, my future home, for I have learned that it is not only progressive but a place where law, order and justice prevail. Here all men are free and equal before the law. No, I can't accept your hospitality, just now at least. A friend has arranged for my employment with an agricultural firm. After I have been here for a while you will get acquainted with the newcomer and invite him to visit you. You having posted your family and any of the members of Ebenezer who may have known Prof. Norris, and I shall be safe."

"God bless you, my son. May the Lord ever take care of his own, as he has done thus far," said Father Buchanan.

Mr. R. O. Dupree went down to Croton as agent of an agricultural house in Cleveland, Ohio. After spending some time among the business men of Croton, and with the farmers thereabout, he made himself known to Theodore and Mrs. Norris. Mr. Dupree told them of the escape of Mr. Norris, his whereabouts and his anxiety concerning them. He and Theodore went about disposing of the estate in the most judicious and advantageous manner possible.

Mrs. Norris and Marie were sent to Cleveland, Ohio, and the household effects were sold out at private sale. The town property was disposed of and afterwards the farms and stock. They realized good prices by accepting part cash and the balance on time. The Norrises realized several thousand dollars in cash, which together with the cash already in bank, gave them the neat sum of twenty-five thousand dollars. Theodore as administrator, drew the money from the bank and left for Ohio. Mr. Dupree was to see after the collection of the notes through his bank at Cleveland, and settle all the financial affairs of the Norris estate.

With silence only as their benediction, God's angels come Where in the shadows of a great affliction, The soul sits dumb.

—Whittier.

ALTHOUGH wounded and half dead, Prof. La Prade was not allowed medical attention or to be seen by his friends. He was not permitted to have a change of clothes, although those he had on were muddy and bloody. Lawyer Grimpky, who had taken his defense in hand, more out of sympathy than for expected fee, braved the popular current of hate and disapproval and visited the prisoner in his cell. He prepared as best he could to conduct his defense, but he told La Prade that he must not hope for much, as he would come before the court presumed to be guilty, because he was a Negro.

"Will people who kill a man, hold an inquest over his corpse and then salt it down like a slaughtered hog, be likely to treat one supposed to be an accomplice of the dead man with impartial justice? However have faith and courage," said he.

After the prisoner had lain in jail for two months he so far recovered as to be able to hobble around with a stick; but he was allowed the stick only when outside of his cell.

The term of the court at last opened at Croton. After the civil docket was disposed of they took up the criminal docket. Professor La Prade's was the fifth case on the call. A large crowd of whites was present, and it was thought best to have an extra force of deputies to protect the prisoner in case violence was attempted. But the excitement had so far subsided that there was little or no demonstration; only a few hot heads made show of passion. The trial began by arraignment of the prisoner. He pleaded not guilty, and the selection of the jury began. One hour was consumed in impaneling the trial jury. The indictment charged the accused with murder, as accessory before and after the fact, to the killing of Gooch Tarlton.

The Commonwealth began by introducing its testimony. No one saw the accused near the place at the time of the killing. It was shown that he was at Tarlton's office with the daughter of Norris in the morning; and for some reason or other broke into the office, and there was loud talking up there and a scramble. The accused was seen to leave there in company with the girl and go towards the Norris home.

Professor La Prade had no witnesses; he was not put upon the witness stand, as his lawyer feared that it might prejudice the case if he were compelled on cross examination to tell certain things which he knew about the cause which led up to the killing of Tarlton. The lawyer did not wish to stir up the hotheads in and about the court to attempt mob violence again. The prisoner was a sheep before his slaughterers, and opened not his mouth. Both he and his lawyer believed that conviction would be the only means of saving the prisoner's life. They felt that if acquitted, or if he even sought a delay of the trial the crowd would mob the prisoner on the spot. The mob always wants from two to ten Negro lives for one white man's life. So the judge charged the jury for conviction. Norris was dead, and they wished this other "nigger" convicted of the murder of the so-called best citizen, Tarlton, to get him out of the way. The jury retired and were out ten minutes when they came in and announced that they had reached a verdict of guilty of murder in the second degree. They fixed his punishment at the maximum, twenty years in the penitentiary. There was applause around the court-room when the verdict was announced. The prisoner looked resigned. The Court asked the attorney for the defendant if he wished to make any motion. After a hurried consultation with the prisoner, the attorney rose and told the Court that he had nothing to offer. Thereupon the Court proceeded to pronounce the sentence upon the prisoner of hard labor in the penitentiary for twenty years. The prisoner was taken back to the jail. The next day his attorney called to see him and explained the reason for his having taken the course he did of nonresistance to the will of the Court and the people.

"I feared that if we entered a motion for a new trial or took an appeal, that might cause another outbreak of lawlessness, said Lawyer Grimpky. ''You know they charge that the courts and bar are to blame for lawlessness because of delays in the judgment of cases. My plan was to offer no objection to the will of the Court and the people, and try to get you pardoned after the people hereabout have had time to cool off and see and feel the injustice of your punishment. I think I can get many of them to sign a petition for your release. And, too, if there were to be another outbreak here, and you in jail, they would lynch you the first thing they did. I wished to save your life.

"No, La Prade, I don't charge you a cent for what I have done nor will I charge for what I intend to do for you in the future. I expect to do all in my power to get you pardoned. Yes, I know that you will suffer greatly in the state prison. As a matter of humanity I wish I could prevent your going there, for I know what it will be in its mildest form to a man of your education and sensibilities. Do all in your power to make friends of the prison officials, especially the guards, though they are a brutal set of fellows, and hard to get along with. On the slightest pretext they would shoot you down, and report that you were resisting or trying to escape. Many of the guards and officers are felons and deserve to be serving as convicts themselves instead of serving as guards."

"I feel the injustice of my punishment very keenly and that I shall be called on to suffer much more than I have yet suffered," said La Prade. "These brutal men will know that I have been convicted of helping to murder a prominent white man; that I was connected in the crime with a man who has already been lynched, salted down and sent in as food for Southern wrath, and they will be especially severe with me. While the punishment of all Negroes in the South is retributive, mine will be more than that—it will be the punishment of revenge. I feel sure that their wrath will be vented upon me. But do you know that in my darkest hour and greatest suffering I have felt a joy in my heart, a kind of elation. I believe now that I shall find satisfaction in undergoing all that is to be put upon me, even slow, torturous death, since it is all, that she might live. I have gladly undergone all the pain and suffering and will undergo death if it comes to that, that she might be saved from the blighting touch of that vampire, Tarlton! I think I should not regret to suffer thus for any worthy woman. But for Marie, dearer to me than life itself, why, I believe I could sing my own funeral dirge while burning at the stake for trying to protect that in her which in any woman is worth more than life! To die to save our poor, abused and misused womanhood from the blight of villainous outrage ought always to be sweet to true manhood! Yes, I shall glory in my suffering for her sake! While I know I am as innocent of any wrong as an angel, yet I glory in my punishment. Had a white man done what I did, he would be held up as a hero, worthy of the highest encomiums that tongue can utter.

"I am glad, Mr. Grimpky, that you took the course you did. I trust you and shall try to do what is best. When you write Mrs. Norris tell her what I say, and she will talk it over with Marie. They have done what they could to save me from this, my last doom. They will continue to do what they can for my release, but release I do not hope for, except in death. But if die I must, it will be a happiness to me to offer up a thing so worthless as my life for a cause so noble and a girl so worthy. Tell them not to fret and pine over my seeming misfortune, but to look forward to better things. May the son and brother be spared the agony and death that the father and I have suffered for our defense of womanly virtue. You are a hero, Mr. Grimpky, among cowards and bullies, for that is what mobs are made up of. No brave man is ever cruel or abusive to the weak and helpless. The loving are the daring, and the brave are the true. You have always stood for the right and urged justice and fair treatment for all people. You have braved popular ill-feeling against me, and at the risk of injury to your practice stood up in my defense while I was being tried by the men who mobbed me. You may lose caste and custom in this God-forsaken place, but you can and must win your way upward in the world. Such virtues as yours cannot go unrewarded. If I should ever escape from the hell to which they have consigned me with life and breath, I shall use them in speaking your praises. I go gladly, since it is a sacrifice for love and honor. Let them do their worst.

" 'They cannot bend the lofty soul, Though friends and fame depart: The car of fate may o'er him roll, Nor crush his hero heart.

" 'For there is something will not die, Where life hath once been fair; (Some towering thought still rears on high; Some manhood lingers there.' "

The prisoner was not allowed to see any one at Croton except his lawyer, or to attend to any of his affairs. He left all in the hands of Mr. Grimpky. His relatives at South Bend were afraid to come, and hence did not see him. On the third day after his sentence the prisoner was taken to the penitentiary. When he had been put in prison garb and instructed somewhat as to rules and penalties, he was put to work in the quarry. The work was very heavy, and the prisoner had not fully recovered from his wounds. He had never done heavy work; it almost prostrated him. The prisoner came in with the gang at dark the first day so nearly dead that he could scarcely drag himself along. His chainmate carried the chain to relieve him as much as possible. While the roll was being called he fell in a faint. After the roll was called the prisoner was unchained from his mate and laid in a corner till the prison doctor could attend to him. When the doctor came he rolled him over with his foot, felt his pulse with his walking cane, gave him a jab in the ribs, and said, "There is nothing the matter with that 'nigger.' " La Prade was dragged up by a guard and two "trustys," carried to his cell, dumped upon a pile of straw and left without food or medical attention. The prisoner had a high fever that night, but the next morning was able to get up, though very weak and dizzy. At four o'clock the prisoners were roused, but remained in their cells till half past four. They were then chained together two and two, marched out to a water trough, where they washed their faces and hands, without soap, or anything on which to wipe. After this, the prisoners were marched to a long shed, where they stood before a shelf on the wall. On the shelf were placed for each prisoner a hunk of cold corn bread, a small slice of fat bacon and a cup of water called coffee. They were allowed fifteen minutes in which to dispose of this sumptuous meal, then were marched out into the yard, the roll called again and the squads formed and marched off to their various places of labor.

Although weak and sick, La Prade swallowed the swill called coffee, and the stuff called bread. He knew he must get strength from something for the work before him. Although sick and weak, he struggled hard to do his task. But the weather was so cold and damp that his fever began to rise again in the afternoon, so that he grew dizzy and fell with his burden. The boss began to lash him with his whip, but he lay there as one dead. After lashing his hands, face and body for some time, the boss ordered two of the squad to take and dump him op a pile of brush. The air being chill and damp, his fever grew worse and he became delirious. At last one of the bosses came out and had the prisoner carried to the doctor, who this time gave him some quinine. He took the medicine during the night and the next morning was in better shape. La Prade was given lighter work for a few days, and soon gained strength.

After the prisoner had been there six months it was decided to send him with others to work in the coal mines. This work was harder and more dangerous. Each man was tasked at so many bushels of coal per day. If he failed in his task he was whipped with a big leather strap. The strap was made with several thicknesses of raw-hide nailed together at the loose end to make it heavy. La Prade had failed several times and thereby fallen under the lash. He was often sick and unable to perform his task, but if he failed he was punished just the same. On several occasions he was lashed into insensibility. The fare at the mines was worse then than at the main prison. The convicts came out of the mines about dark, were marched off to the stockades, given corn bread, often frozen, a tin cup of water sweetened with sugar-house molasses, and then turned into holes in log walls with their wet mining clothes on. In winter they shivered all night, and in summer they sweated and steamed. There was no place for the sick—sick and well were crowded together. Indeed the managers seemed to desire to hasten the death of the sick as much as possible. Bad treatment and exposure were the means used to get rid of them. They said: "The dead tell no tales."

La Prade's mate took sick, but was forced to his task and died under the lash of the boss, who was trying to force him to his work. He was unchained, taken by two convicts under guard, carried out to the burying place, a hole dug and the body tumbled in just as picked up from the pit. La Prade said to himself, "Is this hell, and are these men devils incarnate!" The prisoners goaded to desperation, often insane from torture and hunger, made the dash of death for liberty. Most times there would be two or three gun reports, and the victim was picked up and tumbled into the hole always kept ready. If one got beyond the range of the guns, the hounds were turned loose and in a few hours his mangled body would be found in the woods or brush. Then brush, leaves and sticks would be piled upon it and the body burned. The records said, "Killed while attempting to escape." Now and then one would escape. But for every one that escaped, ten were killed or recaptured. Those recaptured might well have wished they had met the fate of those killed in the chase, for their groans and yells could be heard for many days and nights after they were recaptured.

La Prade saw and heard all this, squirmed under the lash and groaned under the kicks and cuffs, but hoped and trusted in deliverance. Death would have been welcome, but he seemed fated to live, labor and suffer, Their tables were stored full, to glad the sight, And not so much to feed on as delight; All poverty was scorn'd and pride so great , The name of help grew odious to repeat.

—Pericles.

IT was the balmy month of May when earth, air and sky seemed joined in conclave to make an occasion of beauty, love and song. Woods, fields and air resounded with the songs of joyous birds, and were redolent with the breath of leaves and flowers. All, everything, seemed to conspire to make the closing scene of the school a gladsome time; to make the launching of a new barque upon the placid sea of matrimony one of joy mingled with fond regret.

Since Harold went home from school with the teacher on that afternoon, and there at her home they vowed to unite their destinies, Miss De Hart had gone to and from her school on the hill as one who walks upon the air. The children wondered what had come over her. All kindness before, now she was the perfection of love and tenderness. On the next Monday morning after the nice-looking preacher had spoken to them, Miss De Hart greeted each pupil with a kiss. She even kissed ugly, dirty Phil Dean! After a few days it began to be known that the teacher was engaged to the gentleman who had told them so many nice things when he was at the school. When the larger girls knew of it some of them went to their teacher and, putting their arms around her, kissed her and lay their faces against hers, as if to say, "Happy woman, when shall we thy joys know?" Others looked at her and smiled, as if to say, "You thought we would not know; but we do." The boys pouted for a while but their love soon overcame them, and they were as docile as ever. Not one of the pupils but would have been glad to swim a river or go through fire for her. "O there is joy in every heart when love abounds," sang the pupils! For Miss De Hart, the hours, days and weeks seemed to drag that were to bring her to the end of her work as teacher, and to the entrance upon the new life of companionship with the one she loved and honored.

Harold came down to see his mother and fiancee once or twice after the engagement, but had not visited the school. The arrangements were for the marriage to take place on the Wednesday following the close of school, which, was on Tuesday. The Bishop would pay a great honor to the pair by being present to unite them in marriage. Julian and Lucius were to act as. escorts to the bridal party. Two receptions were to be held; one at the home of the groom immediately after the marriage and another following that at the residence of Mr. Newton, a cousin of Miss De Hart. At two o'clock a. m., accompanied by their mother, they were to start on their bridal tour, visiting Washington, Baltimore, Philadelphia, New York and Boston. They would return to Oakland.

Julian came a day or two ahead, as he was to look into some legal matters for Harold. Lucius came on the morning of the wedding day. At ten o'clock, the groom and his two classmates called upon the bride. The lawyer was introduced. After they had spent an hour at her residence they left for a stroll. The classmates talked over old times at school, their successes and failures since leaving the University, but studiously avoided any expression that would bring up the accident at the football game, or the fainting spell on commencement day.

"I like your fiancee very much," said Julian; "she seems an accomplished lady. From what I hear of her and the esteem in which she is held by the people here, I think she is just the woman for a man in the ministry."

"Well, as an accomplished lady, I think she is worthy of the high estimate which you and Julian place upon her," said Lucius. But to be frank with you, Harold, I am sorry to see you link your destiny with a woman as dark as she. I could never bring myself to marry a woman of her color; her complexion would always overshadow her other qualities. I do not believe that I could love my offspring born of such a union! You should at least unite with a woman no darker than yourself. Before I would make such an alliance, I should remain a bachelor, as I am, forever."

"Why, Lucius, not even our friendship as classmates warrants your indulgence in such free expression of opinion to me of my future wife. Many a man has been challenged to mortal combat for words less derogatory. But since I am pre-eminently a man of peace, I shall pass your disparaging remarks by, because you mention no fault worthy of condemnation. Nor do you point out one defect which she or I by any power we possess could correct. You admit that she is all that any cultured Christian lady could be. But you fall back and offer the same objection to her that the white people, especially the Southern whites, offer to you or any one with Negro blood. My friend, I always knew you to be full of color-phobia, but did not think you would flaunt it in the face of your host, friend and classmate on the most joyous day of his life. That you could thus challenge my respect and friendship in speaking of the woman who, next to my mother, is the dearest person on earth to me, surprises me. But I opine that your zeal is not according to knowledge, and dismiss it as the vaporings of a disordered brain."

"Well said, well said," was the approval which Julian gave to the defense of the noble woman. Said he, "We who suffer so much as a people from the blighting curse of color prejudice, ought never allow our partiality as to color, if we have any, to show itself in words or acts. This mental defect, like that of concupiscence and drunkenness, should be crucified in our bodies. We should try to be like our Master, always seeing that in our fellows which is best, overlooking the weaknesses and faults."

On Tuesday, May 26th, 18—, the children, parents and friends gathered at ten o'clock a. m., to hear oral examinations, speeches and songs, to hear the results of their examinations, and to see the work of the pupils. After the exercises were over a basket dinner was served in the shady grove. All then went home to prepare for the event of the evening.

At half past seven o'clock the people began to gather at the church to witness the school exhibition. By eight the house was full, and the exercises began. After an hour and a half of very excellent entertainment by the pupils, the exercises closed with speeches of regret by some of the patrons for the loss of their very excellent teacher. The speakers said they were glad, since they could not retain the teacher, to turn her over to the care of one of their most excellent sons. She was still theirs, as she was going to one whose family had been one of them for several generations, and that the couple would be loved and cherished by them all. The exercises over the people went to their homes to rest and prepare for the grand event of the next evening.

On Wednesday, early in the day, presents began to arrive at the Scott residence and continued to come in till a late hour that evening. There were many valuable compliments from a distance as well as at home. Among those most prized was a painting presented by the G. A. R. Post of Oakland. It represented a colored soldier lying wounded on the battle-field. The scene was night, but by the light of the camp fire a red spot could be seen on the ground and leaves where the soldier lay. All who saw the face recognized it as that of Sergeant Scott, the groom's father.

Promptly at seven thirty o'clock in the evening the bridal party arrived at the church door, and made their way down the aisle to the slow music of the wedding march. Julian and Miss Forrester came first, next Lucius and Miss Newton, after them Harold with his mother on his arm, and then came the bride on the arm of Mr. Newton, preceded by four little girls with baskets of flowers which they scattered in the path of the bride. Remarks were heard: "She is the black swan," "How beautiful," "How sweet she looks," "Isn't she lovely," "He is getting a noble woman!" "Yes, and he is a noble man." The Bishop went through the ceremony with eclat. The bridal party re-entered their carriages and the audience was dismissed. The invited guests repaired to the Newton and Scott residences, where feasting and congratulations were the order till the time to say farewell to the bride and groom. At two o'clock a. m., the members of the bridal party accompanied the newly married people and the mother to the train, and saw them on a Pullman sleeper, and after wishing them smooth sailing o'er life's stormy sea bade them a final adieu!

As Julian was so near Muskegon, he must needs go to that city. Lucius not wishing to linger in an atmosphere so pregnant with unhappy memories left the next day for his field of action. The attorney was treated quite as well as the doctor had been at Muskegon. The lawyers, doctors and business men vied with each other in making his visit pleasurable. Some said that he must have enjoyed his visit more than the doctor did for he stayed longer, and was with Miss De Shon oftener. The look upon her face was different when he was around from what it had been when the doctor was near. Norman was not quite so cordial with the lawyer as he had been with the doctor, for he looked and acted as though he were jealous.

In adamantine chains shall death be bound, And Hell's grim tyrant feel th' eternal wound.

—Pope.

Is it for this we all have felt the flame, This newer bondage and deeper shame?

Nay, not for this, a nation's heroes bled, And North and South with tears beheld their dead!

—Dunbar.

THE Norrises had never given up hope of securing the release of Professor La Prade. They were kept posted by Mr. Grimpky as to the status of his efforts to secure a pardon for the prisoner. Lawyer Grimpky had secured a large list of names to a petition to the governor for the pardon of La-Prade. Mr. Storms headed the list. The judge, prosecuting attorney and some of the trial jury signed the petition.

But the Croton Bee, a newspaper published at Croton, bitterly opposed the pardon, and said, "Let the 'nigger' rot in chains. It was a mercy to send him to the penitentiary. He should have met the fate of Norris, or at least, have been condemned to death! Any 'nigger' who kills a white man should be killed, hung or lynched. This is a white man's country. The 'nigger' is only here by sufferance, and can only stay by obedience to the whites. Whenever he raises his black hand against a white man he should perish like the other beasts." The paper had several editorials along this line.

The governor turned the petition down as against the public good. That failing, the Norrises and Buchanans decided to give five thousand dollars to some trusty person who would undertake the escape of La Prade. An Ohio man, who had been a detective, undertook the perilous task. He had to have a confederate, of course. One of them must commit a small offense, and be convicted and sent to the penitentiary in order to get into communication with La Prade and perfect the plans—and that might fail, for the confederate might not be sent to the mines where La Prade was, and then all would fail except the punishment of the rescuer.

The men came to Croton at different times, put up at different hotels and were perfect strangers, so far as any one except themselves knew. The name of the principal one was V. B. Strong, and the confederate's name was M. B. Devine. Strong made complaint one morning that Divine had forged his name to a check which he had given his landlord. When arraigned, Devine agreed to plead guilty, provided he could get off at one year, in the penitentiary. That was arranged, and he was sent to prison for a term of one year. Devine was a blacksmith, so they put him in the shop. After he had been there about two months a call was made for a blacksmith at the East mines. One of the blacksmiths there had just been released, and Devine was sent to take his place. At roll call he noticed the answers to names, to see if La Prade was called and to see and note who answered. He soon found that La Prade was there, and that he was a miner. When Devine had learned this he managed to communicate with Strong, who had come and opened a photograph gallery in the village, a mile from the prison. Devine was allowed to write but his letters had to be looked over by the prison authorities. He was a chemist, and understood how to make a fluid to write with, the letters of which could only be seen after the sheet was heated. He wrote to a lady at Stillwater, and left about half the sheet blank, but in reality it had the invisible writing upon it. The lady was V. B. Strong. Strong got the letter on an order signed by the lady.

The blacksmith, Devine, proved to be one of the best they ever had. He could not only repair, but make many of the tools they used. Devine was also a man of fine education, played on several instruments, sang, and was one of the finest comedians the officers had ever heard. They had him over at the mess hall of the officers as often as they could. They declared that Devine was the same as a circus or a minstrel show. In addition to being a chemist, he had studied medicine and pharmacy. This prisoner was so entertaining that the officers came to feel that they could not do without him, and regretted that his term was so short, but thought it a pity for so smart a man to be in prison. They made him a "trusty." As a "trusty" he was often sent to the village of Stillwater on errands for the prison authorities. On these visits he always saw Strong. At those times they formed plans to secure the escape of La Prade, who was having a hard time of it. His work and his punishment grew harder and harder. Devine had managed to have a conversation or two with La Prade while they were in the exercise pen on Sundays. La Prade was told of what had been done towards his escape, that there was hope beyond, and to do his best to keep going.

The prison burying ground was about a quarter of a mile from the stockade. Most of the burying was done at the close of the day's work. In winter it was quite dark at quitting time. Two guards and four prisoners were sent out to where graves about two feet deep were kept open. One or two "trustys" worked at grave-digging most of the time. There was a burial nearly every night, and sometimes two or three.

La Prade was such a delicate man that he had rarely ever been able to do his work, and hence was nearly always being whipped. Now that the season was wet and cold, he had fallen sick again, and was not able to do his task. At last he was whipped, kicked and beaten so severely that he lay for a long time as though dead. The prison doctor came to see him, and said, "O well, that 'nigger' will be dead in a little while. Boys, have you got a hole ready?"

Devine asked if he might give La Prade some water, as that would perhaps revive him. He took a tin cup, went to a nearby spring, got some water, and quickly dropped into it a white liquid from a vial he held in his hand, went back to where La Prade lay and placed it to his lips. He raised the sick man's head so that he might swallow. La Prade revived, so that with Devine's assistance he was able to get to his cell. At the door Devine slipped into La Prade's hand another vial, which had directions on it: "Ten drops every hour; throw vial away when empty." Next morning La Prade lay cold and stiff in death. The body lay in the dead-house all that day. By good fortune Devine was sent to the village that afternoon; he saw Strong and told him that the body of La Prade would be buried that evening about six o'clock. Devine was to assist, and would leave a mark, which they understood, to show Strong the grave.

At ten o'clock that night a man drove a horse and buggy to within a hundred yards of the prison burying ground, got out and went cautiously towards the graveyard. Peering around for a while he saw the marked grave, and began the work of disinterment. In about thirty minutes, he pulled the body from the hole, and carried it to the buggy, put it in and drove rapidly away. Strong had a room over the gallery, which no one but himself and Devine were permitted to enter. To this room he carried the body. Once within, he laid it on a long table, stripped it of the prison rags and threw them into a red hot stove. He first gave the body a thorough scrubbing, alternating cold and hot water, and then rubbed the body till it began to glow and show signs of circulation. From many bottles he took fluids, administered them by pouring a little into the mouth of the subject and rubbing others on the body. Now and then, he held vaporous substances to the nose and chafed the body. Thus he worked for two hours, when there was a slight vibration of the chest, and in about ten minutes another and so on, till there was a deep sigh, and the dead was alive—living and breathing.

"Z. W. La Prade sent up from Coweater County, died on Dec. 16th, 18—," was entered in the prison records. There would be no excitement or search, as the prisoner was dead. So Strong kept La Prade in the room, fed and administered medicine to him till he was convalescent. In about a month from the time he was rescued, La Prade had grown a beard and was recovered sufficiently to travel. Strong destroyed all traces of the prisoner La Prade. His name was now L. A. Pardue.

As Devine's time expired in two months after the rescue of the prisoner, Strong made preparations to start North with Pardue. They would go as far as Oakland and t^iere await the coming of Devine. On a dark night they drove by buggy twenty-five miles to Lookout Station, and took the four o'clock train for Oakland. Of course Par-due had to ride in the Jim-Crow car, but he and Strong kept in touch with each other.. At Oakland Pardue stopped with a colored family and Strong put up at a hotel, but they met at night and discussed plans. As La Prade had never been at the place no one knew him; and he could not have been recognized now, because he looked more like some foreigner than a Negro. The Rev. Harold Scott was not at Oakland at this time. He had gone to another charge, and his wife and child were at Mrs. Scott's at Croton.

After Strong and Pardue had been at Oakland about two weeks, Devine came to them. That night they took the train for Cincinnati. Strong rode in the sleeper, Devine in the day coach and Pardue in the Jim-Crow car. They reached Cincinnati without mishap. As they had passed from the land of Egypt, they now traveled together in the same coach, put up at the same hotels and traveled as companions and associates. When they reached Cleveland, Ohio, Devine went on to his home at Oberlin, and Strong took Pardue to his residence in Cleveland, and sent a telegram to Mr. Norwood stating that they were at home, and all was well. Mr. Norwood understood, and answered that he would expect them on at the earliest date possible.

Sprinkled along the waste of years Full many a soft green isle appears; Pause where we may upon the desert road, Some shelter is in sight, some sacred, safe abode.

—Keble.

FIVE year's practice in Eastberg had made Dr. Storms quite popular as a physician and surgeon. He was making reputation and money quite rapidly. Having successfully performed several difficult operations, caused his fame to spread to other cities and towns. As the custom is when a new physician comes to a place, many of the chronic cases were brought to him. Of these several had been declared incurable by other physicians. Yet Dr. Storms cured some of them. The doctor was kept busy day and night.

It was largely through the influence of his classmate and chum, Dr. S. P. Tilton, that Dr. Storms took up the practice in Eastberg, the home of the Tiltons.

Dr. Tilton's family was quite wealthy and prominent. Sebastian and his sister Cordelia were the only children. The father, Dr. B. S. Tilton, had been so successful as a physician that he retired from active practice and turned it over to his son. The elder Tilton devoted his time to politics and speculation. Dr. S. P. Tilton was succeeding nicely in his practice. Dr. Tilton often visited the office of Dr. Storms, where they held consultations. Dr. Tilton preferred always to seek advice from Dr. Storms, as he knew his ability to give reliable information. Often at night when they had leisure they sat and discussed medical and other matters till a late hour. When not discoursing on medical subjects they often discussed civil, political and religious matters. Dr. Storms could speak freely with Dr. Tilton, for they were fast friends.

"It is unfortunate, I think for both the whites and blacks that the better class of both races do not come together and try to combine their efforts to build up his wasted land," said Dr. Tilton. "This is the land of my people as it is the land of your people. Why should conditions be such in this day of advanced thought and action that I should feel more patriotic than you or your people?"

"Don't say my people, if you please! My country is the world, and my people are humanity," said Dr. Storms. "I belong to no race and no clime. Am I without race or nation? How can I, an outcast, disowned by my father and my country, have other feelings than those of a wanderer and a pariah. Though I am a black man and of the black race, I am white. Who has done me this injustice?"

"Unhappy thought! This is what I referred to," said Dr. Tilton. "Conditions are such that you have almost no love of country. You almost hate the South for what it has been to your mother, to you and your people. You feel that you have no race. You do not claim the Negro race, because you feel that you are more a white man than a Negro. Your education and tastes put you far above the average of that people. But do you know that that comes of the degradation in which the Negro is held by proscription and race antagonism. In view of the rapid pace with which the Negro has made strides up the steeps of progress in these years of quasi freedom, what would he not do in the next hundred years if helped and not hindered by the white man? I know it is asserted that if the Negro were left to himself, or put off into a country to himself, he would soon lapse into savagery. But that is no proof that he may not attain to a high state of civilization! There are no self-made men, races or nations! No man can lift himself out of the mire. He must be helped out. No man can enlighten himself. He must be enlightened by others. You and I are called learned physicians. Are we not using information received from others?

The originality displayed is the skill with which we are able to apply this information. The whole civilized world uses the vast accumulation of the knowledge of all ages for its own benefit and advancement. It is true that through the strength thus acquired we are able to add a little, and thus age improves somewhat upon age.

"The Negroes should have the assistance and sympathy of the Southern people. Constituting, as they do, two-fifths of the South's population and nearly all of its laborers, they ought to be helped and encouraged to become patriotic citizens. No man can seek his country's highest good who does not love it. I know the course of the South, as a whole, has been to alienate and drive the Negro away from it. My people have half paid the Negroes for their labor, deprived them of manhood rights, cast them into prison by the wholesale, often for trivial offenses, mobbed and driven them from their homes, so that their budding hopes as free men have been blasted. The Negro feels that while in the country he is not of it. Although they have done exceedingly well both for themselves and us, would the Negroes not have done much better had they been treated as men and citizens. As a Southern man wishing the highest destiny for our sin-cursed section, I feel ashamed of her record of blood and oppression.

"Any one coming from the free progressive North into our part of the country can see at once the signs of the blighting hand of slavery, and the bloody traces of Kukluxing, lynching and whitecapping. No country on earth can prosper that harbors such sins within its bosom. No state or states can achieve their highest good that send men to their law-making bodies who boast of killing the people or depriving them of their legal rights. How much better than Nero is a man who stands up in our legislative and other halls and declares that in the South a part of the citizens will never be allowed to exercise their rights? Nero acted blindly, but these act with full knowledge of the injustice they do. Strange, I know it sounds to you, Lucius, to hear a Southern man talk thus; but you know that in my heart I love all men, and especially the weak and oppressed. You are aware of my treatment of you and the other colored students at the University. But going North did not change my heart or opinions; they were ever thus from my boyhood days. When I was a child I used to play with Saul, and thought it so strange that he was not allowed to come in, eat with me, and stay all night. When they said to me: 'Why, he is a 'nigger!' You can't eat and sleep with 'niggers!' that did not satisfy my young heart or the questioning in my mind.

"You must remember that many of the Northern men at the University upbraided me for treating Negroes as equals. I know many Southern people, especially of the younger element, who would be willing to treat high class Negroes as equals. Why, I would take you to my home and introduce you to my parents and sister if I dared to. But my people and public prejudice will not allow it. They would drop me as an associate and cut off my practice. So you see what a terrible thing caste prejudice is."

"Yes, I feel the sting of it every day," said Lucius. "Of course it galls me more than it does the average Negro, because of my nearness in blood to the dominant class. My education and training have had a deal to do with it. Reared at my father's home, I had very little to do with the blacks. Reared not exactly on equal terms with my brother and sister, yet I always considered myself their equal. Since acquiring an education I feel that I am their superior in every respect, except in their estimation, that of my father, and the public. The shame of my birth is on him, not me. Although I love and honor my father, I feel sometimes that I could kill him to avenge the wrong he has done my poor angel mother and me. And then, again, I repent, when I consider that he has done about all he could under the ban of Southern hate and injustice. And he tries to atone for that injury by treating the Negroes well, and doing what he can for them. For the whites will not allow those who wish to do so, to treat the Negro right. My whole nature rebels against an unreasoning prejudice that undertakes to set itself up as the judge of all the earth. Well, by their follies they are only hastening their own doom. Because they have not ruled in righteousness the Lord will pluck the Kingdom out of their hands and give it to another. The South will yet read, written on its wall of prejudice, 'MENE, MENE, TEKEL, UPHARSIN!' "Do you know, Lucius, that many of your friends feel that the Negro is too tractable and conciliatory—if he had more of the combative in his make up he would be treated with more deference; that he trusts in God to fight the battle •which he must fight! Many who used to stand up and contend for the rights of the Negro have lost faith in him because of his non-resistance to insults, oppressions and repressions heaped upon him from year to year! 'He who would be free must first strike the blow.' It is useless for a man to pray when he ought to fight. 'God helps those who help themselves.' Do you think that the millions of any other race on earth would submit as tamely as does the Negro to these outrages and injustices?"

"At first I thought your position would seem to be the correct one," said Lucius. "It does seem cowardly for ten million people to allow themselves to be trodden under foot as the Negro is; and that, too, in many sections where there are twenty-five Negroes to one white person. To persons who do not understand the situation it is astounding that these ten million people, goaded and exasperated as they are, insulted and misused in every way, do not break forth in their desperation and become a death-dealing mob. Since they have become so accustomed to death it is thought that they might rise in their might, and with the sword of vengeance and the torch of destruction go forth to avenge their three hundred years of wrong and suffering. But they who say such things do not know the Negro. He loves peace and his brother man. He prefers to serve God and his fellow, rather than to become a murderer.

"His record as a soldier in two hundred years of war on a thousand battle-fields will attest the fact that he is no coward. No man who has an ounce of brains or one trait of honesty will call him coward. The Negro soldier was never known to turn his back to approaching foe. But the bravest soldier is one who can stand in the face of a galling fire without firing in return. He who can stand still and wait his time to shoot, in the face of a shower of lead, is the bravest of the brave. It would be easy for the Negro to strike back, kill and slaughter, and himself be slaughtered, together with his helpless ones, but he is only biding his time. He who thinks the Negro is not chafing under these outrages and oppressions reckons without his host. The Negroes are keenly alive to every ill they suffer. Thousands and thousands lay awake nights pondering over the wrongs heaped upon the race. Of course the great majority of the Negroes are ignorant, and like the lower strata of any race or people, they pay little attention to the things which trammel us. But at least half of the ten million Negroes in this country are galled almost to desperation by the insults and injustices heaped upon a docile, affectionate and trustful people. The Negro is a part of the citizenship of this republic. He has ever been patriotic and has poured out streams of his best blood in defense of a liberty enjoyed by everybody but the Negro. No; they judge wrong who think or say that the Negro is cowardly or indifferent to the wrongs done him.'' These two young physicians often had such discussions. They felt almost like brothers when thus together. They would do anything they could for each other. They often consulted each other over the diagnosis of difficult cases. In most instances when Dr. Storms visited the patients of Dr. Tilton they thought Dr. Storms was a white man also. Wherever Dr. Storms went he made a favorable impression as a physician. Many said he was the best physician in the city, white or black. Dr. Storms spent little time outside of his professional work. He mingled little with the people except in a professional way. His tastes and prejudices had not changed, except to become more intensified. His close attachment to Dr. Tilton inclined him more towards his father's people.

On one occasion when calling at the office of Dr. Tilton, he saw a beautiful young lady sitting in the reception room. At a glance he knew by the resemblance that she was the sister of Dr. Tilton. He asked, with hat in hand, if the doctor was in, and she called the doctor. When he came in, as no other persons were present, he said: "Cordelia, this is Dr. Lucius Storms, of whom you have heard me speak so often."

Cordelia blushed and recognized the introduction with a nod of the head. Lucius blushed also and bowed and said: "Miss Tilton, your brother, always kind, is more than obliging in thus honoring in this manner one who is not entitled to expect it. He has ever been one of my best friends. I have been helped so much by his kindnesses. We contemplate taking a journey sometime to the Old World. We wish to visit the lands of history and achievement. There we shall be companions and brothers."

Cordelia blushed and bit her lip. She had never been brought thus near to a social level with one of the despised race. Dr. Storms bade them good afternoon and left.

When Dr. Storms was gone Cordelia said to her brother, "Is he really a Negro? He doesn't look, talk or act like one; at least, not like those I see. Is it really true, Sebastian, that you associated with and treated, and now treat this Negro as a social equal?"

"Yes, and no. I did when I could; I would row, if I dared, treat him as my bosom friend. I know no man on earth, except my father, whom I esteem higher. I don't treat him as a social equal now, because you and the rest will not permit it."

Pardue, Marie and Brownsville.

Domestic happiness, thou only bliss.

Of Paradise that has survived the fall!

—Cowper It was necessary for Strong and Pardue to remain in Cleveland for a few days to attend to some business affairs. Mr. Strong wished to consult a physician as to the proper treatment for Mr. Pardue. He wished to rid him of the ill effects of the exposure and brutal treatment undergone while in prison. And too, Mr. Pardue had to purchase suitable clothing. For all necessary expenses they had been instructed to draw on Mr. Norwood's bank in Cleveland, and they spent ten days in that city attending to business and seeing the points of interest. When on board the train steaming westward, Pardue became livelier than he had been since his resurrection. He seemed filled with happy anticipations of something that might possibly happen at the place to which he was going. He discoursed felicitously of the future, and the new life opening up to him.

"They say that after the resurrection from the dead the risen souls are happy if they have done their duty before death," said Pardue. Am I not one of the 'risen?' Why should I not rejoice and be glad? Am I not on the road to a paradise where there is an angel waiting at the gate for me? Yes, waiting for me! I do not wish to be an angel, but with an angel to stand. I have passed from death and hell to life and joy. I go to the rich reward promised to those who are faithful unto death. No other image has ever crossed my vision, or has any other spirit nestled within my heart. I am now about to enter the border-land of such a joyous happy life, that I feel that all the misery, suffering and even the death which brought me to the gate of bliss, were a good and not a misfortune. They placed me under the Southern white man's hate and lash to fit me for this coming good. For every stripe upon my body, and every kick and cuff, I feel that there awaits me such joy and peace as shall cause me to glory in these stripes and marks of the hell of their cruelty."

"Although, she has never told me by word or look that she cared for me, or regarded me in any different relation from that in which she held the other young men of her acquaintance, still, somehow, I feel that she at least has a compassionate regard for me on account of my great suffering. I know, though, that the devotion with which I regarded her before my doom has been sanctified by my sufferings! I almost worship her now! The love I bore her was the one star of hope in my dark and gloomy prison life and death! Had it not been for the love of her, which filled my poor desolate heart, I should have succumbed ere I did to the brutal cuffs and kicks of those in charge of the prison. Her voice ever came to me out of my misery, saying: " 'Be still, sad heart, and; cease repining, Behind the clouds is the sun still shining.' "It is said that they who die in faith shall awake to a far more joyous life than anything they have ever known or dreamed of. When I succumbed to the weight of my prison burden, it was as though I had sunk to a final sleep to dream of her forever more. But this joy of freedom and expected bliss makes my resurrection like unto the final day!

"You have told me how it was all planned and who were the prime movers in bringing you and Mr. Devine to the rescue. I can see through it all; one anxious face urging them to this end. She is the angel who urged and guided them. Is it possible that I, yet alive, shall see her face and hold her hand in mine? To feel that it shall be so is a joyous anticipation; to realize it will be bliss beyond expression."

"Yes," said Mr. Strong, "she has had much to say in directing us and has been urgent in her request that we save you from the slow death of your tortuous imprisonment. I am quite sure from the look in her eyes and t&e faltering voice in which she spoke of you that there is a very tender feeling in her heart for you. I believe you will realize your fondest hopes. The family has spared no expense that might make your pardon or escape secure."

On arriving in Brownsville they were met at the station by Mr. Norwood and Theodore with their private carriage. They took the newcomers to the Sumner House, where sumptuous rooms and accommodations had been prepared for them. After they had changed their dress and taken refreshments Mr. Norwood and Theodore took them to the Norwood residence. The mother and daughter met them in the drawing-room. Mrs. Norwood embraced Pardue as though he had been her own son, rescued and returned to her from the battle slain! Marie came forward with outstretched hands and tearful eyes and clasped both Pardue's hands in hers 'and said: "Professor, I am so. glad to see you! It is as though you had returned from the vale of shadows. Indeed you are returned from death, as I am informed. Well it is said, 'We live to die, and die to live.' "

"Yes," said the professor, "that is just what I did, Miss Marie. I chose to die that I might live. I am alive, and wish to live now that life's beauties and loveliness are opening to me. I once desired to die, because I thought it necessary to save those I cared for more than life! Now that I have passed from" death unto life, I want to live and enjoy the loveliness and liberties of life. It opens all the fountains of my soul to be thus alive and enjoying life's hopes and realizations among the redeemed. For have not nearly all of us been redeemed—Miss Marie, from the demon despoiler; Mr. Norwood, from the fury of the mob, but alas! some poor innocent being was sacrificed to save him; and me from the death-dealing hellhole of the South called a prison?"

The Norwoods thanked Mr. Strong for his devotion to their cause. All financial matters relating to Pardue's rescue had been settled. After a pleasant chat of an hour, Mr. Strong bade them good afternoon and accompanied by Theodore, was driven to his hotel. Here he retired for much needed rest. Theodore returned to his office. Mr. and Mrs. Norwood excused themselves and left Marie and the Professor in the drawingroom. The Professor was the first to break the silence: "It seems to me that life never was so sweet as at this moment. Can it be that I am about to realize the fulfillment of the hopes and dreams of my nights of torture and desolation! How often, O how often in those hours of delirium and exhaustion out of the darkness has my soul wandered with a sylph-like spirit in verdant groves filled with sweet odors and singing birds! In my visions I sat beside the limpid streams and sipped with her the cooling draught. And by my side, always speaking words of cheer and singing sweet songs of love to me, was a maiden dear.

"It was thee, my Marie; it was thee. Not once did I hope ever to realize those heavenly joys in this life till the man spoke to me, a few weeks before my death and resurrection of the hope beyond. But I always hoped that in that brighter, better world we should sit side by side in the evergreen groves, listening to the heavenly plumed birds as they sing among the ever-blooming flowers and we drink of the living waters of the fountain of life.

"But God has been most gracious in permitting me to sit and look upon the lovely face and into the beautiful eyes of the one who has been always in my heart, thoughts and dreams. Since I sat and listened to the entrancing music of your voice on the evening of your graduation—since then, Marie, I have been your slave. To die for you was sweet, yes sweet! Will you take this poor feeble life, called back by your will and power from the cold, damp grave? Take it and make it what you will. It is not much to offer, but such as it is, it is all yours—it is all yours now and forevermore."

Marie was weeping. Lovejoy gently placed his arm around her and drew her face to his, took the hands from her face and pressed a kiss upon her quivering lips, saying, "Marie, my love, will you come to me?"

"You have suffered much for me and mine; poor is the reward which I can give. But, as you ask, it is yours. My poor heart impels me to render so far as I can some recompense for such service and devotion as yours has been," said she.

They talked for quite a while of the dark and gloomy past with its rifts of sunshine, and then of the bright and golden future. Hand in hand the lovers now went to where the parents were and asked for their approval and blessing upon their betrothal. The father and mother were not surprised at their coming, as they had long surmised that there was an attachment between the young people deeper than friendship.

The Norwoods had invested in property and traded till they were now much wealthier than when in Georgia. Mr. Norwood owned two very valuable farms, which he was cultivating, besides several valuable pieces of city property. He also owned and conducted a large agricultural and hardware store. Theodore was State Commissioner of Agriculture. Marie was one of his clerks; but she was now relieved by Mr. Love-joy A. Pardue, who took her place in the office.

The time of the marriage was to be Thanksgiving day. Messrs. Strong and Devine were among those invited. On Thanksgiving evening the new Ebenezer Church was full to overflowing with the elite of Brownsville. The audience was as neatly attired as was ever seen in any auditorium on like occasion. At the Norwood mansion presents were being brought in at a rapid rate. Presents and congratulations had been coming in for three days, and among them was one, a diamond ring, from Mr. Strong. It had been engraved on the inside, "Risen." There was a gold locket with a picture in it, of a body being taken from a grave. It was presented by Devine.

Elder Buchanan, in feeble, faltering voice, united the pair in holy wedlock and remarked at the close of the service that he thought this would be his last ministerial act, as he was near the end of his journey. The guests repaired to the residence of the bride, where, feasting and merriment continued to a late hour. The next day, the newly-married folks began housekeeping in their own cosy little nest, next door to the paternal domicile. As they came in to the first meal in their own dining-room, arm in arm, Love-joy remarked that: "This is a love-feast;" and as they sat side by side, he said: "Once I was dead, but now I am alive forevermore."

In the month of December, as it began to draw near to the anniversary of the nativity of Him who came to bind up the broken-hearted and preach deliverance to the captives, while the streets of Brownsville were thronged with merry shoppers who were making their purchases of things to gladden the hearts of their kindred and friends, Elder Buchanan, the founder of the beautiful, prosperous city, was stricken with paralysis. When it was known about the streets and in the places of business, the questions were upon every lip: "Do you know that Elder Buchanan is very ill?" "How is Elder Buchanan?"

Many hundreds called at the residence to express their sympathy and offer their services; not a few passed to ask after the condition of the venerable father. Four of the best physicians were in attendance upon the patient. But on Christmas Eve, as the flickering- rays of the wintry sun fell faintly upon the leafless branches of the trees upon the western slopes, he breathed his last, full of years and good works.

Full of faith he took his flight, Out of darkness into light.

His funeral occurred on the day after Christmas, and was attended by all the city officials in a body, the Board of Trade, the business men and a vast concourse of people. The services were held at Ebenezer Church, where a sermon was preached and eulogies and resolutions were offered. A double line of carriages and vehicles nearly a mile in length followed the remains to Oak Hill, the finest cemetery in the city. The body was deposited in a private vault, to remain till the sarcophagus which was to be erected by the city was ready. In it the casket would rest permanently. His death was mourned as a public loss. The will of the deceased patriarch Buchanan was found to contain among other bequests one of a thousand dollars to Ebenezer Church and one of five hundred dollars to Mr. Leonidas Storms, the man who out of the darkness of desolation came to deliver him from the hands of the destroyer.

Thou ugliest fiend of Hell! thy deadly venom Preys on my vitals, turns the healthful hue On my fresh cheeks to haggard sallowness, And drinks my spirits up!

—Hannah More.

ON returning one night about half past twelve o'clock from the bedside of a very sick patient, Dr. Storms found a telegram awaiting him. With trembling hand he opened it and read: "Mr. Leonidas Storms lies at the point of death. Come at once!

"A. Grimpky."

He had only time while the office boy packed his suit case to telephone Dr. Tilton to look after his patients while he was away. He informed the doctor that he had been called to Croton on account of the severe illness of Mr. Storms, of whom he had often told him. The boy drove the doctor to the station and he caught the two-thirty o'clock train for Croton. As Dr. Storms was well known by the train men he had to go into the Jim-Crow car, because he could not get a sleeper on such short notice. It was very distasteful to the doctor to ride in that filthy, dingy, stinking car, among a lot of dirty railroad hands. They were smoking old, filthy, offensive pipes and acting in a very boisterous manner. It so stung the doctor that he tried to ride on the platform, but the brake-man ordered him in from there. At last he set his face to endure it, and went in.

"I do not suffer one-thousandth part of what Mr. Norris and Prof. La Prade were made to undergo for manhood's sake," said the doctor. I must learn to endure this for a while that I may rise to better things." After he got settled down and somewhat overcame his repugnance to his surroundings he fell into a musing mood. He thought upon his father's illness and of his possible death; of all that his death meant to him; the memory of his angel mother, and of the wrongs to them both. Said he to himself: "The only difference between the blackest, dirtiest Negro on this train and me is my ability to suffer. They feel no inconvenience on account of these insults and injustices. My education and refined feelings are the measure of my sufferings, not my color. For my white skin avails me nothing when it is known that there is Negro blood in my body."

Dr. Storms mused upon the chances of trouble with his brother, who hated him because he was not only a natural child but a Negro. He felt sure that his sister would not of herself give him trouble, but she was married now and her husband might be disposed to annoy him. In these hours of his journey he climbed many imaginary high mountains and waded deep rivers of trouble and difficulty.

In all Dr. Storms' mental visions one star of hope shone out of the blackness of his night and illumined his pathway. He had thoughts and inclinations which he knew he dared not express. As his thoughts crowded thick upon him, his heart burned, and he trembled with emotion when a certain face and form flitted across his mental pathway. Lucius also thought of Ernestine and her seeming aversion or indifference to him. He remembered that she seemed to prefer the man whom he hated. Why he hated Julian he could not tell, as Julian's conduct toward him had ever been most honorable and respectful. He just hated him on general principles, like some white people hate Negroes. Lucius had once aspired to be preferred by Ernestine to any other young man and because Julian appeared to stand in the road to his ambition he hated him and wished to do him injury. Lucius felt sure that Julian knew of the wrongs he had done and instead of respecting this magnanimity in Julian, he felt a deeper contempt for him. Lucius believed that if Julian had been a manly man, according to his ideas, he would have called him, Lucius, to account for his conduct, and thus given him excuse to do Julian greater injury. But as Lucius had at the suggestion of Ernestine abandoned any predilections as to her, he allowed his mind and heart to contemplate the possibility of attainment to an object higher in the society scale and more to his liking. If the young lady now in contemplation was not higher in reality, she was at least so by the place assigned to the races, by those who assume lord-ship over all races, kindreds, nations, tongues, principalities and powers.

"I have always desired to cut my relations with my mother's unfortunate race. To be one of them only brings misfortune, insult and degradation. To be in this dirt trap, called a car; to see this dirty, motley crowd; to contemplate what they represent and what they stand for in this country, fills my soul with disgust and an unutterable longing for something higher and better— something that will carry me up into the atmosphere where men get a full draught of pure, free air and life. This life for me is deep misery and unendurable! I will aspire if I have to pay the penalty with my life! I will live as a man or die as a dog!"

Before Lucius realized where he was the porter cried out: "All off for Croton. Lucius sprang up, grabbed his suit case and got off. No carriage was there to carry him to a stopping place. He desired to go at once to his father's bedside, but since the father was either dying or dead, he must be cautious. So he gave his suit case to a boy to carry and walked down town. Lucius went to the office of Mr. Greer, Mr. Storm's lawyer, and learned that his father was very low, and not expected to live for many hours. Lucius paid the boy, and asked Mr. Greer to allow him to leave his luggage there till he returned. Lucius then went to the office of Mr. Grimpky and learned further of the condition of Mr. Storms. Mr. Grimpky told him that Gatewood had just gone up town. So Lucius hurried on to see his father while Gatewood was out. When he reached Mr. Storm's room he found him speechless. Soon after Lucius arrived there Alma came in. Having given him her hand in greeting she left the room, leaving Lucius and Mr. Storms together. Mr. Storms looked at Lucius and seemed to recognize him, but could not utter a word or move. Lucius stood by the bed and wiped the bitter tears from his eyes. He felt that he was recognized by his father, but his utter loneliness and desolation overcame him, and he sank to the floor by the bed. When he had lain thus for some time Gatewood came in; and when he saw Lucius he grew very red in the face and said, with much passion in his voice: " 'Nigger,' how dare you enter ray father's room unbidden? I am in charge here! You cannot take privileges or hang around here as you have done heretofore. When he who lies there passes away, you pass from here forever."

The father heard what was said, but could only look distressed. He could utter no word of protest, though he looked worried.

Lucius said, "I am sorry conditions are such that my presence is required or has been requested here! I pray you to have some regard for your suffering parent, who lies there almost in the arms of death! I shall rid you of my presence, if that will prevent your brawling over your dying father. You are his lawful son and legal heir. I am his son of misfortune. He is a high-toned man. All his life he tried, as far as he could, to repair and atone for the wrong he had done my mother and me by bringing me into the world under untoward conditions. Yes, he is a noble man! Would that his son and heir had some of his traits! You know your power and I know it, too; therefore I go from this house, but shall contend for my rights whatever they are under his last testament."

"Yes, 'nigger', I know my rights and power, and I shall use them on you if you don't get out. Only the fact that you are one of our former 'niggers', keeps me from having you dealt with by the 'Klan.' But even that will not restrain me should you come around here again claiming any rights or recognition as anything but the ex-slave of my father. Do you understand? If you do not govern yourself according to what I say, you will be quieted."

"I go, sir. Do not think you can frighten or deter me! I am not of that blood that cringes or cowers," said Lucius.

Lucius returned to the city slowly, pondering over the events of the last hour. He secured lodging at the home of Mr. Warren, one of the prosperous colored business men of the city. The next day word was brought to Lucius that Mr. Storms had died at three o'clock that morning. The funeral took place the second day after his death, at two o'clock in. the afternoon, at the Presbyterian Church. A large concourse of people was present to do honor to the memory of one of their foremost citizens. Among the floral designs was one, a "keystone," sent by the family of Elder Buchanan. Gatewood objected to its being placed by the bier, but Alma insisted that it would be pleasing to her father to be thus remembered if he were living, so Gatewood yielded to her. Of course Lucius was not among the mourners; but he sat in the place in the church set apart for colored people.

The next day Lucius went to see his lawyer and arranged for him to be present at the reading of the will and to attend to his affairs. At eleven o'clock that night he returned to his home. When the will was read it was found that all the real property had been left to Gatewood and Alma. Lucius was to receive ten thousand dollars in cash and bonds as his share of the estate. That amount was considered to be about one-fourth of the estate. The executor was to turn that amount over to Lucius, providing, no contests or lawsuits were instituted. But if there were lawsuits all were to take equal shares under the will, according to the decree of the court. Gatewood fussed, fumed and talked a good deal about what was left to the "nigger." He threatened to contest as to the bequest to Lucius, but Alma and her husband were disposed to let things stand as the parent had willed. Gatewood asserted that if Lucius had remained in Croton, he could have had the whole business soon settled out of court by the Klan. The executor after waiting one year to see if any contests would be made, turned Lucius' share of the estate over to him.

Lucius invested the money in a beautiful residence in Eastberg. He had through his practice and trading secured considerable estate before he purchased the lovely home in an aristocratic section of the city. There was considerable stir and complaint when it was known that the Negro doctor had secured a residence in that section. Several threatened to sell out and leave if they could not freeze the Negro out. A committee of the residents waited on the doctor and said to him: "We know you are as white, as intelligent and refined as we are; we presume that when you marry, your wife will be no darker than yourself, and that most of your associates will be people of your color, but you are known as a Negro; therefore your presence in this section not only injures us socially, but injures our property. You know that the coming of a Jew, Negro or any one of the dark races into any high-class section of a city causes those living there to change their residence even at great sacrifice. We do not stop to argue the justice or injustice of the feeling of aversion to the Jew, Negro, or dark races, but we know it is a fact. You also injure yourself, because you are now held in high esteem by the best element of the white people of the city. But when you undertake to ruin them financially and socially, then you make them your enemies and force, them to drastic measures. You also injure your race's interests by making friction between the whites and blacks."

"Gentlemen," said Dr. Storms, "I have no race; I am an outcast. I am more a white than a black man. I am what I am by no fault of mine. In fact, all the misery and misfortune that I suffer is due to your race. But one thing I know. I am a man, and I will sacrifice my manhood to humor no one. In purchasing this property the white blood in me asserted itself in seeking that which it deemed good for itself. I and the race to which your prejudice has assigned me have sacrificed life, liberty and property, to your greed and hate; but this time I propose to stand upon my constitutional rights. The enjoyment of life, liberty and property you have guaranteed to every man. No, I shall not sell; I did not buy to sell! I have no ties on earth now, and if I am killed, the property shall go to the education of the race accursed, for the love I bear for my mother's memory."

The committee went away with frowns of displeasure upon their faces and vengeance in their minds. "There will come a time, Mr. 'Nigger/ when your pride will wilt; when you will sing another tune."

Gatewood Storms came to Eastberg about this time ostensibly on business, but in reality to stir up feeling against Dr. Storms. He did all he could to encourage the excitement about the "nigger" doctor. He ranted about his impudence in trying to be white folks by purchasing a home among them. Gatewood did all in his power to fan the fire of indignation against Dr. L. Storms into a conflagration. He talked with many of the leading citizens about the trouble Lucius had given him and his sister on account of some claim he pretended to have on his father. He told them that that "nigger" had always longed to be considered a white man, and that was the reason he had stuck himself up among the best whites.

"I understand that Dr. Tilton treats this 'nigger' almost as an equal, and that he went so far as to introduce him to his sister. Well, that is something no true Southern man will do or allow others to do. The Southern gentleman will associate with no man who treats a 'nigger' as his equal, no matter what the 'nigger' knows or has.

"Well, I warn you that you are going to have trouble with that 'nigger.' Dr. Tilton had better beware of how he associates with him. 'Play with a dog and he will lick your face.' "

Thou hast prevaricated with thy friend, By underhand contrivances undone me; And while my open nature trusted In thee; Thou hast stept between me and my hopes, And ravished from me all my soul held dear.

Thou hast betrayed me. —Rowe.

BEECH HAVEN was an important legal as well as business center. There were found nearly all the courts. Besides the state courts, all Federal courts, except the Supreme Court, were held there. It was on that account a city full of lawyers. The courts were in session most of the year, hence nearly all the attorneys were busy.

On the bulletin board of a fine office building owned by a wealthy Negro, on one of the busiest of the city's thoroughfares, was this sign: "JULIAN JARNIGAN, LAWYER AND COUNCILLOR-5th-14." Taking the elevator and reaching No. 14 on the fifth floor, one found a nicely furnished suite of three rooms, with all the modern outfit for such an office. The front office was a reception or waiting room; the second was the office of the clerks, stenographers and typewriters— the files and a part of the library were in the second room; the third room was the private office of the attorney. The principal part of his library was' in this office. All the historical and other reference books were in cases in the front office. He employed a bookkeeper, two clerks, two typewriters and stenographers, and an office boy.

Lawyer Jarnigan was very busy. The office was crowded from morning till night, often to late at night. Much of the legal office and court business was conducted by the chief clerk, who was the assistant to the lawyer. The clerks were young law graduates serving their office terms. Only the most important matters and clients were admitted to the attorney's private office. Matters of paying fees, settling with clients, information concerning the status of cases, or the final decrees were attended to by the clerks. Lawyer Jarnigan had numerous cases in all the courts up to the Supreme Courts of the state and of the United States. His practice was not confined to the colored people; he had many white clients and among them several large firms and corporations.

"Money and business know no color," said the lawyer in discussing the matter of white clients in the South. "If a white man thinks he can save money or secure better results by having a Negro lawyer attend to certain cases, why, he will have him. There are many cases in which a colored lawyer can, from the very nature of things, give better service than a white one. These are some of the things which make prejudice pay."

Among the farmers, business men and politicians, Lawyer Jarnigan had many warm friends. The Hon. W. I. Westmoreland often gave him legal matters to attend to for his employes and tenants. The Hon. Westmoreland was not only one of the largest land owners and farmers of that section, but he was also the representative from that district in the United States Congress. Hon. Westmoreland had more than five hundred Negroes on his plantations. Those whom he employed as laborers lived in quarters, as the Negro did before emancipation. Those who rented or farmed on shares lived in cabins of one room. Sometimes there were two rooms when the family was so large as to require four or five beds. Often as many as ten persons slept in the same room— girls, boys, young men and young women slept in one room. Their daily fare consisted of bacon, cow peas and cornbread—sometimes buttermilk. On Sundays they might have biscuit and coffee. Those who were hired and those farming on shares were called up in the morning by the plantation bell. They went to and came from the fields by the same signal.

On the plantation was a log schoolhouse, at which the county conducted a three months' school in the winter. The teacher was one of poor education. The schoolhouse was also used as a meeting-house. On Saturday nights prayer and praise meetings were held. On Sundays there was preaching all day, as there were usually four or five preachers present, all with burning messages to deliver. On Saturday nights after the exhortations and prayers were through the young and nimble sisters got in a circle and went through holy dances, while the older sisters, brothers and young men sang their weird songs. The contortions of the body and the steps to the wild songs made the scene an impressive one.

The moral tone on these plantations was very low. The preachers led in conquests of lust. They often had as many as a dozen offsprings laid to them. After these revival seasons several of the young women would be found to be in an interesting condition. To be a mother of a fatherless child was no bar to entrance to the church, or to being received by the best among them. There were few whites around except the bosses, who had no families, and were consequently in illicit relations with a number of the colored women.

At the Saturday night hullabaloos, cake-walks and all manner of lewd dances were indulged in. The tendency on the Westmoreland plantations was to lower the moral standards. The manner of housing and promiscuous mingling of the sexes without restraint, all tended to breed vice.

"Let the 'niggers' frolic, shout and play Saturday night and Sunday, and they will work contentedly all the week," the landlord and bosses said, "What do we care for their morals so we get cotton and make money ?"

The Hon. Roscoe De Witt introduced a bill in Congress to cut down the representation of those states which had debarred from voting any of their citizens of votable age. Hon. Westmoreland was among those who strenuously opposed the measures.

"The 'nigger' is little above the brute." "All he is fit for is to work and do the white man's drudgery," said Mr. Westmoreland.

The bill was laid over till the next session of Congress. When Congress adjourned Hon. Westmoreland invited Hon. De Witt and five other members who favored the bill and two who opposed it to visit his plantations. Hon. De Witt and the other Republicans had never been in the South, so they gladly accepted. The day appointed for them to start was a month away. Westmoreland made a trip home and instructed the bosses and foremen to get all the Negroes, nearly a thousand, together on the Saturday after the gentlemen arrived ; to give them the biggest day and night they ever had; to make preparations for two thousand, and invite the "niggers" from all the surrounding plantations. They made ready as directed. On the day. appointed the Negroes came by hundreds and ran up into thousands. Two string bands were on hand to furnish music. Barbecue for two thousand was prepared and twenty loads of watermelons were brought. A blind tiger was run with the knowledge of the landlord, so that the Negroes might be at their worst. Rag-time dancing and cake-walking were in their glory. At two o'clock Hon. Westmoreland drove the Congressmen out and carried them all through the crowds in the midst of their wild drunken debauch. The scene was really obscene. Westmoreland carried the visitors to a building where a sumptuous country dinner had been prepared. They were served in grand old Southern hospitable style. The visitors i were then taken out to a grand stand and given seats where they could observe all that went on at the worse than Neroan revel. The visitors were shocked by what they saw and heard.

"Is it possible, Westmoreland, said Mr. De Witt, "that you allow your people to conduct themselves in this manner? Do you offer no objection to these bestial sports?"

"Why, this is 'nigger' life and character," said Westmoreland. "This is 'nigger' civilization. Why, do you see that fellow lying yonder by that large oak? He is beastly drunk. That 'nigger' is one of the leading preachers at the church here. That one you see staggering over that woman is another. Both of them have at least a dozen women here on my plantations. These are some of your citizens. These are the people whom you wish to place beside me and the chivalry of the South."

At night he drove out again with the visitors. By the bright moonlight and a few flickering lamps they saw sights that made them shiver with disgust.

The Congressmen were the guests of Westmoreland for several days, and he carried them to many cities and towns in the state. He always took them through the low slums, where the most depraved and abandoned Negroes were congregated, and where they were acting their worst. On all these occasions Westmoreland informed, the Congressmen that these were the people they were trying to put beside the Southern white people. Never at any time did he show them the low, vicious and ignorant class of poor whites who although as ignorant and depraved as the Negroes, are still considered worthy to vote and hold office. Although Westmoreland was considered a close friend of Julian's, he did not allow the Congressmen to meet Lawyer Jarnigan, visit his fine offices, or to see any of the other colored lawyers, physicians, ministers and business men. Westmoreland did not permit the visitors to see the sections where the well-to-do, refined colored people lived. He took care to keep all these things from their sight.

There was a colored bank at Beech Haven, and many nice business houses, churches and school-houses. The office building where Julian had rooms was filled with colored lawyers, physicians, artists and real estate agents; on the first floor, was the bank. There were many beautiful homes where the degree of culture, refinement and chaste living, was as high as that in the best homes. But the visitors were shown none of these homes or people, nor were they allowed to see their churches and places of amusement, for Westmoreland's purpose was to have the Negro citizens measured by their worst element. No people ought to be so estimated. Should the sixty per cent of the Negro race which has struggled up from the depths of poverty and ignorance to a plane of honest and decent living be classed with or kept down by the depraved rag-time element of the race?

On their return northward the Republican members felt somewhat depressed and crestfallen on account of what they had seen of the people whom they were trying to help. The Democrats were jubilant because they saw that they had changed the opinion of their colleagues with respect to the Negroes as citizens, and they knew that sentiment would grow to the Negroes' detriment.

When Julian had an opportunity he talked with the Hon. Westmoreland on the subject of the visit of the Congressman.

"Why would you not allow our committee of leading colored men to call upon your guests, when you announced that they would be glad to meet the citizens at their hotel while in our city?" asked Jarnigan. "You might have allowed us to pay our respects to them, if not to lay some of our grievances before them. It does look as though you wished to exhibit the worst side of our life in the South; to show them the worst and most depraved Negro—those whom your system and others have made brutes. The manner in which you and those around you conduct your farms tends to make the people more vicious. Twenty-five Negroes have gone from your plantations to the penitentiary this year. I defended some of them. I can't see how a man who stands for all that you represent can take the course you do toward my people, for each year you reap a rich harvest off of them in dollars. How can the ignorant, weak Negro in the South ever be elevated if the strong and great, the leaders, the rich and lawmaking element are going to use that power to degrade and damn the race? I and at least half of the race protest against it with all our being. Even those poor, ignorant, vicious people, whom you see used like so many beasts, would join in a like protest if their blinded eyes were once opened."

"What you say, Jarnigan, is in many respects true," said Hon. Westmoreland, "but you know that in these times the all-powerful dollar is master of assemblies and measures; that men amount to nothing when measured by money. Thousands and thousands of men are being sacrificed yearly to the god Mammon. Mammon sends forth armies to wipe the inhabitants from a place or country that it may be occupied by the money power. The age is so commercialized and mammonized that I find myself in the great and powerful march of commercialism and industrialism."

Up comes the gale, And the mist-wrought veil Gives way to the lightning's glaro And the cloud drifts fall A somber pall, O'er water, earth and air.

—Dunbar.

Alas! by some degree of woe We every bliss must gain; The heart can ne'er a transport know, That never feels a pain.— —Lord Lyttleton.

A LARGE mass meeting was held at Reformer Hall. Speeches were made protesting against the manner in which Horn Westmoreland was trying to bias sentiment against the Negro by exhibiting the worst element and qualities of the race.

"We do not deny that we have bad people in the race and many of them. Where is a race or nation which has not? But we demand to be measured like others, not by our worst, but by our best," said they.

A committee was appointed to go to Washington for the purpose of waiting on the Republican members of the party which had visited the Westmoreland place and any others they might meet, to lay the true facts of conditions before them.

On his return from that meeting, Lawyer Jarnigan found a telegram calling him to New Orleans. The telegram said: "Papa is dead! Come! Ernestine!!" The next train going South carried Julian. When he reached the city the funeral was over. On the afternoon of the day Julian arrived, the will of the deceased De Shon was read in the presence of those interested. All the estate was left to Ernestine, except some charitable bequests. There were no other near relatives, so there was little likelihood of contests. Julian spent considerable time in advertising and helping Ernestine in getting things in shape to manage them. Mr. Marcet was continued as Ernestine's lawyer for the time being, but he would be assisted by Julian.

One afternoon they visited Ernestine's plantation ten miles out from the city. The weather was quite warm and as the afternoon wore on the day grew warmer instead of cooler. The couple spent some little time at one of the houses on the farm. The lady brought them cool water from the spring at the foot of the hill; she also served them with a nice luncheon, consisting of cold biscuits, preserves and delicious milk and butter just from the spring-house. After being so refreshed, they drove about the plantation for some time, admiring the crops and talking over the past, present and future. Their minds were so full of the things about them that they failed to note the rapid flight of time. When Julian and Ernestine returned to the house the weather was still hot and sultry, although it was late in the afternoon.

When Mr. Simpkins, the man of the house, came in the couple drove up and said they must start for the city right away, as they would be late getting in any way. Mr. Simpkins told them they had better stay all night, as he feared there would be a storm before many hours. Julian said he hoped not. Ernestine remarked that they must go, as they were compelled to be in the city that evening to attend a reception given by the "Langston Legal Club" in honor of Mr. Jarnigan.

They had driven only a few miles when Julian noticed a dark cloud rising in the southwest. Soon after, they saw a flash of lightning.

"It looks as though what Mr. Simpkins predicted will occur," remarked Julian.

"I hope not," said Ernestine.

In less than thirty minutes it began to grow dark. The clouds were covering the skies, the lightning flashing and fierce winds blowing. The storm had not yet burst upon them, though it was coming fearfully fast. Julian wished to take shelter in some of the cabins not far from the road, but Ernestine preferred that he drive on.

"We are in a top buggy, and have a storm curtain. We can keep dry, I think," said she.

"Well, the storm has no terrors for me. It is only for your sake that I wish to take refuge. The wind might blow a tree or limb upon us. I would not have anything happen to you for my own life." said Julian.

Just then the storm burst upon them in all its fury. As they were driving in the face of the storm the rain beat in upon them and soon had their ardor somewhat dampened, but they struggled on as best they could. It was now pitch dark! Only by the flashes of the lightning could Julian see the road. The horse became fretful, jumped and reared, and tried to run, as several limbs fell near. At last the horse began to surge and run, and before Julian could check him plunged forward in the dark, and ere they knew it all were in what had been the dry bed of a stream, which they had noticed on the way out, but now it was a raging torrent. Ernestine screamed when the water rushed in upon her! She clung to Julian and Julian clung to the reins. The horse struggled, kicked and finally got loose from the buggy. Julian clung to the reins with one hand and with the other tried to hold to Ernestine, who had fainted; but the horse dragged him loose from Ernestine. She was held in the buggy by the storm curtain. Julian was dragged to the shore by the horse, while Ernestine and the buggy were whirled down with the torrent tide. As soon as Julian reached firm ground he rushed down the side of the stream calling loudly to Ernestine. But no response came. He ran up and down the bank calling wildly, stumbling over stumps, logs and gullies, but he rushed on blindly. Julian fell into the flood two or three times and had a hard struggle to keep from drowning. At last he made a wild rush going further down the stream. The clouds had begun to break a little and he could see better. After he had run down the side of the stream about a mile he came suddenly upon the buggy, turned bottom upwards in an eddy. He rushed on as fast as he could, falling over logs, stumps and into gullies. Finally he thought he heard a scream. Now he tried to fly and even prayed for wings! At last he made a long leap and fell into the flood, but managed to keep on top of the water and to retain his presence of mind. Several times he was hit by floating logs and limbs of trees and knocked under the seething waters, but he had resolved to rescue Ernestine alive or dead, or perish. After Julian had been in the torrent for what seemed to him an age, he was hurled around a bend in the stream, and saw what appeared to be a white garment. The almost drowned man struggled towards the object, often knocked back by objects floating on the bosom of the flood, but struggled on, fighting a death struggle, and at last got close enough to see one fair hand sticking above the waters.

"O God, it is she! Help me to save her," prayed Julian.

Just then a huge wave lifted and threw him right to the object. He grasped the cold, lifeless hand, made another prayer for help, and with one arm bore the apparently lifeless body, and with the other fought for the shore. Having reached an eddy he picked up the body and carried it to smooth ground, laid it down and began to do all he knew about restoring drowned persons to life. He worked thus for some minutes. During the time he was trying to resuscitate the drowned, the storm had subsided, the clouds rolled away and the moon shone out in all her beauty. Low muttering thunders were heard now and then in the distance, as though saying: "Well, keep out of our path next time!" At the end of half an hour Ernestine began to show signs of returning life. Julian now took her in his arms and began to walk as rapidly as he could back up the stream. When he had gone about half a mile he saw a light, which seemed not far away, and towards that light he bore his burden, but it was further away than he supposed. When he reached the cabin the people had not retired for the night. He carried the rescued in and laid her on a cloth spread on the floor. After Julian had in a few words' explained what was the matter a bed was made ready by the women and dry clothes, such as they had, were put on Ernestine. An old lady in the house who knew well what to do in such cases took charge of her, and after chafing and bathing with restoratives for sometime, Ernestine opened her eyes and said.

"Where am I? What has happened? O yes, I remember it all now. There was a storm; the horse ran into the stream. Where is Julian—I mean Mr. Jarnigan? O my God! what has happened? Where is Julian?"

Julian hearing her call came into the room to soothe her. When Ernestine saw him she exclaimed: "Saved! Saved! Thank God! Thank God!"

For the first time Julian asked what o'clock it was, and when told that it was just 10 p. m. it seemed to him incredible. Why, said he: "It seems to me that it has been years since we left the plantation. Can I get one of the men to go to the road and see if anything can be seen of the horse? The buggy is on the bank of the stream between this place and the road."

The man sent to see about the horse, returned in an hour, but instead of the horse he had with him two young lawyers from the city. "Well, my friend, we did not expect this evening's meeting to be thus," said the lawyers.

"How came you here, my friends?" said Julian. "Well, it is like this: the horse you drove came to the stable with his harness all torn and bespattered. The exciting news was brought to the club meeting, where your presence was expected every minute. So we jumped into our carriage and drove out along the road to see if we could learn anything of you and Miss De Shon. We were more than fortunate in reaching the ford or crossing of the creek just as this young man came to look for your horse. From him we learned that a gentleman and lady who had been in the flood were at this house. He guided us on here, and here we are to carry the rescued back to the city. You can tell us all about it at the club/' Ernestine was now sufficiently recovered to make the trip home. After paying the people of the house for their kind assistance and arranging for them to get the buggy out and bring it to the city in the morning, the party left. Now and then Mr. La Roche and Mr. Sinclair, the young attorneys, would make some jocular remark about storms, floods and winds. "It is an ill wind that blows nobody good."

The moon was smiling upon the fields and woods as though she had not just a while before hid her face behind a black veil while two mortals were struggling in the death grapple of the waves in the blackness of darkness; the crickets were chirping as merrily as though there had been no flapping of death-wings over the rolling flood; the owl alone of all the night singers moaned out his doleful notes of darkness and disaster. Ernestine did not talk much. Now and then she would shiver, heave a sigh and whisperingly thank God! They reached the city and retired to their respective homes. The reception went off without the guest of honor, but it was repeated two evenings later.

On the morning after the storm Julian calling at the De Shon mansion was informed by the maid that Miss Erestine was in the summer house, so he turned down the flower-lined walk to that place of sweet odors and reveries. He found Ernestine looking pale and languid. Instead of the conventional black, she was dressed in white with a blue ribbon at her throat. Julian thought her angelic. She looked up with a sweet smile, when she saw Julian coming to her.

"Good morning, Miss De Shon."

"Good morning, Mr. Jarnigan," said Ernestine, with a seeming ironical break in her tone.

"The maid wished to call you, but I would not have it so, and took the liberty to approach the throne of the goddess of beauty. Though the maid seems to have orders not to permit the devotees to offer homage on this morning, yet to me it is the one of all others in which I am feeling devout," said Julian.

She looked at him for a while, then blushed and let her eyes fall to the gravel floor. Julian came up to where she sat; she started to rise and offer him a seat, but he demurred. He requested her to remain sitting, as she must be weak at least from the experiences of the night. But beyond a little stiffness and a few bruises, she said she felt quite herself.

"No, I could not be a faithful subject if I sat while my queen is on her throne," said he. "I come to worship at your feet. Ernestine, never till last night did I know how necessary your life is to mine. Not till I thought I must lose you did I realize that life is nothing without you. Dearer to me than all else in the world, what could I be without you. When I jumped into the flood it was to find you alive or my grave amid the angry waves. If you were dead what would there be for me to live for? Since we were schoolmates, and you know that all through these years you have been my guiding, reigning sovereign, I have looked forward steadfastly to the time when I might tell you of the hope and desire of my heart, of the barren and desolate waste in my life where your sweet image does not appear. Now that you are alone in the world, neither father nor mother to dwell in your mind or occupy your heart; now that you need some friend who will be closer than a brother, may I not be that friend? May I not serve you? I shall not ask if you love me. I know that in your heart there is no guile; that in your mind there is no deceit; that like my darling Mother you are one of earth's noble women; that you would neither by word nor deed mislead anyone. Just say I may live in the paradise of your love!

" 'It you say me nay.

Then gloom and death must end my sway."' "Julian, and remember I have never so called you before," said Ernestine, "you say too many nice things of me. I shall feel happy if I can be the good woman and live the beautiful life you have often pictured to me of your mother. My life is not worth much. Last night in that fearful torrent, it was worth nothing till you snatched it back from the gaping jaws of death. Though worth little or much, it belongs to you, and the cause of which you speak, not because you saved it, for worthy men have sought the place you occupy in my heart and mind; but there was no room for any of them, and my conscience acquits me of having ever encouraged them. For in the hospital, when you had been sent there by one who hated you, my spirit went out and called yours back from the realms of shades and the grasp of death as yours called me back last night."

As she rose from her seat and stood beside him he clasped her to his heart, saying: "Idol of my heart, it is for this hour I have prayed, pined and waited. Once before, Ernestine, my queen, when returning to life and consciousness you called me Julian. Now that you have lifted me out of the darkness of doubt and disaster I am Julian forever."

After attending the reception on the following evening in company with Miss De Shon, Julian left for Beech Haven to take up the battle of life with renewed vim and determination.

You know that love Will creep in service where it cannot go.

—Shakespeare.

AN outbreak of the yellow fever at Eastberg caused a great number of the people to flee from the city. They fled to the mountains and hills. Quite a number of the physicians had pressing business which called them out of the city, and when they were away, quarantine regulations kept them away till the epidemic had subsided. But there were a number of physicians who remained at their posts of duty like heroic soldiers, and among them was Dr. Storms.

Few colored people were attacked by the fever, but all who were, were carried to the "Yellow Fever Hospital." Dr. Storms was one of the medical staff in charge of the colored ward. He was often called in consultation with the staff as to treatment of white patients.

Lines of discrimination on account of race or color caste grew quite dim in those days. Sometimes they are ruled out altogether in times of great distress or disaster, and so it was at East-berg. None knew but he or she would be the next to succumb to the dread disease. For that reason all were on their good behavior. It is related that during the earthquake at Charleston, S. C., white women rushed from their tottering, falling mansions and begged any one they happened to see, whether white or black, to save them, and it is told to their honor that not once did the colored man offer any indignity to defenseless women, white or black. Would that the same could be said of the white men!

Dr. Tilton and Dr. Storms worked side by side among the stricken, in the hospital and in the homes. Both expected to be attacked by the disease at any moment. Drs. Long and Peterson had already fallen victims to the epidemic. Several of the nurses had also succumbed to the dreaded leveler! But what Dr. Tilton most dreaded was that his sister might be attacked. The father and mother had been sent out of the city at the outbreak of the malady, but the mother had died while away of another ailment. The sister refused to leave her brother in time of such peril. Dr. Storms in anticipation of an attack had telegraphed Lawyer Grimpky to meet him at Williamsburg, and there they put Dr. Storms' business in proper legal shape, so that if he did fall his estate would go as he desired it should. On his return in the evening the first news which reached him was to the effect that Miss Cordelia Tilton was a victim of the fell destroyer. He was called to his supper, but did not take time to eat. His buggy was at the door, so he jumped in and told the boy to drive in haste to Dr. Tilton's office. Dr. Storms was informed that Dr. Tilton and three other physicians were with Miss Tilton and that she was at the family residence. The influence and standing of Dr. Tilton prevented her being taken to the hospital.

Dr. Storms would not go to the Tilton residence unbidden. He sat there in the office for a while in deep meditation. Dr. Storms went to the phone two or three times for the purpose of calling Dr. Tilton, but each time hung up the receiver and returned to his seat. At last he wrote to Dr. Tilton, left the note on the desk, and told the girl to call the doctor's attention to it as soon as he came in. Dr. Storms then got into his buggy and drove to the hospital where he found several new patients. He made hasty examinations and gave directions to the nurses for their proper treatment and care.

Just as he was preparing to leave the hospital, a call came from Dr. Tilton's office, asking if Dr. Storms was there. Dr. Tilton requested him to come by his office on his way back, if it would not inconvenience him. As he was on the point of going he directed the boy to drive to the office of Dr. Tilton.

When he entered the office Dr. Tilton grasped his hand with fervor, seemed much excited and to the question, "How is your sister?" replied with trembling voice, "She is in a very critical condition, Lucius. I wish very much for you to go with me to see her. Dr. Levy is with her now. We have the best nurse in the city and her assistant. You know that Miss Moultrie is the most skillful nurse on our staff. If she were white she would command five instead of three dollars per day. If she can nurse my darling sister back to life and health she shall be most handsomely rewarded."

"I do not think that I ought to go. Although I might do something to help the young patient, I fear that my presence there will be very injurious to your reputation and my standing in this place. But you urge it and for your sake, and to perhaps save a human life I shall go. For you and yours I will make any sacrifice, even life! Alas! you know the gossip and criticism that will follow a visit to this patient by me!"

"I know all you say and feel that it is true, all too true! But what care I for whims of senseless, soulless prejudice when the life of her whom I hold dearer than any being on earth, since my mother is no more, is in peril?"

Dr. Storms heaved a deep sigh and said under his breath, "May she be spared for his sake. I feel that in trying to save her I shall spring a death trap about myself! Still if I perish I perish. I shall go, I shall go!" He rose and said to Dr. Tilton: "I shall go! But no one must know of this visit but you and the nurse."

"I do not care who knows it! But if that is your condition I shall submit to it."

When they arrived at the mansion Dr. Tilton relieved Dr. Levy. Miss Moultrie took charge of the sick room and all being in readiness Dr. Storms was conducted into the room by the brother of the patient. Dr. Storms felt strange and nervous for a moment, when he beheld the sick girl lying there in a death-like stupor. She was the picture of a withering lily or the bride of death. The two doctors made a careful and rigid examination and after they were through both sat down. Neither spoke for some minutes. Although Dr. Tilton looked at Dr. Storms several times appealingly, as if to say, "Why do you not speak and give me hope?" At last when he could endure the silence no longer, he exclaimed: "Well, doctor, Lucius—what do you say? Is it life or death?"

Dr. Storms did not seem to hear, he was so ' wrapped in meditation. Finally Dr. Tilton laid his hand upon Dr. Storms' knee; then he jumped as though aroused suddenly from slumber I "I say, Dr. Storms, Lucius, my friend, is it life or death?"

Dr. Storms spoke then and said, "There is one chance in a thousand! A desperate chance! I made a discovery while treating this disease in New Orleans, which I have never disclosed to anyone. I am going to apply it in this case, and you shall learn all about it, for I may be taken by this malady, and I wish that medical science shall have the benefit of the invaluable discovery."

From that hour the patient was treated by Dr. Storms alone, the treatment being always fully explained to the brother. After twenty-four hours she revived and Dr. Tilton exclaimed: "It is a miracle! Dr. Storms you are a hero, a savior of the people!"

In three days the patient was out of danger, and after ten days she was able to sit propped up in bed. Her brother and the nurse were ever speaking the praises of Dr. Storms for his wonderful skill in saving the life of Miss Tilton, and at this her face would beam with a smile of thankfulness. When the doctor visited her the last time and told her she was fast returning to her former health she told him she was very grateful to him for his treatment and its results. Dr. Tilton, the father, had objected to having his daughter attended by a Negro physician when it was first mentioned to him by telegram, but finally because Dr. Storms had always been a close friend of his son he yielded, as it seemed to be a last resort. He was willing to undergo that much humility in trying to save the life of his only and much loved daughter.

As soon as Miss Tilton was sufficiently recovered Dr. Storms ceased to treat her. When she made inquiry as to the cause of the sudden cessation of the visits, Miss Moultrie told her that already the gossiping tongues of prejudice were wagging.

"Of course, I feel somewhat ashamed and humiliated at being treated by a physician known to be a Negro: but since he is my brother's friend and has saved my life, I try to overcome my prejudice on account of his race with my feelings of gratitude. While I am aware that the doctor is not reckoned to be as good as a white man, I know that he has few equals in his profession, even among white men. Much as I love and honor my father and brother, I am forced to confess that this colored physician is far above them in ability. I am sure that I owe my life to his knowledge and skill! Why, he is no more like the Negroes I see and know than the great eagle is like the titmouse," said Cordelia.

"My child, you must not say such things. Suppose the ears of envious prejudice heard those words," said Miss Moultrie!

After the patient had so far recovered her strength as to be able to walk about the grounds Miss Moultrie took her departure. The first time she met Dr. Storms Miss Moultrie told him of the grateful feelings of Miss Tilton, but said she hoped that he would take a platonic view of those things!

Dr. Storms was considerably moved by what was told him, pondered much over it, and as he paced the floor, exclaimed: "O what am I? What destiny awaits me? The thing to which I would aspire is in me a consuming fire. The things which I have learned only make the fire within me seethe and burn the more! I know that my ambition must consume and turn to ashes within my own heart! When I know my own feelings I am in a torture, because I know full well the chasm of hate—deep as hell and black as damnation! Yes, yes; I know all too well, the wall of prejudice and pride, as impassable as the 'Gulf of Despair!' Hence I must crucify my heart on the cross of caste! Again, she is the sister of my best friend. Alas! for that friend to know that one of the despised has tender thoughts of his sister would be to turn him into a deadly enemy; it would be as a dagger's thrust! Strange, how strange! It makes no difference how much they may respect and honor you, when it comes to a union even by honorable marriage of a man with one drop of the blood accursed in his veins with their sister or daughter, all the demoniac hate of race pride is aroused. I know that my friend, Dr. Tilton, has as little of this senseless pride as any Southern man living; but even he would take sides against me. God knows I am blameless in this matter! For his sake, yes, for him, I would stifle my hopes and sacrifice my heart's idol on the partition wall of prejudice! For this I shall do all things! For his name's sake I shall be nothing, nothing, do nothing and know nothing but to suffer!"

The fever having nearly abated, the doctors had much more leisure and were often together. One evening at the office of Dr. Storms, Dr. Tilton said to him: "Lucius, my sister is dearer to me than any being on earth. It seems to me that if it were possible I love her more since her miraculous escape from death; and you wrought the miracle. You also imparted the priceless secret of her salvation to me."

"Don't, don't mention those things. They prick like needles," said Lucius.

"Lucius, I have just sent Miss Moultrie a check for five hundred dollars, and now I wish to reward you for what you have done for us. Please accept this as a small token of the high appreciation I and my people feel for you, and your invaluable services," said Dr. Tilton.

"What is it?" said Lucius.

"Look and see," said Dr. Tilton.

Dr. Storms took the slip of paper and looked at it, but dropped it as though it had stung him. It was a check for one thousand dollars. Dr. Storms drew himself up as though some great indignity had been offered him and said: "Dr. Tilton, I cannot believe that you intend to insult me, or to wound my feelings. How could a friend so far forget a friendly act as to attempt to reward it in this manner. All the gold of Ophir could not have induced me to render the service I have given you and your sister or to impart to you the priceless secret of saving human life—only devoted deathless friendship could lead me to do what I have done. Don't humiliate me by offering to reward me with gold for that which I hold above price. Heart coin is the only medium of exchange for those labors."

"Pardon me, my friend," said Sebastian, giving him his hand. "It was thoughtlessness or overthankfulness that prompted the act. The money shall go to relieve the distress and want of those poor who have lost loved ones in this dreadful epidemic—the widow and orphan. Lucius, you know that you have the most profound gratitude of my heart. My sister also appreciates your services very much. She often speaks of your wonderful power over disease and has requested me to thank you for what you have done for her, but I have been criticised so much because of my relations with you that I have refrained from saying so. Gate-wood Storms seems to be trying every means he can command to win the esteem of my sister. He never fails to speak disparagingly of you when occasion offers, and he appears to follow your footsteps like a detective, but what his purpose is I do not know. I believe he would be glad to do you some deadly injury. Young Storms talks constantly of the bequest you received from his father's estate. It seems that he wishes to recover it for himself. He points to that Fourth-Avenue house of yours, and says that it is his by right."

"I do not fear him, although I know him to be a cowardly sneak, who would stoop to anything to carry out his fell designs. He will never get that property or anything else that I possess. I trust that his evil plans will fail. 'He that diggeth a pit shall fall therein.' He hates me because of the sin of our father. I have never done him an injury or sought to do so," said Dr. Storms.

Far from the madding crowd's ignoble strife, Their sober wishes never learned to stray; Along the cool, sequestered vale of life, They kept the noiseless tenor of their way.

—Grey.

TIME, the great leveler, has wrought many changes among the people and places that we have known. Croton, once a struggling, straggling village, has become a thriving, bustling city.

Mr. Forrester sleeps beside his faithful wife in the old family burying-ground at Beechgrove. The children have married and gone to other cities and countries. The Storms's plantations are owned by Yankees and Jews. The Norris's lands are owned by thrifty colored farmers. The Hon. A. Grimpky is one of the presiding judges of Coweater County, and is spoken of as an upright judge.

Harold with his wife and two children are at Croton now on a sad mission. Mrs. Scott, quite old and feeble, has been stricken and is not expected to live long. Harold has come with his wife and children to care for her in her illness, and be by her should the end come.

On a beautiful evening when the Autumn winds were gently sighing among the pines, and the voices of the night were whispering their sad messages of parting, Mother Scott called Harold to her bedside and said to him: "My son, I am. going now to your dear father, who has waited so long and anxiously for me. So often, O so often, has he looked out from the windows of those bright mansions up there to see if I were coming. I shall be with him soon now, and like him I shall be free from the cares, disappointments, sorrows and pains of this life. 'Earth is a wilderness, Heaven is my resting place!' Where are Martile and the children? Bring your wife and Paul and Virginia, that I may say to them, 'Farewell!' "

"They are here, mother," said Harold.

The old lady took Harold and his wife by the hands, and said to them: "It is needless for me to admonish you to love and serve each other, for your lives have been thus far as one. The Lord has blessed your union. He has given you these two children. There may be others; but live for God, your children and your fellow-men. I shall not tell you to love these bright jewels He has given you, for the danger is that you will love them too much. Your love may cause you to indulge them in whims and harmful allowances. Refrain from that which tends to vanity or undue self-esteem! Love them with sublime love! Love your neighbor and God supremely. Love your enemies. Love those also who abuse you and despitefully use you!

"The Lord has permitted me to live many years in this country. I have seen the wicked in power and heard the people groan. But I remembered that God is just, and that His righteousness must prevail. I have seen and felt most of the troubles that beset our people in this place, but I have never lost faith in the justice and mercy of God. I have seen many of those who have abused and maltreated my people die miserable deaths; and their very memory is a hiss and a byword. I have tried always to live 'a pure, devoted, Christian life. Both of you are apostles of Him who is the avenger of every wrong. 'Wait thou on the Lord.' "

Laying her hands upon the heads of the children, she blessed them, saying: "Little Paul, your grandfather was a soldier who fought for freedom of our bodies, and your father is a soldier in the army of those who are fighting for the freedom of the mind. May the Lord combine in thee both of these virtues. Paul, fight a good fight; keep the faith. My little Virginia, may you resemble somewhat your grandmother, but more your mother, whose life has been one season of well-doing. The Lord spare you to take up her noble work when she must lay it down; may our Master seal you all for His Kingdom; let your life, like the virgin mother's, be given for the salvation of men."

As fades the daylight from the landscape, while the shadows of evening softly glide through forest and fen, as the voices of the night whisper a gentle farewell to passing day, so passed the spirit of the tender, loving mother, Mrs. Scott.

The neighbors and friends had visited "Mother Scott," as she was called, all during heir illness. Many called to pay their respects and offer sympathy and service, among them not a few whites. Lawyer Jarnigan and Dr. Storms were both notified of the death and were asked to be present at the obsequies. Julian came. Lucius telegraphed his sympathy and regret, as he could not be present. The funeral was very largely attended.

It was necessary for Harold to spend some time in winding up his mother's affairs. He requested Julian to remain for a few days to assist him somewhat with the business. They spent several days in winding up the estate. Harold and Julian learned several things while there, and among them, that Gatewood Storms was very much enamored with a Miss Tilton, whom he had. met at Eastberg. Also that Gatewood was quite angry with Dr. Storms on account of the share he had received out of the estate of his father. Further, he was very indignant and greatly incensed by a rumor which had reached Croton, to the effect that Dr. Storms had attended this same Miss Tilton while she was suffering with yellow fever. Julian resolved to write Lucius and put him on his guard, and informed Harold of his intention. Harold commended his purpose, saying: "It shows a Christian spirit in you thus to treat one who has always been your deadly enemy, and that too without cause, except that you seemed to be his rival for the affections of Miss De Shon. Now that you are the crowned victor in the contest, you can, I think, well 'afford to be magnanimous."

Julian wrote thus: "Croton, Ga., July 10, 18— "Dear Lucius: "I will not say Dr. Storms, for that is too cold and formal. I know you will be surprised to receive a letter from one whom you have always chosen to regard and treat as an enemy. Though I am happy to say I know that I have never felt or acted in such manner as to merit that kind of treatment from you. I am only nerved to write you now because from what I have learned since I came here danger seems to threaten you! You are my classmate and brother whether you will or not. I should feel mean all my life, did I not do all in my power to avert a danger which threatens you or any one else, and especially one who does not like me.

"It is asserted here that you and a Dr. Tilton are very intimate friends; that you were chums at Harvard; that you two are often together; that you, at Dr. Tilton's solicitation, treated and attended his sister during an attack of yellow fever; that before that, you had greatly incensed the best citizens of your city by purchasing a home in a very aristocratic section of the city. But to make bad matters worse, it is whispered that you care more for the young lady than is allowable in the South for. one of your blood to care for one of her blood. Now you know it is death for one in the South of Negro blood to think about a woman of the dominant race. If she cared for you that would only make the vengeance surer and more terrible which will certainly come upon you if those matters are not cut short. Your brother Gatewood is furious, and is doing all in his power to foment trouble for you. He is laying plans; I dont know what they are, but I can only say, 'Be warned!' I have sent a copy of this letter to my fiancee, Miss Ernestine De Shon, that she may know you are in danger. I shall not expect a reply. Harold knows all and he and wife join me in expressions of anxiety and sympathy. They understand fully why you did not wish to come to this place to attend Mrs. Scott's funeral.

"Hoping that all may end well, I am yours, as ever^ "Julian."

Lawyer Jamigan wrote Miss De Shon that he would come on to New Orleans and spend a few days. He also wrote Mr. Wilford, as Wilford had written him sometime before that he expected to be in New Orleans about that time. Julian invited him to stop at his hotel as his guest.

Harold sold out all the personal property which he could not ship home, and put the house in the custody of a real estate agent. He and his wife spent several days visiting old friends. The people were exceedingly glad to entertain their former teacher and benefactor. After spending ten days in bidding farewell to old familiar scenes, they left for their home. On account of the facilities for educating their children, they had purchased and occupied permanently a home at Muskegon.

Rev. H. Scott was now a presiding elder, and thus had better opportunity to be at home. Muskegon was on his district and was his headquarters. Mrs. Scott was one of the writers for the Sunday-school paper of the Connection. Elder Scott was being urged by his people for editor of one of the church papers.

Julian reached New Orleans two days before Mr. Wilford. On the second day after his arrival, he and Miss De Shon drove out to the plantation and viewed the scenes of their perilous struggles and glorious victory. When they stood on the spot where Julian had rescued her from the flood, she fell upon his breast and wept tears of joy.

Julian spent several happy days with his once rival, Mr. Wilford. Ernestine did all in her power to make their visit pleasurable. She entertained them at tea. The visitors were feted many times by the professional and business men of the city. Mr. Wilford was in the city on business, so he remained a few days after Julian had taken leave of his fiancee and friends. On the afternoon of the day he was to leave the city Mr. Wilford called on Miss De Shon. After they had talked for quite a while on race and business affairs, and of her schoolmates, Dr. Storms, Elder Scott, and that other one nearer to her than all, Hon. Julian Jarnigan, Wilford broached the subject nearest his heart.

"I am forced through courtesy to congratulate you on your affiance,'' said Wilford. "While I do so with vain regret, I must say that I think you have chosen both a worthy and eminent man. I know you will excuse me if I ask if your mind is unalterably fixed."

Miss De Shon looked at him fixedly for a second, and then said: "Ordinarily I would take your question as an affront, but knowing your interest in, and esteem for me, I excuse the question. Yes, my mind has been fixed since I was a school girl—fixed till death changes it! Whatever other faults I may have, I thank God that none of them is fickleness. But you and I can be very dear friends. You know that I have never encouraged your seeming preference for me, or given you cause to hope that we might be anything but friends."

"True, true," said he, "and I honor you the more for it."

Wilford took his leave, wishing that she might live long to enjoy the happy lot she had chosen.

The death of Julian's mother came as a blighting shadow over his path. He had visited her only two months before and found her in so much better health than she had been for many years, that he had reason to expect she would be spared to them for many years to come. She died as she had lived, full of faith and righteousness. She left a rich inheritance of precious memory of good works. Her death was lamented by all the people in Bon Aqua, black and white.

'Tis liberty alone that gives the flower Of fleeting life its luster and perfume; And we are weeds without it. —Cowper.

THE visit of the members of Congress to the Westmoreland plantations accomplished more than the Colonel intended. As aimed at, the visit caused the delay or death of the bill then before Congress to cut down representation in that body in such states as refused the right to vote under the Constitution of the United States to any of the qualified voters thereof. The death of the bill emboldened other Southern states to adopt constitutions which eliminated the Negro as a voter. The whole South arose and demanded that the Negro not only be not allowed to vote, but prohibited from holding any official position. Said they: "His mission in the world is to serve the dominant race in the most menial capacity." But in addition to the foregoing this discussion put in motion two distinct ideas as to the destiny of the Colored American. Each class was supported by strong men. One proposition was the "Utilitarian Educational Field and Industrialism" for the Negro, and the other, "Universal Educational and Political Opportunities" for his highest development. Harold Scott, being a minister, became a devout apostle of the gospel of salvation through industrial and political acquiescence. He preferred to work along the line of least resistance.

Julian Jarnigan, being a lawyer, a combative calling, took up the cudgel in defense of the propaganda, "Universal Educational and Political Opportunity" for all men, whether black, white, red, brown or yellow—for "all men up, and not some men down." Harold spoke through his church paper, the "Messenger." Julian was heard in the "Tocsin" of his town.

Said the Messenger: "First of all let the Negroes make friends of the Southern white people. We are here and here to stay (if the white people will permit us). The South is our home by all the ties of blood and tears—tears shed amid our toils and sufferings, in making this country what it is. It is ours by struggles on many gory battle-fields. Negroes have enriched this soil with their blood and bodies that the tree of liberty, planted at Bunker Hill and grafted at Appomattox, might grow and flourish. But are there not peaceful victories not less far reaching than those of bloody conflict? Then the Negro should bide his time. 'Wait thou on the Lord!' He has said, 'My plans are not your plans, My thoughts are not your thoughts. I will avenge mine own. Though there be deep waters they shall not overflow thee.' Though they may be grievous is it not better to suffer our present ills than by opposing them incur others far more disastrous ? While it is true that our people are largely ignorant, it is not so wholly by their fault. For amid oppression and repression they have, through sweat and blood, reduced their ignorance nearly sixty per cent up to the present.

"Although just out of the slave pen, where immorality was encouraged and even enforced, our people are fast coming to regard the family relation and the home as sacred institutions. Still they are forced to battle against ignorance and superstition among themselves and the traps and pitfalls set for them by bad white men. But is it not better to fight these, forces of evil with the weapons of the Master than by a resistance which can only end in defeat?

"Ours is a moral fight—a battle of intellect with infamy. Both races must be educated up to the philanthropic standard. There is far too much acrimony. The evils from which we suffer because of our weakness are not chargeable wholly to either side. One of our great publicists has said, 'To the Negro the ballot has been neither a sword of offense nor a shield of defense.' It is urged by others that the very fact that he could not maintain his citizen rights is proof that the Negro was not worthy of the franchise. That position is not tenable, because what is true of the Negro voter in that regard is true of any class of poor and ignorant people under any government. But there are other and worse calamities than the loss of the ballot. For whatever is not settled right will not remain settled. Ignorance, vice and idleness among us work for more harm than the injuries inflicted by loss of the ballot, though that is bad enough.

"The despised and proscribed Jew has gone through and is still going through tenfold worse persecutions than we, in the search for his 'palladium.' Few, few are the obstacles that can permanently stand in our way if we love righteousness and eschew evil! There are far greater victories to be achieved in the educational and industrial field than in the political field. We are much more in need of the fruits of industry than the spoils of politics. Let us lay broad and deep the foundation of our domestic life. Being poor 'and ignorant we of all people most need instruction and assistance along these lines.

"While there are those who dispute our right to vote and hold office, there are few if any who will hinder our progress industrially. Let us become more and more owners of the soil and producers of its fruits. We should become a strong force in the industrial and business life of the South. We can improve in honesty, industry and reliability. At the North we may be freer and more secure in our rights; but the North is older, more densely populated, richer, more intelligent, and on that account, the contests for the rewards of toil is more intense and competition is more pronounced. The compensation for labor is greater, but the cost of living is far higher, hence it is better for our people to remain where the climate and the cost of living at least are more in accord with our present needs and abilities. Let us strive here to grow stronger in knowledge and wealth, and we shall be able to more properly use them. When we have grown wiser and more skillful, shall we not come into the enjoyment of all our manhood rights? Will not the very power that comes with knowledge, wisdom and wealth force the white man to concede our civil and political rights? Christ taught that if smitten on the one cheek to turn the other to receive the next blow rather than strike back; for it takes two to make a fight, and there are few drawn battles—some one must be defeated in a fight. If they whip, tar and feather their own for advocating fair treatment toward us, what must we expect? Sometimes weakness is strength. The salvation of the Negro, at least for the present, lies in passive obedience to the powers that be; the acquiescence in all that is done to or for him. The South is the place where the Southern Negro must work out his salvation, even though it be with fear and trembling! Here he must prove his worthiness to win!

"We should be encouraged by the fact that many colored people enjoy privileges and blessings which thousands of whites do not possess. Many colored people can draw on the banks for thousands of dollars, give orders which will be honored by the best business houses, secure comforts in their luxurious homes, and enjoy many other privileges and attentions which thousands of white people do not have. And too, he is making the white man's wrath to praise him in that he is turning it into money, through his own enterprises.

"In a final reckoning and righting of all things the strong religious zeal and firm faith of the Negro will be his great support and sustaining grace amid his turmoils, troubles and failures. 'Trust thou in the Lord and thou shalt dwell in the land and verily shalt thou be fed.' "

In the Tocsin, Julian was heard to say: "We certainly do wish the friendship of all people and especially of the white people of the South. Colored people should court their favor and do every decent thing to secure their approbation. We need their sympathy and help because we are here in their midst and wish to remain. Within these precincts repose the ashes of our beloved dead of the centuries of our thralldom. The spirits of the martyrs to the Demon Slavery are here. Their spirits hover over our devious pathway. Their memory is instinct with every hill and valley. Here by her smoothly flowing streams, beneath her moonlit sky, let us live and die. Here may we linger long and listen to the mocking bird's song.

" 'In spite of every ill, This land is ours— We love It still.' "But does it not take two to make friends? Both must be willing. Nearly every one who speaks on the race issue advises the Negro to make friends of the whites of the South. But none says to the Southern whites, 'Allow the Negro to be your friend! So use him as to make him your friend!' It may sound well to say to the Negro, 'Make friends of the white people,' while every day he is being mobbed, lynched, Jim Crowed, cheated, maltreated, vilified, and his simplest rights trampled under foot. 'Vinegar never catches flies.' Why not advise the lamb to make a friend of the lion? There is no more grateful animal than the Negro. He is docile and tractable and will certainly be friendly with those who befriend him. I think he showed his friendliness to the Southern people during the Civil War. Did he not labor to support his master while the master was away fighting to make his fetters more secure? Did he not care for and support the wives and children of the South in those dark and perilous times? Those acts should have secured for him the undying friendship, yea, gratitude of his late master and insured the unfailing help and protection of the South. But alas! the very children that he nursed and fed in those dark days are to-day his lynchers, Jim Crowers and oppressors ! The Negro has been the friend of the white man and has made proof of that friendship, and this the white man has admitted in words, if not in deeds, on many occasions. It seems now to be about time a more friendly spirit was manifested on the part of the whites. We are not forgetful of the fact that we have many good friends among the better class of Southern whites, who, as individuals, do acts of kindness, but the masses have not so proven, especially in these later times.

"On a thousand battle-fields of this nation, which fosters a liberty which the Negro has never enjoyed, he has given his life and blood freely to prove his friendship for the white man. The tree of liberty which he helped to plant shelters every race but the Negro. Our struggle is not one of force and arms, but is a contest of intelligence against intolerance! It is sometimes better to fight and lose than not to fight at all! Sometimes defeat is more glorious than victory. While the Lord helps those who strive, he intends that all his intelligent creatures shall struggle to attain that which is highest and best, not only in this life, but in the life to come. He implanted this aspiration in the breast of the Negro; therefore he will not be content with anything less than what other men enjoy. The Negro aspires to the best in religion, education, morals, liberty both civil and political, and industry. Yea, he may be thrust back with kicks and curses; he may be advised that it is his to live on the lower plane of human existence; he may he advised that what others aspire to and enjoy is not for such as he; but he will never listen to the voice of the defamer or the compromiser. He will struggle on to victory or annihilation! For what shall it profit him if he gain the skill of a Tubal Cain or the wealth of a Croesus and lose the elements of true manhood and the desire for the very best to which human life invites."

"The Tocsin believes and teaches that the Negro is a man, not a quasi man, and that being a man he needs that which is necessary to manhood, and needs it badly. That living as he does, in this busy, hustling twentieth century civilization, he desires whatever it offers that is best, and needs it now. That if admittedly a backward race, he is in need of the best and strongest helps to bring him up to the demands of the times. If he needs goodness and knowledge, which is power, why wait till next year or the next century? I say, Why wait while we perish? It doth not yet appear what he shall be, but he feels and knows that when he has reached his journey's end he will be in all essentials like his ideal, the mighty white man.

"Let no man delude himself with the thought that any man can remain in chains and ignorance under the blaze of the twentieth century. The Southern white man is too well informed to believe that he can impose restrictions upon the elective franchise which will permanently keep the Negro from it. He knows full well that in a republic the voter is a citizen and the non-voter is a 'serf.' "Confessedly there is too much ignorance, immorality and viciousness amongst us, but to whom is it chargeable in large measure—this ignorance and immorality? What school was it in which the Negro was taught for two hundred and fifty years ? Who was it that marred his life and darkened his soul? Was not his ignorance enforced and a premium placed upon his immorality? Go ask the Legrees, Toombses, Westmorelands and their like!

"Our friends the enemy rail against the ballot in black hands. They have emasculated the black citizen. He is out of politics and on this account is more than ever at the mercy of the courts 'and civil officers. The Negro is shot down like a beast of prey whenever it pleases the caprice of the white man so to do. For the slaughter of a Negro there is rarely if ever a trial, and a conviction is unthought of, and all because the Negro is a political nondescript. Ye gods, will justice sleep forever? Even the Negro's home, which ought to be his castle, is entered and violated with impunity.

"In a government of, for and by the people, a man without the power which his vote gives is a peon. No man ever surrendered this right to another and had it returned to him without a struggle.

"The jails and penitentiaries are full to overflowing because, the Negro having no vote, his constitutional rights, and all rights are disregarded by the courts and officials. Despised and rejected as a citizen he comes into court presumed to be guilty, because he is a Negro. It is said by some that the ignorance and venality of the Negro lost him the ballot, but that is not patent, for there are more than three millions of ignorant, vicious and venal men in this country of the other races who vote. It was done, as admitted, by many of their lawmakers, because he is a Negro, and is hated by those who should manifest a better spirit toward him. They urge also that having allowed himself to be defrauded of his ballot is proof that he was not competent to be a voter, but the truths of history disprove that assumption, for the same number of the poor and ignorant of any other race in this country could be treated in like manner, if it were desired, but they could not be kept so permanently, neither can the Negro.

"They build upon the sand who endeavor to erect a wall around the Negro which shall cut him off forever from the goal of his ambition—full citizenship. They are building surer than they intend who undertake to wall him in. For by their oppressions and repressions they are moulding a Negro who will be sufficient unto his day. They are continually lamenting the passing of the servile type, the old time Negro, as we lament the old time white man. The present generation is fit only to toil, suffer and receive the kicks and cuffs of those who for the past should be their friends. Yet, out of the ashes of the present race will spring a new race that shall stand forth a giant. Out of the darkness will burst forth a light that shall show all men at their true worth.

"Christ taught that if persecuted in one city you should flee to a safer one. But some say stay in the South no matter what your treatment is. Other races travel, migrate and emigrate from shore to shore and from pole to pole, but the South, they say, is the place where the Negro must stay; that here alone can he find that which is best for him. They seem to forget that Negroes were once more numerous in Boston than in New Orleans; that in New England the Negro Problem had its birth. There, the Negro was once more numerous than in the South. In that section also was the monster Slavery cradled and nurtured. But those people have produced fruits meet for repentance. These Sophists teach that the Negro differs from all the rest of the human species in that he profits more from negative than from positive good. To them slavery was a Godsend; Kuklux, mobs, lynching, Jim Crowism, disfranchisement and all our oppressions, repressions and proscriptions are blessings. It is all like the practice once in vogue in Europe of disfiguring the human face and form for the purpose of making money by them. They are like those Africans, who think distorted features lend beauty to the face. Such persons thank God for the existence of the Devil and evil. Although they cry from the housetops that the Negroes will stay where they are grossly mistreated, they are leaving by thousands annually, and few if any ever return. They hear the complaint of the South as to the scarcity of labor, and charge that it is due to the indolence of the Negro, but will not admit that it is largely due to mistreatment, starvation wages and the consequent migration of the Negro. They make much of the prejudice and proscription at the North, but for all that, the Negro stays when he goes and he don't starve either. He loses that scared, cowed look that ever haunts his face while here. The Negro realizes that he is more humanely treated and better paid and is willing to suffer and pay the other penalties for the greater freedom and security of life and limb. Yes, they prefer the North, though colder, more exacting and active to the warm, lax, lynching South. These traits show him a man like other men, and that what is good for others is good for him. Again we say his highest destiny lies along the path traversed by other men and races."

Pale death, with impartial step, Knocks at the hut of the poor And the palace of kings. —Horace.

WHEN Lucius received the letter from Julian, a revulsive feeling came over him at sight of the name. But as he read on through the message he became wrapped in attention. When he reached the end of the letter beads of cold perspiration stood upon his pale brow. He sat in deep and solemn thought for an hour. Finally he was aroused by the boy, who announced that there was a telephone call. The doctor told the boy to attend the call and take the message. It was a call to one of his patients. Dr. Storms did not go at once, but sat to collect his thoughts and plan his course of action. He was debating mentally the disclosures in Julian's letter. Might not Julian be trying through malice to disturb or frighten him? He felt that Julian must have ill feelings toward him for the manner in which he had treated Julian while they were in the University. But as to the occurrences to which Julian referred there could be no mistake. He also realized that Gatewood hated him with a terrible hatred, and would do anything in his power to bring disaster to him. He had heard Dr. Tilton speak of Gatewood's attentions to his sister Cordelia. At last he concluded that Julian was, as he represented in the letter, a friend who steps out of the darkness to warn him of hidden danger! Dr. Storms decided once to carry the letter to Dr. Tilton and ask his advice and assistance, but changed his mind. "For," said he, "This letter may prove to be a false alarm, or the things spoken of in it may be only myths. Then, too, Dr. Tilton might be insulted and highly indignant at such bandying the name of his sister. Although I know that Sebastian is my true friend, and that he is very grateful to me for the recovery of his sister, he might turn to be my deadly foe on hearing my name mentioned in connection with that of his sister. Rather than bring one pang to his heart I would willingly go to death! His sister, too, is an angelic woman, and though she has a queenly air and pride, she has an humble heart, full of kindness and sympathy for every thing that is good. To save this illustrious family any humiliation I shall be prudent, as I am warned to be; to save my best friend, I shall be cautious; to cheat my most deadly enemy, my brother, I shall be on my guard, not to save myself from the penalty sure and swift, which in the South is always visited upon any of my blood for even looking upon a woman of the superior race, but for her and hers! For myself I do not fear, but because I honor the family and love Sebastian, I will not cause him pain, or bring to that family of families one pang or stain. Yea, I will stifle my own feelings and crucify my idol in my own heart, not to save myself, but Sebastian and his."

Gatewood Storms was a frequent visitor to Eastburg, and was often at the Tilton home, and although he pressed his suit most 'assiduously, it was rumored that he was not making any headway with the young lady. He could not chain her heart or command her thoughts. Young Storms was considerably chagrined over the poor progress he was making with the pet of the Tilton home. So seeking some one upon whom to vent his wrath Gatewood redoubled his efforts to entrap Dr. Storms in some way so as to ruin him. Lucius sometimes felt that Gatewood's persecutions were a sort of retribution laid upon him in double measure for the manner in which he had used his classmate Julian while in school. Gatewood, serpent-like, not only crossed his path often, but seemed to have others employed to hound his steps.

Dr. Storms had not spoken to Miss Tilton since his last call to her during her illness. He studiously avoided meeting her if she happened to be at her brother's office when he called there, even though the brother had often told him that his sister was desirous of thanking him personally for his great service in saving her life. But Dr. Storms felt that he could not see her, as he had already aroused deadly hatred by attending and saving her life when all others had failed and fled, and also because he desired to live as a man and breathe the pure sweet air of possibility and respectability. Dr. Storms felt that if he were seen talking to the young lady it would prove to be the last straw upon the camel's back.

Since Cordelia's recovery she was accustomed to drive in the afternoons, and she sometimes carried her maid with her; often she went alone—out along the country roads that she might catch the breath of the woods and fields and inhale the bracing autumn air.

One afternoon Dr. Storms was called out into the country several miles to treat a patient suffering with fever, and as the day was quite warm he did not start on his return trip till late in the afternoon. The doctor drove leisurely along, thinking over the vicissitudes of his eventful life and of possibilities yet ahead. He was pondering over the trials of his career and his triumphs in his profession; he was also thinking of the wonderful recovery of Miss Tilton and of what had been told him of her gratitude to those who had aided in that recovery. He was suddenly roused from his dream-like revery by a great noise and commotion; and as he looked up the road ahead of him saw a cloud of dust and heard a woman's piercing screams. The doctor saw at once that it was a runaway, and that the horse was coming in his direction. In an instant he turned his horse to one side, jumped to the ground and prepared to stop the maddened animal. As the terrified horse came dashing by Dr. Storms leaped to catch him, but the brute sprang to one side, overturned the vehicle and threw the lady out; and the beast dashed on in his wild flight! The doctor hurried to the prostrate form, and when he reached the lady and saw that it was Miss Tilton he grew weak from fear and anxiety. Blood was streaming from a wound on her head. The doctor rushed to the buggy, got bandages and restoratives, and soon stanched the wound. While endeavoring to revive the lady he forgot all else save the restoration of the sister of his friend to consciousness and life. Thus engaged and absorbed, he did not observe the lowering cloud of death which had settled about him in that brief space to change that scene of love and mercy to hell and demons! A vehicle with four men with guns drove up. They had been out hunting. Three of the men sprang out and ran up to the prostrate forms. Instantly they knew the lady and the doctor, for one of them was Gatewood Storms and another was the son of the chairman of the committee which waited on Dr. Storms when he purchased the Fourth-Avenue house. Gatewood was the first to speak, saying: " 'Nigger,' we have caught you at last, and in the very act. You black villian, you shall answer for this with your life! 'Nigger,' you have been trying to live high, but you won't fly high any more; you 'are as good as roasted now. No use to say a word, or try to deny, for we caught you in the very act of attempt upon this young lady; and see she is wounded and all bloody from her struggles against the black brute! It is a blessing for the lady that we arrived in time to save her from the blighting grasp of this burly 'nigger,' though she may be dead already! Come with me, you black devil," and Gatewood seized Lucius by the arm. But as he did so Lucius dealt him a blow that laid him low. Gatewood, furious now, sprang to his feet with his gun at aim, but as he pulled the trigger one of the men knocked the gun up and the charge went off in the air.

"We can fix this 'nigger' better than that," said one of the men. "He wants to be white folks and even dares to lay his black hands on one of our women. To shoot him here and now would be showing him a mercy."

While one of them guarded Lucius the others took up the still unconscious girl, put her into the doctor's buggy and told the young man who had taken no part in the arrest of the doctor to hold her with one arm and drive to her home. The others put the doctor into the trap and carried him to jail, spreading the story as they went, that the 'nigger' doctor had been caught attempting an outrage upon Miss Tilton; thus the lie that Dr. Storms had attempted rape upon a white woman flew like the wind. Men, boys and the riff-raff from saloons, dens of infamy, places of business and the homes, many of them without coat or hat, but with guns, pistols and knives in hand, crying, "Death to the 'nigger,' " By ten o'clock there was a howling, yelling mob of several thousand at the jail demanding that they be given the 'nigger.' "We are going to have that 'nigger' or blow up the jail."

When Cordelia was carried home apparently dead Dr. Levy was called at once, and after a time she was restored to consciousness. When the anxiety for her life was passed her father and brother told her what was being reported through the city. Through her groans and tears she told her father and brother of the runaway. She said that she was certain the doctor had offered her no indignities and that they ought to go at once and do all in their power to rescue the accused; that he had done too much for them to sit there and let an innocent man be put to death! Then the father and brother hurried out to try to disperse the mob; but their words of admonition and remonstrance seemed only to add fuel to the flame of wrath and hate! Some one in the mob yelled: "Git out! We ought to lynch you two. You had that 'nigger' treat your daughter and sister when she was sick. You brought on this crime of his by 'associating with the 'nigger.' You, Sebastian Tilton, associated with this 'nigger' while you wus in school. You have ruined him. He wants to live among white folks! Well, we will fix him this time by making him think he is as good as white folks. He is a 'cure-tall.' Well, we will cure all his thirst to be white folks. We knew our time would come to deal with this 'nigger,' and any others whut thinks they is as good as we is!'' Dr. Tilton and his father heard them battering down the jail door. They pushed and fought their way toward them and just as they reached a point within ten feet of the door a loud yell went up from the blood-thirsty rabble: "We have got him! We have got the d—d 'nigger!' " The word went out. "They have got the 'nigger.' " The victim was dragged out barefooted, without coat or hat, but he looked calm and resigned, with lips compressed. Dr. S. Tilton kept on fighting and pushing his way towards the part of the mob that had Dr. Storms in charge; for they were striking with sticks, knives, and anything they could hit him with. At last they got the victim to a telephone pole more dead than alive, and covered with blood and mud! As they were placing a rope around Dr. Storms' neck, Dr. Tilton reached his side and stood up, all haggard and pale, before the beastly crowd! He begged them not to kill an innocent man who had done nothing except to try to save a lady's life.

The leader, who was the doctor's brother, Gatewood Storms, yelled out: "This 'nigger' shall die here and now.'' With that the coward pushed the rope over the prisoner's head and flung the end to men who had already mounted the pole. As they began to draw up the rope, Dr. Tilton sprang forward with knife in hand to cut the rope. But just as he drew back to strike, some one in the mob dealt him a blow on the head and he fell like an ox under the butcher's hammer. As Sebastian went down, Lucius went up! When the body reached the upper air, a thousand shots rang out on the night. The dangling form was seen to quiver, then all was over!

Two or three friends of Dr. Tilton picked him up and bore him to the office of Dr. Levy. The doctor dressed the wound on his head, restored him to consciousness and carried him home in his carriage.

Cordelia swooned again when she heard of the tragedy. They had sent for Miss Moultrie, and she with tear-stained face, was attending and administering to the needs of the stricken girl.

The coroner cut down the body of Dr. Storms, summoned a jury out of the crowd, and held an inquest. Verdict: "Lucius Storms, colored, came to his death by the hands of parties unknown to the jury. This September 18th, 18—." The body was turned over to the colored undertaker. At 8 o'clock p. m. the next day the funeral was held at the Presbyterian Church, of which the doctor was a member and an officer. The Masons and a large concourse of people were present to pay respect to the memory of one of whom they were quite proud. A large company followed the casket to the cemetery. There they said "Requiescat in pace" to one who, though not without his faults, loved justice and righteousness. Julian came to the city to be present at the burial and to drop a tear for himself and Ernestine upon the bier of the slain.

The colored people were very much excited by the lynching. They said: "Who is safe? If an innocent man is lynched because he was trying to be somebody and help one in peril, what may the guilty expect? It was, of course, a sad misfortune that he was sacrificed to the diabolical curse of race prejudice."

Dr. Tilton recovered in a few days, took his sister, who was very much shattered by the trouble, to Florida and left her there with some friends. When he returned he began to wind up his affairs with a view to leaving Eastberg forever. The aged doctor preferred to stay at the old home and end his days near the resting place of his family. When his sun was set, he wished to rest beside his wife and children in the family burying-ground.

Judge Grimpky came up to dispose of the estate of the late Dr. Storms according to the bequests. The residence over which so much hard feeling had been aroused, was left to establish a hospital. Twenty thousand dollars in cash and money to be raised by the sale of the real and personal estate, was left by the deceased to erect a hospital and nurse training school for colored people at Eastberg. Mr. Grimpky was to have five thousand dollars for executing the will and managing the estate. When Dr. Tilton learned that he was a legatee, he forthwith gave the property to Judge Grimpky in trust for the colored hospital. In the Spring, Miss Tilton passed through Eastberg to see her father,' and thence to New York, where she was to make her home with her brother.

A Board of Trustees composed of seven of the most substantial colored men in the city and state was organized, and the property and funds were turned over to them. There was a howl of indignation when it was learned that a Negro hospital was to be opened in the Storms' mansion. Although the whites ranted and threatened to burn it if the trustees did not sell to them, the hospital was opened. Many moved out of the neighborhood and rented to colored people, and others sold out at a great sacrifice. They said that Storms did them more harm in death than in life. Dr. Tilton gave the trustees of the hospital an additional thousand dollars, and Miss Tilton donated two thousand. Judge Grimpky gave them twenty-five hundred of the five thousand left him by the will, so the school and hospital was an assured success.

Gatewood with bloody hands persisted in trying to gain in the estimation of Miss Tilton. He even wrote her several letters, but she threw them into the fire with a shudder as they always seemed to have blood upon them and to smell of perdition. Miss Tilton said to all who talked to her on the question of matrimony, that she would never marry, as she had undergone enough. She would devote herself to helping, as far as she could, the helpless, unfortunate and outcast. So she joined several eleemosynary women's societies and was a constant contributor to the "Storms School and Hospital." "Out of the darkness of night comes the dawn of a new light! Out of death comes forth life!"

For I have suffered loss and grievous pain.

The hurts of hatred and the world's disdain, And wounds so deep that love, well tried and pure, Had not the power to erase them or to cure.

—Dunbar.

OR several Issues, the daily papers of Eastberg and surrounding towns condemned the mob from the standpoint of humanitarianism and business disturbance.

The Record said: "The action of the mob of toughs, irresponsible people and boys was a disgrace upon the civilization of the age. Their conduct was worse than that of wild Indians and more condemnable. The putting to death of the negro doctor is a foul blot on the fair name of our city and state. If the negro was guilty of the unmentionable crime or the attempt to commit it, he should have been tried and condemned by the courts. The officers of the law are culpable for their lack of diligence in trying to prevent that sickening spectacle.

"We know how great was the provocation to violence. Nothing so stirs the savage nature of the white man as the fact that a negro has or has attempted to come in contact with one of our women. The Southern white man will not tolerate contact between a white woman and a negro under any conditions. He will not tolerate contact in any form, whether by force or acquiescence. That is why we have to make such stringent laws against miscegenation. If a negro and a white attempt to come together by marriage they will be imprisoned, and if the attempt is made in any other way it is death to the negro. But our people should allow the law to take its course. Such an occurrence as a mob not only disturbs the better class of negroes, but also disturbs us.

"The negroes are amongst us, and constitute a large per cent of our population. The majority of them are law-abiding and industrious, 'and we would wish conditions to remain such that the two races can live together, but as distinct as the fingers of the hand—one in work, but separate in life and death. Can we not live together, work together and still let each race occupy the place God intended for it. This trouble was brought on by that negro trying to be a white man. Very nearly every case of friction between the races is brought on by the negroes of mixed blood.

The white blood in them makes them assertive and they are more clamorous for their supposed rights than the blacks. They chafe and complain more at the barriers raised against them than do the full bloods. They do not like to be classed with the blacks or to be treated as the ordinary negro is treated. The real negro has little or no ambition to be anything above what the white man has assigned to him. If he can be around, wait on, and grin at and fawn upon the white man, he is as happy as the days are long. The real negro is a sort of happy-go-lucky fellow. If he has his banjo and jug of whiskey, he cares not who is president, or whether cotton is a dollar a pound or a dime a bale.

"The white man will never consent to be put on any kind of level, political, civil or social, with negroes of any grade, whether they be educated or uneducated, rich or poor, fair, yellow or black. The negro can stay here and do our work and attend upon us if he is obedient to our mandates; otherwise he must go! go! The white man does not stop to ask what is just in dealing with inferiors, but what is expedient—what is best for himself. He did this when he drove the Indians from this garden spot of earth. He did the same when he sent to Africa and brought a million black people here to fell the forests and till the fields. Now that they are by accident free, we will allow them to remain in our midst if they stay in their places. Their accidental freedom and subsequent endowment with citizenship have somewhat turned their heads, but they will do well to think on their latter end before they attempt to enjoy a white man's rights. They have been encouraged to these aspirations by their erstwhile friends at the North, but they will have to go there to enjoy them. Here in the South, ruled by the pure, proud, Anglo-Saxon blood, they are doomed to an inferior life. We ought to stop educating them, for in so doing we only make them more assertive and troublesome. What if their ignorance does make them more vicious; we can cope with them. We managed them for over two hundred years as our chattels. What are our prisons for but to put negroes in and to replenish our chain-gang, and peonage pens? The educated negro is more objectionable than the ignorant one."

Said the Watchman, the colored paper at East-berg, in reply to the diatribe of the Record: "We were pleased to note the words of admonition of the Record. But we regret exceedingly that the editor deemed it necessary to go out of his way to insult and vilify the whole Negro race. We have always contended that if a healthy public sentiment against mob violence were built up it would cease. Public sentiment more powerful than law or court upholds the setting of law and order at naught, and hence the law is trampled under foot by every schoolboy.

"Who are the moulders of public sentiment but the press and pulpit? If the ministers of the Gospel, editors of our great papers, and the writers for our magazines would speak out against it, they could soon so change public sentiment as to make mobs next to impossible.

"To condemn an outrage against a man, and in the next breath heap contumely and obloquy upon him and his race is negative to any good. The utterances of the Record as to education, are a bar to the door of hope. If the Negro were to heed it, he would cease to try to be anything but a beast of burden for the white man. But the Negro does not believe this long drawn out tale of his inferiority. He does not believe the tale that he is inferior because he is black, and we thank God that he doesn't. The story of his inferiority has been dinned into his ears for centuries. The wonder is that he has any aspirations above the brute. The one thing that stamps him a man is that he continues to hope on, work on and trust God and the future. That he is a man is shown by the fact that even in spite of the entanglements of Kuklux, whitecappers, night-riders and mobs, amid oppressions and persecutions on the right hand and on the left hand by so-called friends and enemies, he continues to toil up—he continues to try to find his way out of the darkness of his night!

"We are sorry to hear the editor discount the white blood in Negroes. If the white man is such a saint, then the white blood in the Negro ought to make him better. But the truths of history overthrow all of his contentions along the line as to color making one Negro better than another. But when he confesses that the more education and wealth the Negro has the more he is disliked by the white man, he expresses a conviction which we have long held.

"Some years ago there were those who believed in the elevation of the Negro, and they gave large sums of money towards his moral, religious and intellectual development. Many did this because they believed that the two hundred and fifty years of unrequited toil of the Negro in helping to make this country what it is entitled him to at least this tribute to his worth and work. But since it is decided that he is doomed to be only a hewer of wood and a drawer of water, most philanthropists are unwilling to give money for any other purpose than to fit the Negro for a toiler.

"It was once asserted that if the Negro got education and wealth all race prejudice against him would vanish. Southern statesmen wish to deprive the Negro even of this advantage. They contend that it is as a common laborer the Negro is to find employment; that as a skilled laborer, he will come into contact with a force which will prove his undoing; that the white man will not endure him in the field of skilled labor. One element would at least allow him an industrial education, but the other would deny him even that. It seems to be the avowed purpose of the South to compass the utter debasement of the Negro. But the Negro will accept nothing short of the absolute recognition of his manhood rights. He has labored and waited for three hundred years, and he is willing to labor and wait a thousand years, if need be, to attain the ends of justice. But on the other hand, we find that prejudice increases— becomes more unreasoning and unreasonable, as the Negro advances in education and wealth.

"The newspapers, public writers, and lawmakers of the South, and many at the North, have conspired to make the Negro a pariah in this land of the so-called free. Why is it that the best brain of the South, encouraged by the North, is spent in devising ways of keeping the Negro in outer darkness? The Negroes are not all good, neither are they all bad. But all Southern and some Northern writers do all in their power to make the world believe that all Negroes are bad. 'All coons look alike' to them.

"Dr. Storms was despised because he wished to be a man among men! He was sacrificed to appease the hate of those who condemned this trait in him. Had he violated one law, or done any act that warranted arrest and trial, we would say, 'Amen' to the strict execution of the law; but no, just so—he was condemned by hate to his terrible fate!

"That he may have erred in some things we do not deny; but he did nothing worthy of death, except to violate the Southern edict that: 'No Negro shall be a man.' "We know of many white men who unfortunately loved black women. Some have clung to them till death. But those are cases between the powerful white man and the weak and helpless black woman. We shall be glad to join them in a code of morals which shall say: "All women are sacred from outrage by any man;" but we condemn a code which protects one class of women and debauches another. How is the Negro to learn good morals if his women are to be forced into immorality by the white man?

"When a colored senator introduced a bill the other day to make it a felony for white persons and Negroes to cohabit, why was it so strenuously opposed by the white senators? Some of them said in their speeches on the floor: 'We have large plantations with hundreds of 'niggers' on them. Often there are no white families for many miles. Our bosses are usually single men, and if you pass a law forbidding their cohabiting with the 'nigger women,' we can't get them to remain on our plantations.' Senator Smalls begged them in the name of their God, their religion and their civilization to offer some protection to our women and children! He said to them, 'On these plantations, a white man cohabits with a black woman or women for a few years and then leaves them with a family of children, without a father, money or protection. Those children become a burden upon the community or state. Not only so, but growing up in such an atmosphere they are morally weak and are likely to follow the unchaste life of the father and mother. I honor the white man for trying to protect the chastity of his women, but condemn him for debauching the women of other races, especially ours. Often the men who lead mobs to lynch a Negro for attempt, reported attempt, or rape, are men who are leading immoral lives with Negro women! Of course only one-tenth of the Negroes mobbed are even accused of the crime of rape!"

The Record was greatly aroused over the daring utterances of the colored editor. The Record said in reply: "We condemn violence and mobs of every description. We condemn also the acts and utterances of self-assertive negroes like this editor of the Watchman, a negro paper. This negro editor, like all other negroes, must stay in his place, or he will soon find that he has no place at all on this earth, which belongs to the white man anyway. We will not allow a man to abuse our ox or other dumb animals if we can prevent it. In the same spirit we do not wish to see the negro abused. If our ox or ass undertakes to put himself beside us, then we rise up and slay him! So shall it be with the negro. If he is humble and obedient to the white man's rule he will treat him humanely; but if he undertakes to put himself beside the white man he must take what follows.

"The South, the home of the only true Anglo-Saxon, will not tolerate anything that savors of equality with an inferior race. Before we will allow the 'blackamoor' to be anything but what the white man and the white man's God intend he shall be, we will exterminate or drive him from this land. We brought him here, and we can send him away.

"Already organizations, men and money are at work to accomplish that much desired end. Emigration agents and government officials are at work to the end to flood the South with a class of foreigner who will not only take the negro's place as laborers, but will one day rise up and wipe the black blot off of our civilization.

"Too many Southern writers are devoted to the cause of keeping the sins and imagined sins of the negro before the world, and especially before the people of the North, to allow the work to fail! We have already changed thousands who were once willing to fight for the so-called rights of the negro. We have worked so effectively through the press, our boys and girls in Northern schools, and our women who have gone into Northern homes, and told the people of the beastly negro, that the work cannot fail. Many men who were once wont to stand up in Congress, and on public platforms, and defend the negro, and ask for what they called justice for him, have been silenced or their guns turned upon the negro. Now those same voices, many of them, are heard condemning the negro and praising us for teaching him his place. Men who once aided in sending bayonets into the South to force us to allow the negro to rule over, us, are among those who now say we are right in depriving the negro of manhood rights or any other rights that are not in accord with our ideas of justice for the negro. They are with us in spite of the fact that the negro has steadily increased in wealth and education, in spite of a president's declaration that he 'would not close the door of hope in the face of any man.' In spite of all that has been done to bolster the negro up, he must stay down.

"The South is fast closing the door of hope, just the same, and the American people acquiesce in what we are doing! The South through its press, pulpit, platform speakers and public writers has driven the Negro from the ballot box, the jury box, from public office, places of amusement and common carriers. His fate is more securely fixed within our grasp than ever before. We have driven him from nearly all the great colleges and universities of the land. We have so changed sentiment that he is no longer accepted in places that bring him in contact with whites, even at the North. We are fast southernizing the entire nation, so that the negro will be no better treated North than South.

"The negro must go! One writer, who has done more than any other in moulding public sentiment against the negro, has declared that it is his mission to drive the negro from this country.

While we of the South know that his fabrications are emanations from a diseased brain, yet since they help our cause what care we? Of course, we do not believe what he says about the negro. For we know the negro as a kindly, gentle animal; that, like a faithful dog, he watched by our homes and families while we fought to keep him in chains. But those who do not know the negro as we do believe what the writers say. Those who used to pity will, when they read these utterances, curse the negro and thirst for his blood.

"We of the South used to chafe over 'Uncle Tom's Cabinbut one of our story-tellers has totally demolished the cabin, lynched the good 'nigger,' Uncle Tom, and made Legree the friend and associate of the St. Clares, the Shelbys and the Abolitionists.

"The editor of the Watchman had better run and read or he will read and run. We will not tolerate language from a negro not in keeping with his place in the economy of this government. The negro is here by sufferance, and he will suffer if he arrogates too much to himself. He will do well to be warned by the fate of the negro doctor!"

In the next issue the Watchman declared that "There can be no more deadly delusion than the arrogant assumption by the 'Klan' and lynchers that the hopes, griefs, wails and prayers of a great but sorely afflicted and downtrodden, yea! long suffering people, can be silenced with fire, hemp and shot or drowned in streams of blood.

Measured by any rule of justice, save the 'Klan's' code of death, we have done no wrong:. We have uttered no word but in defense of justice and right! We urge also obedience to the laws. We have not equivocated, neither will we retract! Our tongue will only be silenced, in death. The cowardly, cutthroat 'Klan' can silence the voice of the Watchman, but they cannot blind the 'All-Seeing Eye of Justice!' The white man knows and feels deep down in his heart that the Negro is a man.

He has met the negro too often on battle plain, When cannon thundered and bullets fell like Autumn, rain.

"fie has both fought with and against the black soldier on many a battle-field. And the Negro has always proved himself a knight worthy of the white man's steel! Let them do their worst! The diabolical ruler of darkness can only be appeased by blood. The Negro question will not down till the ghost is laid by atonement for the hundred thousand Negroes murdered since their freedom, and the fifty millions destroyed in fastening slavery upon this nation!'' The other papers took the matter up and pushed it, saying many bitter things. Some of their editorials were more bitter than the utterances of the Record. The "Klan" was called together and they decided that the Watchman was a dangerous organ and must be suppressed. So a committee waited on the editor and gave him the choice of discanting or leaving the city. A committee of the leading Negroes met a committee of the white business men of the city and tried to adjust matters, but the rabble and the "Klan" had decreed that the paper must be suppressed, and the editor run out of the country or killed. Editor Monroe was warned and advised to leave, but he was obstinate. So on the morning of Nov. 18th, 18—, about half past 2 o'clock, the mob came to the "Watchman Building." They came with torches flaming and guns and pistols firing. The mob demanded entrance and when the door was not opened broke it down, rushed in and up stairs to the printing office. They threw the presses out of the windows, broke them to pieces, scattered the files, type and everything to the four winds. Some hotheads set the building on fire; and they shot, danced and howled around the fire like Comanche Indians. Many of the mob went in search of the editor, but he had been taken by a friend and carried away to save his life. Not finding him the mob vented their spite on several defenseless Negroes, killing two and wounding others. Many Negroes fled for their lives, leaving all of their possessions behind. Thus was the Watchman torn from the wall, and diabolism, darkness and desolation were enthroned. Many Negroes sold out their possessions at great sacrifice and left, saying: "If they persecute you in one city, flee ye to another." It was many months before the Negroes who remained became easy and reconciled to conditions.

The colored people felt more than ever the peril of their position. Some said: "Although we seemed to stand well in this city and community, we are in a slippery place. 'When we think we stand, let us take heed, lest we fall!' We can see and feel the prejudice and repression growing from year to year. Although we are prospering here and seem to be fairly well situated, we cannot trust this ever changing public opinion. We can trust no future!

"Do we wish our children to grow up amid the fast gathering storm? There will come a reckoning day and who shall be able to stand? For ourselves, we could endure the punishment, for we have endured and become hardened to it. Like any worthy parents we wish all that is best for our little ones, but can it be secured in this land of oppression and repression?

" 'This land, the white man's pride, The land where our fathers died, The Negro's vale of sorrow, Offers us no bright to-morrow.' "At the altar of the white man's God the Negro is not acceptable. In the courts we see him condemned for offences from which the white man is set free. In the fields of labor he is denied a living chance in the battle for bread! In the school he is given only a sip at the fountain of knowledge, and they clamor to cut that off. On the highways and byways he is shoved aside. Out of this Egyptian darkness, into which he has been peering so long; out of this entanglement of diabolism with destiny comes no voice of consolation and reassurance. Do we not owe it to our children to seek an atmosphere where we can breathe the air of opportunity and freedom ? The founders of this government left the land of oppression to plant the tree of liberty. Can we not up and do something for ourselves? Let us seek a country where the God of righteousness rules in the hearts of men, where 'Out of the darkness, the voice of hope and trust will lead us on to grander and nobler things, when the dawn of destiny shall overthrow diabolism.' "

To the nuptial bower I led her, blushing like the morn; all Heaven, And happy constellations on that hour Shed their selectest influence: the earth Gave sign of gratulation, and each hill; Joyous the birds; fresh galea and gentle airs Whisper'd it to the woods, and from the spicy shrub, —Milton.

JULIAN and Ernestine were greatly affected by the news of the terrible death of their schoolfellow. Ernestine was the more grieved on account of the untimely end of Lucius. She felt that perhaps her treatment of his seeming preference for her may have caused him to heedlessly and recklessly plunge headlong to his death! She believed that she could have sacrificed her preferences and ideals to save him, had it been even intimated that he was to fall into the deadly abyss that separates the Negro man from the white woman. How vividly now she recalled his words when he last sought her consent to a union of their destinies, as follows : " 'If you do not accept me I am sure I shall never again seek an alliance with one of my mother's race!"'—fate and destiny!

"I urged him then to fling away such an ambition as unworthy. It is a two-edged sword and often wounds to death those who by it would carve a path to honor, distinction and power. How like a caged lion Lucius chafed and tugged at the bars of his prison (prejudice). Race hatred caused his death! His only crime was to labor and love where love is the bride of death. Fate overshadowed his fancy! But for his black blood he would have been lauded to the sky for thus saving the life of a woman at the risk of his own. Alas, alas! his heroic deed was his death!"

Julian felt Lucius's death as a great loss to the race. Said he: "We have so few really strong men that we can ill afford to lose one so eminent as was Dr. Storms. He was the peer in education and his profession of any man in the city and far above most of them. It is said that he was one of the most skilled physicians and surgeons in the State. I am thankful of one thing—he had committed no wrong. He only broke that hell-born law of caste; he left no stain upon his useful life. Although the beasts which slew him attempted to besmirch his illustrious record, they failed utterly, for the young lady, one of the brightest gems of Southern higher life, swept that black falsehood away by declaring openly and fearlessly to every one that Dr. Storms had only done that which in a white man would have been praised and heralded abroad as a heroic deed. The only thing he did was to save her life on two different occasions. Dr. Storms offered her nothing but the most gentlemanly respect and the tenderest attention in her afflictions. It was deplorable that he should have to pay with his life for saving hers. Had he not at the first saved her life he might be living to-day. We are indeed proud of the fact that Miss Tilton, her father and brother did all in their power to avert the sad disaster and save poor Lucius. When they failed and the foul deed was done, she did what she could to atone for her part in it by giving of her means and money to help establish and foster the school and hospital which was founded through the death of Dr. Storms. This last act of that angelic girl sanctified the death of Dr. Storms, and she still gives towards the support of this philanthropic enterprise, a monument to the life and character of the man of destiny. . Dr. Storms's life and death are still going out in blessings to the Negro race. That institution is affording shelter and medical aid to hundreds of the poor and is lessening the enormous death-rate among our people. The Storms Nurse Training School is sending out well-trained nurses who care for the sick in white as well 'as black homes, hence it is a blessing to all the people. Dr. Storms is dead by the hand of cruel murderers, yet his life is going on down the path of time shedding the golden sunshine, scattering seeds of love and life along earth's thorny way."

At the meeting held in commemoration of Dr. Storms, Lawyer Jarnigan proposed the erection of a memorial shaft in honor of the martyr to manhood rights.

"The slain has erected his own monument," said Lawyer Jarnigan, "by the life he lived and the work he did in the short while he was permitted to sojourn amongst you! The school and hospital he established tell the story of the worth of Dr. Storms. But we wish to pay our tribute of love and appreciation of his short but fruitful life, by setting up a memorial shaft as a reminder of its value. Let us set up a stone of precious memory, so that through the generations those who pass this way may look, read and learn of the destiny of Negro life in its contests with 'Diabolism.' O Truth, thou art imperishable! May no sands of time beating upon the tablets of our memory be able to efface the impress of his worthy works! Through passing generations, the thousands who shall reap the benefits of the Storms School and Hospital will sing of a life devoted and undying! To keep his memory green let us do our duty to our friend and brother. As surely as time swings around the cycle of the centuries, those who perpetrated this dastardly, fiendish outrage will live to repent of their diabolical act. I give one thousand dollars to the memorial fund. I am authorized by Miss De Shon to present her check for one hundred dollars."

Elder Harold Scott was present and spoke next. With words full of truth and pathos, he recited the incidents in the career of the deceased. He related the story of their boyhood days in the village and at school; their presence at the mobbing of Elder Buchanan and Deacon Brown; of their course at Livingston University, and of the ambitions and foibles of his companion in tribulation. The speaker told of their witnessing the acts of the revolution and the deeds of blood in the overthrow of republican rule in their State, and the speaker paid a glowing tribute to the ability and learning of the martyr.

"The deceased had been full of zeal for all that is best in a human career. His nature and intellect were so elevated that he felt more keenly than most men the injustices heaped upon us because of our race. He was ever chafing under the repressions, proscriptions and oppressions heaped upon the Negro people.

"My friends, though the deceased is gone from us, he left us not without a comforter. His strenuous life of activity for the uplift of all people he bequeathed to us a blessed inheritance. We are his witnesses that he contended nobly and well, although in the struggle he fell! There stands his monument—Storms School and Hospital—to enlighten and save the lives of unnumbered generations to come! To such as he there can be no death! Dr. Storms lives on in those who carry forward his work. They have, it is true, slain his body, but they only freed his immortal soul that it may go marching down the ways of eternity, calling us out the darkness of the devious ways of this changeful and uncertain life to that truer, surer and more perfect life above! May we so live that whether snatched away at midnight or at noonday we shall be found ready.

"But the man who stirred up all this excitement, and for rancor and hate caused the death of this noble man—what of him? The hand of retribution has followed fast and followed faster every day since he concocted and carried into execution his diabolical plot of murder! Stung by the relentless worm of remorse, not for killing his brother, but because of his defeat in gaining his object, the hand of Miss Tilton, he took to drink, and its consequent debauchery. I saw in the Croton Bee, a few days ago, that Gatewood Storms had been on a great spree, and carousing among very low Negro women; that he, in company with some others as wild as he, had concluded to 'whitecap' some Negroes and on that raid he and two of his companions in crime were killed! 'Vengeance is mine, I will repay,' are the words of Him who rightens every wrong! In behalf of my wife and self, I give one hundred dollars toward the memorial fund. We wish further to give fifty dollars annually to the Storms School and Hospital. You see that his death, like his life, has been a blessing."

One thousand dollars was raised and a suitable monolith set up over the last resting place of Dr. Storms.

Things were quite lively at the offices of Lawyer Jarnigan in November, 18—. Many important papers were being prepared by the clerks. The stenographers and typewriters were very busy. Men were coming in with bills and going out with checks. A clerk was busy addressing what seemed to be invitations. One of the most reliable contractors and builders of the city was often in close consultation with Lawyer Jarnigan. Plumbers, furnishers and all classes of fitters and suppliers of household effects were coming and going. It was quite apparent that the lawyer was preparing to take a partner. He was building and fitting up a fine new house in the latest and most approved style. It was currently remarked that Mr. Jarnigan was going to have one of the prettiest and best appointed homes in the city, not excepting Mr. La Salle's, the banker. He was having his new house fitted to the taste of the intended mistress. The invitations had gone out to all quarters, even members of Congress were among those who were expected.

Mr. Wilford ordered a painting from a New York artist and Messrs. Sinclair and La Roche ordered another; they were presents to the bride-elect. The one by Mr. Wilford was a beautiful landscape scene, an afternoon on a farm. Men were in the fields. Cows were grazing on the meadow. At the farmhouse door stood a horse and buggy, while a gentleman and lady sat lunching at a table under a great tree. The one by Messrs. Sinclair and La Roche was of a thunderstorm at night. The trees were bending and lashing, the lightning flashing, a rushing, boiling torrent of water, a woman struggling in the maddened torrent, and a man hurrying towards her could be seen by the flashes of lightning.

In New Orleans, at the bridal home, all was in a stir of preparation for the launching of the matrimonial barque. The wedding was to be solemnized at the Congregational Church at 5 o'clock p. m. The bridal party and friends were to repair to the De Shon mansion, where an old time Southern marriage feast would be served. Misses Ballentine and Scribner were the bridesmaids elect. Two days prior to the nuptials, Lawyer Jarnigan arrived in New Orleans and was the guest of Lawyer La Roche. Messrs. Revier, La Roche's law partner, and N. S. Wilford were the groomsmen elect.

On the morning before the bridal day Julian called to see his financee. When he rang, the maid informed him that Miss De Shon was in the flower garden or the bower. He told the maid not to call the lady, as he preferred to gp to her. Julian found Ernestine among the flowers, plucking the prettiest and filling her basket. But to him she looked more beautiful than the roses and carnations. Their greeting was in accord with the usual meeting of those who meet to part no more and whose destinies are to flow on and on forever in one common channel. After the usual felicitous greetings of lovers long absent they held sweet converse upon past events, present happiness and anticipations of wedded bliss. They did not fail to express regrets for the sad ending of the brilliant career of their schoolfellow, Lucius! Ernestine asked many questions about Beech Haven and their future residence there. Together they planned for the management of her estates and financial interests in New Orleans. Lawyer La Roche was to continue as their attorney and agent to look after those affairs. As Julian bade Ernestine good afternoon, he asked her if she thought there was going to be a storm!

She replied laughingly: "I hope not. The storms have done their work."

"What we wish now is a gentle, calm and smooth sea," remarked Julian!

On the afternoon of the wedding day, at four o'clock, the people began to assemble at the church. Several presents and people came from a distance. The President of Livingstone University was in attendance, as well as teachers and guests from Muskegon and Beech Haven. Julian's brother and sisters from Bon Aqua were present. Promptly at five o'clock the bridal party arrived at the church and to the solemn tones of the wedding march, proceeded with slow step to the altar. With impressive ceremony the pastor united the lives and destinies of Julian Jarnigan and Ernestine De Shon. The audience stood while the bridal party filed out of the church, entered their carriages, and were driven to the residence of the bride, where the guests and presents were received. Congratulations, feasting and conviviality were the order to a late hour. At 3:30 a. m. the bridal party were driven to the station where they boarded the train for Beech Haven. The maids and men left the party at Muskegon.

At Beech Haven they were met by a delegation of citizens and friends who escorted them to their new home, where they found a delicious dinner awaiting them. When their apparel had been arranged and they properly refreshed, they were conducted by the strains of sweet music into their own dining-room and served to the rich repast.

The friends having bid them good afternoon and departed, the newly wedded pair were alone in their sitting room. Julian folded his bride to his throbbing heart and said: "Now am I blest. My life's dream is a reality! Since the morning I first entered the dining hall at Livingstone, and my eyes rested upon the most lovely vision I was ever permitted to behold, this hour and this object have been the vision of my dreams and the star of hope to guide my faltering steps."

"Home at last and this is bliss! Yes, the vision and the dream are o'er! Now real life and its joys begin! We are I think well prepared for our duties, as we have not entered into this relation hurriedly," said the bride.

On the following evening a reception was tendered them at the palatial home of Mr. Le Sueur, the broker. For two weeks it was receptions and teas.

A few weeks after they began housekeeping, the Hon. Westmoreland was in the office of Lawyer Jarnigan and when they were through with their business, as the Congressman was about to go, Lawyer Jarnigan said to him: "Colonel, I am driving down to luncheon, and as I go your way let me assist you home."

"I don't care if you do, Jarnigan."

So he drove the colonel to his home. As they came near Jarnigan's residence, he pointed it out to the colonel. "Well, well! that is fine, sure." When they reached the gate the lawyer stopped his horse. The Colonel prepared to alight.

"Come in, Colonel," said the lawyer. "I wish to show you my home." The lawyer conducted him all through the house—showed him his parlor, library, reception room, diningroom, bed rooms, pantry, laundry, music room, sewing room and his own dear den. He then took him into his wife's sitting room, and introduced him to her. When they were driving on to his home, the colonel said several times, "Well, well! I tell you, you have a lovely home, Jarnigan. Few people have better homes than yours, and no one has one better arranged. Why, it is a better and more nicely appointed home than mine! Well, sir, I was never in any Negro homes but the cabins and shanties of the plantations. I had no idea that colored people lived in such homes and in such taste and style. Are there many such homes among your people?"

"Colonel, there are homes right here in your city, several such homes, and some better ones than mine. That is a fault of you Southern men. You live right in the midst of the Negroes, but you know as little or less of them than people a thousand miles away. You know nothing of the better class of our people. All your ideas and opinions are formed from the view you get from day to day of such Negroes as those you exhibited to the visiting Congressmen.

"Well, sir, I shall think and talk of these matters."

"Thank you very much, Colonel, for the compliment you were so gracious as to send us on our nuptial day! Hope to see you again before you return to Washington. Good day, Colonel."

Although Colonel Westmoreland believed in the white man's rule and of keeping the Negro ignorant and servile, he was capable of strong friendships for individual Negroes, and Lawyer Jarnigan was one of them. He had a genuine friendly feeling for the colored lawyer, and put not a few fees into his hands.

Lawyer Jarnigan talking with his wife on these matters said: "There are many of the aristocracy or what are called the better element of Southern whites, who will do much for individual Negroes whom they like. The great pressure and friction comes from the lower middle class, or laboring element. The friendship of such men as the elder Storms, Grimpky and the Tiltons is the bright star in our more than Egyptian darkness! We must labor on, hoping and trusting that somewhere, at some time during our long and weary night the star of hope and of empire will burst upon our anxious eyes from out the darkness, and that diabolism will yield to destiny, seeing and hearing which, we shall take courage and press on to our higher destiny."