
﻿THE MEAT MAN A ROMANCE OF LIFE, OF LOVE, OF LABOR 
By MOSES JORDAN 
Illustrated with Scenes from WM. S. SCOTT STUDIO 

JUDY PUBLISHING COMPANY CHICAGO


Copyright, 1923 By Moses Jordan

Printed in U. S. A.

CONTENTS 
Chapter 
Page 
PREFACE I. 
THE PARADE.,...........11 
II. UNDER THE TRAIN SHED ..19 
III. COLLEGE DAYS..........27 
IV. SEPARATED BY WAR ......33 
V. THE DIARIES ............37 
VI. THE EFFECT OF MRS. BRIT’S DEATH ............... 47 
VII. james Bounded in battle ....57 
VIII. THE LOSS OF BETTY’S FORTUNE 61 
IX. THE VISIT TO THE HOSPITAL ....67 
X. THE CRISIS .............71 
XI. BETTY WINS .............83 
XII. JAMES REFLECTS ..........85 
XIII. THE TRIAL OF MISS ROSS .93 
XIV. FINAL HAPPINESS ........95

THE MEAT MAN The purpose of this little book is to show that success an,d hap- piness are not to be achieved by obeying the desires of the flesh, but by obeying the command of the mind only. Reader, this state - ment might run cross grain to your belief; but if you will go with me through the pages of this volume and notice carefully the general, as well as the concrete examples I have given, I am sure that you will agree with me. Because from your own experience you would be able to multiply my examples many many times.



 THE PARADE On the way from the City Hall to the TTnion Railroad Station, on August 3, 1918, the streets of Omaha, Nebraska, were overflowing with a great multitude of people who had come to say “Gpodbye” to a large body of drafted men. The men were leaving for the training camps, where they would be made into soldiers for the great European War. The people crowded in doors and window's and waited impatiently upon house tops for the men to pass in parade, on their way to the station. As they waited, they talked ex- citedly about the war. Some were enthusiastic, glad to know that the draftees readily heard the call of their country. Almost all of the women were sad and gloomy. They gesticulated and used quite a few superlatives—1“Most terrible,” “The largest guns,” “The worst gasses.” And some disgruntled ones criticized everything. They abused the government for declaring war; they called the drafted men “Fools” because they willingly heard the call of the country and they cursed the Kaiser "something awful.” Among the waiting throng at Thirteenth and 11

 Farnum streets, stood Betty Hogan, eager to' see the parade,, but very indifferent to the people about her. She wore a blue turban hat, an orange colored silk waist, a blue serge skirt and a pair of tan stockings and pumps. She carried a folded blue serge coat across her left shoulder and a small traveling suit-case in her right hand. She paid little attention to the people surging about her. Only when someone pressed against her did she move. She kept her eyes fixed up Farnum Street toward the City Hall, where the parade was forming. And every once in a while 9 she muttered: “Jamies, James,” Suddenly a trumpet sounded. Directly after- ward, a band began to play and a great shout of patriotism swept dcfwn the line of march. All eyes turned where the band was playing. Far up the street, the parade was coming down the K slope, just below the City Hall. Preceeding the parade, mounted policemen dashed up and down the street, driving back all those eager spectators who, had crossed the boundary line. One com- pany of boy scouts, which led the parade, car- ried a large American flag, and another carried a beautiful banner on which was the inscription: “Make the World Safe for Democracy.” The Desdunes band, playing one martial air after RE a 12 Ik ■ I I f

 the other, followed. The Governor, the Mayor and other distinguished citizens came behind the band, and the large bo'dy of drafted men brought up the rear. When the parade was crowing Thirteenth Street, Betty Hogan spied Janies Brit, an act- ing corporal. She made a dashing effort, like a football player, to break thru the crowd to him, and at the same time she was crying: “James, James! Hee*oo, Hee-oo!” but he neither saw nor heard her. While she was calling, he was saluting friends on the opposite side of the street. Presently he caught step, shifted his shoulders in a military manner and marched on down the Street. Betty put her hands around her mouth, megaphone like, and called again: “James, oh James! Look this way, Ja-a-mes.” Her voice was drowned in the tumultous shouts of the multitude. Again she attempted to break thru the human wall, but before she could do so, James was far down the street. Failing in her effort to hail him at the corner of Thirteenth and Farnum Streets, she broke away from the crowd and ran south on Thir- teenth to Jackson Street, and east on Jackson to Tenth Street. On Tenth Street at the foot of the viaduct, she waited. She had headed the 13

 parade off, and as it had to cross the viaduct to get to the railroad station, she intended to fall in it there. However, her intentions were blocked by the mounted policemen, who still dashed up and down the street, keeping back all intruders. Seeing that her plans had failed, Betty drop- ped her suit-case and stood with 'her fists clinched, as the angry tears streamed down her determined face. The people passing, paid little attention to her, for their patriotism1 was full of sorrow and’ tears. Eventually a kind brown- faced elderly lady paused to whisper words of sympathy: “Don’t cry, dearie, I know it is hard and trying when a dear one is leaving on such a mission as this. Bear it. You can, if you will, for your face tells me that you are made out of * fighting material.” “I-I-I want to. see him. I want to speak with him, the mean policemen won’t let me.” Betty tucked in her lip and paused in deep thought. Finally she said: “I must see him before he leaves.” The elderly lady patted her on the soulder. “I must see him before he leaves, my heart would burst, if I don’t. I came all the way from Kansas City to talk with him. Now the policemen won’t let me.” 14

“No, dearie, you cannot »apeak to him here, but you can under the train shed. All will have a chance to say goodbye there, for the policemen only go as far as the station. I am on my way there now. I have a son in that parade, and I must speak to him before he leave*. If you wish, dearie/ you miay come with me.” Betty quickly seized her suit-case and gladly went with the elderly lady. They could hardly cross the viaduct for looking back at the on- coming parade. The band was playing, and the multitude was wild with patriotism. The morn- ing wa^voung. The breezes of the August day were just cool enough to make walking pleas- ant. As they neared the other side, the elderly lady broke the silence by asking: A*‘Is it your brother^1 dearie, whom you came to tell good- bye?” As Betty made no immediate reply, *she glanced at her inquiringly. Betty drooped her heackdike a guilty child when accused by its mother. Seeing that she had embarrassed the girl, the lady apologized: “I beg your pardon, dearie. Don’t be afraid of me, if it is your lover Iwhomr you came to’ tell goodbye. I know how it «fc, for once upon a time, I was a little courting girl.” A smile passed quickly over her kind 15

brown face, as she gazed out over the viaduct toward the sunny sky. Her memory seemed to have been recalling a happy love scene of her girlhood. “If you bear any love for him, such a time as this will surely draw it out.” “You are so sympathetic,” said Betty, raising her head and drawing a deep sigh of complete relief. Following the sigh, a smile drew her tender lips just far enough apart to show a beautiful set of snow white teeth. “I am glad that you are so kind. You seem to be as kind as my mother was before she died. I wish it were so we could stay together, you would be a mother to me. I would, after you had spoken, have answered you directly, but I was afraid that you would think evil of me.” She paused ns she, too, looked across the hills into the clear sky. “I love him, yes, I love him with all my heart. If I could, I would follow him to the end of the world.” “If you love him, dearie, and he loves you, don’t worry. Ask God to protect him and bring him] back safely. God will answer your prayer, if you ask in faith.” At that moment they came down into the station. “See that gate yonder?” As Betty looked up, the elderly lady pointed to a large gate used by the baggagemen at the far 16

end of the station. “They are going to pass thru it. Go stand by it, and when he comes thru, stop hirm. I am going thru the passenger’s gate and wait on the janitor’s bench. My son promised to. break away from the parade here and meet me there.” I r |

The two separated and went to their respective places. Betty took her stand by the gate just in the nick of time, for others, anxious to spend the last moment with the draftees, were rushing for the same place. She gave her suit-case to a red-cap, and put her coat on and buttoned it up. Betty wanted no unnecessary burdens while she was spending her last moments with her ldVer. Bier coat m)ade her very warm. Little beads of perspiration gathered quickly over her forehead. She was so anxious about seeing James that, for awhile, she forgot to wipe them off. However, when she did think to do so, she was not one whit embarrassed for the color in her cheeks was put there by nature. Suddenly the music and the riotous shouts of the multitude burst forth, filling all the nooks and corners and sounding and resounding throughout the station. A& the parade came dowm into the station, Betty joined in the yell- ing. She thought that she would soon be in company with her lover. 19

THE MEAT MAN When the draftees neared the gate, the people pressed fiercely to get as close to it as possible. Those who could not get near the gate climbed upon the iron fence, stood upon box cars, or upon anything that would give them a good view of it. As each draftee passed thru, he was called, beckoned to, or seized by some friend or relative and ushered to some private place where they might talk. Betty stood long by the gate watching im- patiently for her lover, b.^sently the last draftee came thru, but there was no James! However, she still waited, making herself believe that the parade was divided in two sections and that he would come in the other. A few moments dragged by, but neither the second section nor James came into sight. She would not wait longer. She ran thru the station to the street, and looked first up and then down it. She saw no sign of him. “Lord, I wonder where he is.” Betty was completely at a loss about him1. She turned and staggered back under the shed into' chattering crowd. She went to each draftee and asked: “Mister, I beg your pardon, but have you seen James Brit?” “He is here somewhere.” “He was in the com- pany behind me.” “I haven’t seen him since we

left the City Hall.” “He is somewhere with his mother.^ Those were some of the answers to her question. ¡¿GT wonder where he has gone. I must, yes, I must find him,” she murmured as she threaded her way thru the throng. She did not have the least idea which way to go to hunt him. She wait just wandering thru the crowd. Once she felt like getting up on a high place and calling him as loudly as jhe could, but she did not have the nerve to do it. Finally she decided to' go to the far end of the station where the elderly lady and her son were, and ask them to help her find him'. She had Only a few minutes in which to do it, fen it was just about train time. All about her the people were saying, “Good- bye, son, goodbye.” “Goodbye wife;” “Take care of the children, May;” “Goodbye boys, re- member you are the offspring of Crispus At - tuck;” “Manda, I'll write you as soon as I get to camp ;’V/Say, the ooiored boys have never been defeated;” “Live up to1 your reputat - ion boys;” “Hee-oo, Hee-oo, goodbye dear;” “Sampsofi, don’t forget to bring back the kaiser;” “Give them; hell, boys;” were some of the farewell words passing back and forth as the men boarded the train. 21

Even the city joined with the people in bidding the-draftees goodbye. The whistles of the mills and factories were blowing; the band was play- ing; the bells were ringing; the automobiles, parked upon the viaduct over the station, were “honking” and far !up on Church Hill the sacred chimes of St. Peter’s Cathedral were pealing forth in sweet melodious tones: “God Be With You Till We Meet Again.” Here and there, loud screams of heartbroken mothers, who could not bear to see their sons start upon such a crusade, though noble, yet fraught with such grave danger, rose above the shouting multitude high up into the calm air on their way to the altar of a merciful God. Betty, heedless of the farewell ceremony, was elbowing through the crowd on toward the lower end of the shed, where the elderly lady and her son were. She was afraid that she would not be able to find James before the train left. When she came near the bench on which they were sitting, she stopped suddenly, and looked in great surprise. There before her, entwined in each others armsj^the elderly lady was kissing her son, James Brit, goodbye! Betty sprang madly at them crying, “James, James! Oh, God, I have found you.” James broke loose from his mother 22

and whirled just in time to. catch her as she came down upon him. “Betty, dear, I am 10 glad you have come. It was impossible for me to get to you, but I knew you would come to me before I left for France. Mother this is the brave little Betty of whom I have talked about daily. Nothing gets in her way when she wants to do something.” Passionately he squeezed her to his breast, as they whispered hurried words of love. Mrs. Brit, standing aside, looked on, not knowing whether to cry or rejoice. She was happy to know that the girl had found her lover but sorry that she had lost her son. * “Sorry,” said Brit* “But we must postpone our wedding, until I return, that is if you will wait that long.” “I am willing to wait thru all eternity.” There was a short intermission, one broken by affec- tionate embraces. Presently the train whistled; the bell rang. “All aboard,” cried the conductor. The noises of the mills and factories and the shouts of the multitude grew louder than ever. But all were quickly over-ridden when nature in her strange and mysterious way, joined in the great “Farewell.” Suddenly a black cloud, with curtain like rapidity, covered the face of the sun. 23

Like the twinkling of an eye, a silver streak of lighting flashed out o.f the murky clouds, played frightfully over the face of the earth and sud- denly went out. Fast upon the heels of the light- ning, the thunder burst forth in such avdeafening peal that the people flinched and gazed askant toward theftky. The thunder must have burst wide the cave of the wind, for it hardly ceased rumbling before the howling wind swept forward like a raging bull, bending trees, blowing off hats, twisting people about, and whirling paper from the gutters. Dust and train smoke filled the people’s eyes. Sparrows and pigeons darted from the street and sought refuge under strong roofs. Immediately after the sudden storm, a gentle rain fell, and the smiling sun revealed its loving face again. As suddenly and mysteriously as the storm came, it left. No one could give any reason for nature acting so. queerly. It acted as peculiarly that day, when those men offered their liver for their country, as it did on the day when Jesus Christ gave his life for the people who lynched him. But its queer action did not in- terfere with the love making of James and Betty. Still, they stood planning for the future. “We’ll marry as soon as I return. My money 24

is safe in the bank. My boss said that he is going to raise my wages from $75.00 to1 $100 per week. Gee! dear, then I would be making enough money to lift you to your long desired station in life.” “Ah, that’* fine, James.*’ Betty closed her eyes and turned up her soft lips, and he met them with a sweet kiss. “While you are away, James, I am going to save all the money I can, so that when we get married, I will have something to help keep the wolf from) the door.” Presently the train started off. “Now, Betty, I must go. Goodbye, mother.” James turned aside and kissed his mother, then he kissed Betty again. “Both of you be sweet until I return.” He ran up to the train just in time ta catch the last coach. After he was safely on it, he turned and raised his voice above the shouts of the multitude in one fond “Goodbye.” Betty, with others, stood waving her handker- chief and throwing kisses, until the train turned a curve out of sight. Then she and Mrs. Brit, arm in arm, silently left the station. 25



﻿THEIR COLLEGE DAYS Betty and James had been lovers since their first year in New Orleans College. When they met, James was a Freshman in the school of Liberal Arts and Betty was a special student in mjusic. One Friday evening, during a social, they were shot by the golden arrow of Cupid. Altho this was their meeting, it wak not a case of ‘love at first sight.’ Long before that time, from sight acquaintance that is, that acquaintance common among boarding students from passing in the halls, from coming together during chapel ser- vice, and from strolling about the campus, they had grown to admire each other. So, when they met that evening, their smothered passions blossomed into a beautiful rose of love. While together, they were as happy as little children. They talked eagerly, one could hardly wait until the other had finished. Wherever one went, the other willingly followed. When the time came to march, they were partners. She preferred him pulling her out, and he preferred her when they played “children in the well.” At 27

 the table they raced eating ice cream and who- ever finished first helped the other; and when the time came for them; to go to their respective rooms, they parted with heavy hearts. Betty was not beautiful, but she was impres- sively attractive. She was neither yellow nor brown, but a shade between—perhaps, golden. Or she was more like one of those soft rare colors made otn the rim of an evening cloud by the last golden ray of a setting sun. Her hair was beautiful silky black and she often wore it slant-, ing upward, coming to a large knot on the back of her head, with side puffs covering her ears. Her face was rather thin, and very delicate, and the way she fixed her hair made it appear much fuller than it really was. Her crescent eye lashes were thick and beautiful. Calm and serene, were her black eyes, revealing that divine spirit which dwells in all gciod people. She looked and smiled at one with a child-like innocency. Her long arms and slender fingers were her only mark of genius. She was rather tall and slender, but graceful. Betty was deliberate; her motto was: “Look before you leap.” She never hur- ried, yet she accomplished more in the run of the day than many of her swifter comrades. She laved music and she played the piano with a gift 28 CiHMWNWMMlHetf»S5EMME3ESS3l5B53En&MivOTMM3MMtaRHJIMIII

that is seldom found am|ong the great pianists of today. Her nimble fingers moved rapidly over the key-board with such ease and she struck the keys with such a firmness that her hearers always listened with rapt attention. James adored and worshipped her as tho she were a goddess. He spoke kindly of her to his a^ociates. He loved to glide over the dance hall with her resting lightly upon his arm. He admired her sweet soprano voice which ran like a silver thread among the many voices of the fchapel choir. James loved Betty, but not any- more than she loved him. She often said that the mold broke when it made him and that there was not another man in the whole world like him. She loved him because he was tall, robust and handsome. She loved to. see him with his hair brushed back and with a sunny smile radiating his dark brown face. She loved to listen to his funny jokes and yarns. She did not believe that she could do enough to please him. For him she did all a school girl could, and still she longed to do more. When he ran for office she voted fodr him. She always urged him to study hard. When he led his class, she was the first to congratulate him, and when he failed on ex-

 amination, altho it hurt her to do so', she was the first tc* chide him. James was quick to make friends. He had a golden smile or a joke for everyone. He was much loved by the student body in general. He held many offices among them and he labored hard to keep the college spirit at fever heat. The great achievement of his college career, the one which wrote his name among the famous graduates of New Orleans, was when he won an intercollegiate oratorical prize over some of the leading colleges of the country. The next day, on referring to the contest, the “Morning Sun,” a daily newspaper had this to say: “All the contestants delivered eloquent orations. Each one did great credit to his school. As an orator, James Brit, the rep- resentative of New Orleans College, and winner of the prize, is in a class all by him- self. He has brought forth evidence that, when the Colored American is allowed a chance, he will hold his own among the many other races of America. We speak without flattery when we say that in or - atory, the mantle of the late Dr. M. C. B. Mason has fallen on the shoulders of Mr. Jamies Brit. We believe that he would make a successful lawyer.” James and Betty graduated the same year. 30

James took his jokes into vaudeville, and Betty went to. teach music in the London Institute at her home. She intended to teach until James made a success on the stage, then they would marry. He was not on the stage long before he was' a headliner on the Orpheum Circuit. On the stage he was commonly known as Bert Williams II. After a short correspondence with Betty, the date of their marriage was set, the wedding ring was bought, and the trousseau made. The wedding bells were ready to ring, when their marriage was suddenly upset by the country’s entrance into war. The telegram which James intended to tell Betty of hia coming for the marriage, told of his sudden call to camp. Betty’«;only chance of see- ing him was to go. to him. She threw social cus - toms and formalities to the wind, and took the first train going to Omaha, his home. She ar - rived as James and the other draftees were on their way to the railroad station. At the station, they renewed their love and postponed their wedding until after the war. 31

﻿SEPARATED BY WAR When James’ train left, Betty had to. remain in Omaha one hour before she could get a train going back to Kansas City. She spent that hour at the home of Mrs. Brit. In that short time Betty and, Mrs. Brit formed an everlasting friendship. Betty was not rich, nor was she likely to' fall heir to any great fortune. She did not crave fashionable society, yet she was too poor to be satisfied with her station in life. Her home was poorly furnished and often her dresses were not of the latest style. She always felt a little odd among her better dressed friends. And she hated the day when her club met at her humble home. Betty decided that marriage was the thing to lift her to her desired station in life; and that Brit was the man to. marry. He loved her, he knew of her desires and he always assured her that as soon as he colild, he would step in and pilot her life to that longed-for happiness. Betty returned to her home with her mind settled on marrying, and bent on saving money. 33

Whenever she could, she used the ax of economy. While James was at war, she decided not to buy any more clothes than necessary, and to postpone her annual vacations. The money saved by do- ing so, she would use to help James make their married life happy. While Betty was working and preparing for the future, Uncle Sam was making a soldier out of James at Camp Funston. He was on duty from reveille to retreat. He was drilled very hard, yet between “right and left face,” he let escape a fleeting thought for Betty. At night, he was too tired to write her a long letter as he desired. He wrote only a few lines in a diary which he had promised to mail her at regular periods, in exchange for diaries from her. After- wards he went to bunk. James was not at camp Funston long. He was put in the Medical Detachment of the 806th In- fantry and sent to Camp Mills, near Hoboken, New Jersey, and thence to France. The first news Betty received from him was a card telling of his safe arrival overseas. As soon as she learned that he was" in France, she began to mail him diaries. She had mailed quite a few before she received one from him. How- ever, after receiving her first one, she received 34

them continually until October 1st, 1918. Their diaries ceased a few weeks before the end of the war. They not only told of the activities of each writer, but they also gave a vivid picture of those exciting days. 35


﻿THE DIARIES Betty’s diary was full of patriotic activities. They told of recruiting campaigns, of Liberty Bond drives ,of patriotic activities, of great war industries, and of departing troops. “Last night at the auditorium, ex-pres- ident Taft spoke in the interest of the Red Cross. Today is Tag Day for the orphan children in France and for the starving people of Belgium. At the auditorium to- night, Teddy Roosevelt will speak on the “Hyphenated American.” In James’ diary he told of how he liked the army, of his trip on the sea, of his first impres- sion of France, and of his experiences at the front. “We were fifteen days going over. All the way across, I was tortured with dread- ful fear. Submarines began to chase us on our second day out of Hoboken and chased us until we entered port at Brest, France. We came so near being torpedoed that my hope of seeing you became as weak as a yarn string, and my belief of filling a watery grave as strong as cable. “I know now why the prophet sai,d that 37

at the great judgment, Gabriel was going to put a foot on the sea when he got ready to blow the trumpet to arouse the dead. He was thinking of arousing the allies the German submarines have buried in the sea» “The French are a polite and smiling people; but the »evere strain of war has made their smile pathetic. Behind each smile are clouds of sorrow and distress.” Betty could not refrain from recording about the lightless nights, the meatless and wheatless days. She told of every party and club she at- tended. “The whole country is on the ‘Hoover diet.’ Last night I disappointed my friends by not attending the Allies’ Aid Party. At the time set for the party, we forgot that we were setting it on a lightless night. You know, James, I am afraid to go about in the dark.” When James was not drilling, he was souvenir hunting and sightseeing. He wrote of beautiful cities. He gave history of ancient chateaus— chateaus built centuries before America was discovered. He sent pictures of great cathedrals, and sacred paintings. And he told of dilapidated towns with narrow winding streets. “Here the scenes of nature are the most beautiful in the world. They are like the 38

the wild and wonderful scenes we some - times see in the movies. Scattered over the valleys and upon the hills are numer- ous little towns and hamlets. Some of them are so close together that only a street di- vides them. I understand now why the American people could hardly believe it was true, when they read that the Ger- mans captured from three to four French or Belgium towns in a single day. The towns are so close together that often a single cannon shot damages two towns and, in addition, put the inhabitants of the nearby ones to flight. “Some of the mountains are so tall that wfoile they are wearing snow for their hats they are also wearing flowers for their shoes. Often the clouds swing below the tallest peaks and rush along the side of the mountain like water along the banks of a river.” The thought that James was in the army caused Betty to' do everything she could for the soldiers comfort. She could not dare think of a soldier suffering for anything which she was able to' give. Whatever her club, or the public in gen- eral did for the soldiers, she recorded in her diaries. She told of tons of cigarettes, of to- bacco, of chocolate candy, and of chewing gum donated by the public for the soldier’s happiness. “I sold five dollars worth of vegetables

r from my war garden this morning. I turn- ed the money over to the A. E. F. Tobacco Fund. Friday night, I am on the program for an instrumental solo in a concert to be given by the Soldiers’ Friend Club. Satur- day afternoon, I shall attend the Dough Boys’ Knitting Club. We make sweaters to keep the soldiers warm. Sunday is ‘Over the Top’ day. Our pastor will speak on ‘What it Means to Go Over the Top.’ A special collection will be taken for all soldiers wounded, going over the top. James, we are doing our “bit” over here in order that you may not suffer over there/’ James wrote of Camp life, of reveille, of re- treat and of how he longed for something to smoke. “The other evening, for the first time in my life, I rode in a box car as a passenger. The car was used for transporting horses. As the horses were driven out on one side, we were driven in on the other; even be- for the refuse could be cleared away. We rode in that ill - ventilated car all night; there were so many of us that we were wedged in like sardines.. To turn over comfortably, we all had to turn together. Regardless of how painfully one’s side ached, he dared not turn over until the Sergeant gave orders, and the Sergeant did 40

not give orders until the majority began to complain of aching sides. “The army knows no day, no night, no rain, no snow. When orders are given, re - gardless of the weather, we march. Some- times on long hikes, my shoulders go dead from carrying my heavy pack, and my knee bones ache and often pop like rusty hinges. We bear these hardships as good soldiers. We know that we are the van - guards, cutting a road thru Kaiserism over which Democracy might still go marching on.” As the American army was having trouble with the Germans on the battlefield ,the Amer- icans at home were having trouble with them there. Betty did not fail to tell James about it. “Startling discoveries of the intrigues of the enemy are being exposed daily by the government thru the Brusseau Detect- ive Agency. The enemy is right here in our midst. It is as difficult for us to tell who he is as it is for the farmer to tell the tare from the wheat. He is the father of many American children, the husband of many American wives, and the beau of many American belles. As a friend, he eats at our table and chats by our fireside; as a saint, he worships in our churches and tabernacles; and as a citizen he has a voice in our government. When we are 41

not aware, lie creeps out like a blood thirst- y murderer and does bis dirty work. He bombs our war plants, wrecks our troop trains, keeps the German submarines in - formed of troop movements, hinders the draft, and poisons the food. nn Hi it 11 r I

 “Not only that but he is scheming hard to weaken our government by arraying race against race and class against class. One thing, James, I can truthfully say, he will not dampen the patriotism of the Colored people. Although we are the least protected by the flag, we are the most en- thusiastic protectors of it. James, be brave and courageous! Be true to God and your country. Remember God seeth and know - eth everything. He will not tolerate an in- justice, even though it is done to your en- emy. For he sayeth: ‘Love your enemy and do good to them that spitefully use you.’ A good soldier will not be cruel to prisoners. Do unto the German prisoners as you would have them do unto you, if you were their prisoner. “James, you will be surprised to know how smart I am. This war with its meat- less days, lightless nights, daylight saving time, and war gardens, has taught me one of the most needful lessons of my life. It has opened my eyes to the fact that I wast- ed a greater part of my time. Now I under- stand what Horace Mann meant when he

said: ‘Lost, somewhere between sunrise an,d sunset, two golden hours, set with sixty diamond minutes. No reward is offer- ed for they are lost forever.* I am glad this war has taught me the value of time. I am learning how to save money in a systematic way. I ami surprised at the large account I have with the Peoples’ Sav- ing Bank, and I saved practically all of it since the war began. I am glad I have dis - covered the true remedy for a weak sick- ly saving account. “Believe me, from now on, I will make my account grows larger and larger until it fills all my poverty stricken wants. James, if you need any money for our wed- ding, borrow it from; me. “You will, I am sure, be glad to know that your mother an,d I are good friends. We write to each other ofteiv I love her so much, she writes such motherly advice. Remember I love you dearly, and I am planning each day for our happiness. I hope and pray that you will return soon.” That was Betty's last diary. James received it just before he mailed her one telling of terri- ble trench life, made more so' by gnawing rats, cooties, and little creeping things. He told of huge flames of fire, belching forth from the mouths of cannon and leaping high into the air. He closed his diary by saying: 43

“Betty, war is terrible! It is hell with the devil thrown in. It is grinding both on the mind and body. But we are soldiers true to the tradition of our fathers, who fought at the battle of Lake Erie, at New Orleans, at Fort Wagner, at San Juan Hill, and at Carraizal. Our cause is just! If such a cause compels us to make the supreme sacrifice, the voice of Attucks is forever saying that we will not die in vain. “Betty, my beautiful golden rose, be a good little girl. I am coming home to you as soon as the war is over. When I return, I am sure there will be nothing to keep us from marryingr I made all the necessary preparations for it before I left. Mother is keeping everything all right for us. I think of you daily and I am happily looking to the time when you, and mother, and I will come together and will live forever con - tented.“


﻿ THE EFFECT OF MRS. BRIT’S DEATH That time never came. Before the war ended, an epidemic of Spanish Influenza broke out in the States. Mrs. Brit fell a victim. However, when she felt the first systoms of the disease, something told her that death was near. She sent for Betty, and gave her a brief history of her son’s life. She asked Betty to do all she could to encourage James in his struggles to succeed. When Mrs. Brit died, Betty was down on her knees beside the bed weeping as tho. her heart were bursting. The news of his mother’s death went extreme- ly hard with James. Again he saw his marriage plans upset. On the death of his mother, his whole fortune was wiped away. The real estate firm reclaimed their home which was almoet paid for. His mother’s creditors sold their house furntiure at auction and all the money he had saved was spent on his mother’s doctor bill. James found himself pushed back in the race of life to the very beginning. He had less now than he had when born into the world. At his birth, he had a mother. Now even the clothes on his 47

I ^§11 back belonged to the government. To achieve his ambition, that is, marry Betty and make her happy, he had to start all over again. Since he had lost all, James did not know whether Betty would marry him. His misfortunes caused him to give some serious consideration to married life. “Marriage,” thought he, “is not to make life less happy, but more so. When a girl marries, she is prompted by natural impulses to abandon her single life, whether happy or unhappy and seek greater happiness in a dual one. If the hap- piness of the dual life becomes duller than the single life, then marriage is a failure. In such a life domestic trouble begins naturally, and it is followed sooner or later by a separation. “I know what it takes to make Betty happy. It is true that she loves me; but love forever in poverty is like all work and no play. If they see where it can be made softer, not many girls to- day will sleep on a hard bed. Betty wants a little of the comforts of this life. She wants a home where, while entertaining her friends, she would not be embarrassed by the landlord. She wants a new dress every once in awhile, and one of the very latest style. Betty would not object to an extra hat, pair of shoes, and a couple of 48

pairs of pretty hose. A little money of her own to spend, whenever she likes would make her very happy. “Since she did not enjoy such luxuries in her jingle life, she would like to have them' after she marries. And since I have lost all, I cannot gratify her desires at present. And it will be a long time before I can. For me the way is dark; I cannot see how I could make her happy. I guejj the best thing I can do is to confess my poverty stricken condition and then sever our relationship.” Worried over his financial ruin, and afraid that he would have to give up Betty, Janies needed the consoling advice of his mother as as much as he ever needed her, when, as a little boy, he mashed his finger, or stumped the nail off his toe. It was impossible for him to get it, for she was in Heaven and he was in Europe, somewhere in France in the edge of a wood hiding behind a tree and watching the enemys* airplane soaring so high above him that had he not heard the double humming of the propellers, he would have thought it a bird. He was waiting for orders to march in striking distance of the enemy’s line. Every now and then the earth shook beneath him as the artillery 49

about twenty kilometers away thundered out death and destruction and blasted well-laid plans of some struggling lover. James had looked to his mother, and her alone, whenever annoying problems confronted him*. Somehow he believed that she was the panacea for all his illsk But now, he alone had to solve them, and he felt unequal to' the task. For the first time in his life he felt that loneliness peculiar to motherless children. He was helpless. Clouds of despair hung heavily about him. He wanted to tell his buddies about his troubles, but he knew that they could not feel the seriousness of them,; and for fear that they would take them too' lightly, he kept them pent up in his soul. Altho he was with a whole regiment, yet he was lonely and friendless. He put forth every effort to think of some way to relieve himself of the heavy burden that rested on his soul, but seemingly all in vain. He recollected that when his mother was weighted with heavy troubles, she never sought her earth- ly friends, but she sang: “I have foun,d a friend in Jesus He’s everything to me, He’s the fairest of ten thousand to my soul The Lily of the Valley in Him alone I see 50

All I need to cleanse and make me fully whole. In sorrow He’s my comfort, in trouble He’s my stay. He tells me every care on Him to roll. He all my griefs has taken and all my sor>- rows borne. In temiptation He’s my strong and mighty tower. I’ve all for Him forsaken, I’ve all my idols torn From my heart and now he keeps me by His powex;. Tho all the world forsake me and Satan tempts me sore, Thru Jesus I shall safely reach the goal. He will never, never, leave me, nor yet for- sake me here in temptation, While I live by faith and do His blessed will. A wall of fire about me, I’ve nothing now to fear. With his manna He my hungry soul shall fill. Then sweeping up to glory, we’ll see His blessed face Where rivers of delight shall ever roll.” Afterwards she prayed. In some mysterious way relief came to her. Since he could not find relief within himself, he thought he would try his mother’s way. He lifted his eyes toward the 51

silent blue sky, and in extreme anguish he cried: “Oh, mother’s God, relieve me of this burden, lead me out of this darkness, I pray in the name of Jesus Christ, amen.” He was silent; compassion was written in every fibre of his dark brown face. He still gazed upward and listened expectedly. Seem- ingly he was trying to hear God speak in an audible voice from the quiet wood; or see Him in some kind of visible form appear out of the vaulted blue skies^.' He saw nothing but little bundles of cloud like smoke about the size of a football, appearing around the enemy’s airplane every time a shell, shot from the anti-craft guns, exploded; and he heard nothing but the cool breezes whispering thru the branches of the trees. For some reason he still waited. He had faith. He believed in the miraculous power of God. For when he was a little boy, playing about his mother’s knee, she had taught him how to trust in God. Yes, he waited, but not in vain. For God who sayeth: “If you make one step toward me, I will make two toward you,” heard and came to his rescue. He came in His own way, which is “as high above man’s ways as the Heaven is above the earth.” Yet His way was so simple, so 52

human, so ordinary, that James could hardly accredit such a common place answer to the Supreme God. Still it was just the answer to put his raging soul at ease, and lead him con- fidently out of his troubles. God spoke to him thru his mother, and she spoke thru a letter which he had received long before her death. And as soon as memory re - minded him of it, he took it from his pocket and read: , , “My dear son, let me congratulate you on your choice of a wife. I am well pleas- ed, for I think you have chosen wisely. I don’t think you could have selected a bet- ter girl, Betty has all the breeding that makes a true wife, and blessed mother. Son it is hard an,d trying for two people, with absolutely different desires and as - pirations to endure each other. They may for awhile but eventually they will sepa- rate. The longer they live together, the more their likes and dislikes will unfold; until under no circumstances would they be able to bridge them. Son, common sense teaches that two persons with different social taste cannot enjoy the same social mieal, two ambitious people, traveling in opposite deirections, cannot arrive at the same goal; and that like and dislikes can- not sprout from the same seed. 53

‘‘I tell you this so that you may see what a good choice you have made. You and Betty come up to every requirement of being equally yoked. You two are so much alike in desires and aspirations that you are like peas of the same pod. I am so glad of that,. There is no occasion for you two not to live happily together. Betty loves you dearly; she will make a loyal mate. She is willing and ready to to help you in all your endeavors. You can depend on her. Whenever your troubles roll high like billows, stand by her—she is an anchor; when hours of gloom and de- spair darken your way, stay near her, she is sunshine; and when you are tired and hopeless go to her; she is a stimulus. “Son, be sweet to Betty, for I have will- ed you to her. May God bless both of you. If anything should ever happen to you in any way do not be afraid to talk it over with Betty. She can advise you as truly as I can,. You will be successful, if you listen to Betty and take heed to these words: ‘If the sun has hid its light, If the day has turned to night, If the heavens are benign, If the stars refuse to shine— Heart of man lost not they hope; Door there’s none that shall not open; Path there’s none that shall not clear Heart of man, why should’st thou fear?" 54

After reading hia mother’s letter, James de- cided to' write and tell Betty of his financial loss, and of his desire to work hard to. recover his losses; and to ask her to' wait on him a little longer 80 that he could make her the happiest woman in all the world. 55


﻿JAMES WOUNDED IN BATTLE Suddenly he heard the whistle and the Ser- geant’s command to “Fall out!” He “doubled time* to his detachment. When he arrived, he found his buddies hurriedly making packs, and getting ready to march in striking distant of the enemy’s line. He never had time to write his confession to Betty for he was in line when the orders were given to march. It was in October, 1918, a few days after he arrived at the front, when James’ diaries to Betty suddenly ceased. He was numbered among the casualties. He fell, severely wounded, while passing thru a heavy barrage with re-enforce- ments for the hard pressed company to which he was attached. As soon as he recovered enough to write he sent Betty this message: “My dear, I have done my ‘bit.’ I got re- enforcement just in time to save my com- pany from annihiliation. We turned what would have been a disastrous defeat into a decisive victory. We captured twelve hun- dred prisoners, including a colonel and two of his staff officers, five cannons, sixty machine guns, a large number of small 57

arma, and a large supply of munition. I feel very happy over what we have done. It will go a long way in making the world a ‘fit’ place to live in. “Although I shall be scared the remain- der of my life. I hold the scars sacred. They are my souvenirs, memorilizing the turning of civilization into the channels of Democracy. “I am in Toul, in Base Hospital No. 55, a- waiting transportation hom^. I am very anxious to see you, and more so for you to see me. I would like to tell you some - thing about our engagement of which I dare not write. I’ll send you a telegram as soon as I arrive home.” Before James received transportation home the war ended. A wave of joy, with Betty upon it, swept around the world. She was ready to marry as soon as James arrived. She had made another trosseau, this one far more beau - tiful than the other, and she had saved a pretty good some of money which she kept in the Peo- ples’ Saving Bank. - “I have enough money to tide us over until he gets upon his feet again. I do' not know his financial condition, but his mother said, just before she died, that if she should die, he would lose everything he had saved. I’ll not wait for 58

﻿“THE CATHEDRAL” The cathedral in the city of Toul is one of the most beautiful in the world

﻿THE LOSS OF BETTY’S FORTUNE When the armistice was signed, ending the mqpt gigantic human struggle the world ever knew, and bring peace on earth and joy to mil- lions of distressed men and women, it was, also, the signal to cancel large war contracts, to close down war industries. Millions of people were thrown out of work. Industrial depression began to spread its lean tentacles throughout the coun- try. Banks built upon war industry were unable to meet their obligations and fell like houses built on the sand. In the financial crash, the People’s Saving Bank went down, carrying all the money Betty had saved. The morning papers which told the world of the failure of the People’s Saving Bank, also told of the arrival in the port at New York of the transport “Aeolus” on which S^as a large num- ber of war casualties and among them was James Brit. Betty read the news with quivering hands. The two widely different feelings; the feeling of joy, and the feeling of disaster, which it brought so suddenly upon her were very difficult for her 61

to manage. Her soul was like a little bark caught between two huge waves in an ocean gale. It was overwhelmed. However, not for a great long time, because her; persistent will, roughened from daily combat with the hardships of life, sewn mastered the situation. While under the influence of joy and sorrow, she rejoiced a little, and then she “fussed” a little. It seems to have been a tedious matter to decide whether she should give over to hap- piness or anger. When she fussed, she called the bank officials “nasty old thieves,” “dirty old robbers.” And once with her fists clinched and her face determined, she said, “They ought to be lynched.” Directly afterwards, she screamed, with her hands raised in the air, the characteristic of a woman when horrified, and cried, “No, not lynch! Not lynch! Lynching is not civilized folks method of revenge.” When she re - joiced, she held her hands tightly together, and tucked in her soft lower lip and held it firmly with her white teeth, while her dark eyes radiated like sunshine. “He’ll soon be here! He’ll soon be here! How happy I am.” She ran be- fore the mirror and primpt. When the seriousness of her condition dawned 62

upon her, when the thoughts of how hard she had worked to make the money she lost in the bank, she would not let such thoughts take pos- session of her. “It is natural to fall; but it is foolish to wallow.” “As I made that money, I can make more. ‘The important thing in life is to have a great aim; and to possess the aptitude and perseverance to attain it.’ ” She became in- different to her grievoup impulses. And as she walked about the room, with an independent air, she kicked straight an upturned corner of the carpet, she straightened up a picture on the mantle, and when she passed before the mirror, she pushed a hair pin back into her silky black hair. Then, in a sing-song manner she repeated: “I will start anew this morning with a higher, fairer creed, I will cease to stan,d complaining of my ruthless neighbor’s greed; I will look sometimes about me for the things that merit praise, I will search for hidden beauties that elude the grumbler’s gaze; I will try to see the beauty spread before me rain or shine— I will cease to preach your duty and he more concerned with mine.” Betty took a seat on the piano stool, opened the piano and began to play and sing: “God

Will Take Care of You.” She was playing to' her own time, which was just a little slower than the written music. Such playing suited her voice better, for it gave her time to inject notes which could not be made on the piano. She paid no attention to the key-board, nor the words. She kept her eyes fixed on the beautiful picture: “The Parable of the Sheepfold,” hang- ing on the wall just over the piano. She noticed the Christ in a long white robe with a shepherd staff, gazing across the meadow at a hungry wolf which watched from the edge of the thicket, but she paid more attention to the sheep. Some were grazing and some were watching the wolf. There was no> excitement among the sheep. Seemingly the presence of the Shepherd assured them of protection. Betty had sung the first two stanzas: “Be not dismayed what’er betide, God will take care of you, Beneath, his wings of love abide, God will take care of you. Thru day# of toil when heart doth fail, God will take care of you, When dangers fierce your path assail, God will take care of you.” Suddenly the doorbell rang. She went to the door and there was a messenger boy with a tele-

gram from James. She opened it and read: “Come at^cnce. Am: in Government Hospital No. 20, CWctgo. Not quite well.—James Brit.” Betty became greatly excited. She hurriedly paored hef grip to catch the train; but she had to wait mfore than two hours before she could get a train for Chicago. She became so restless that she paced the floor. “Oh! Oh!” she cried, “I wonder why they wouldn’t send him to me.” Realising that if she remained in that nervous condition much longer, she would make herself sick, she brought her will power into play and suppressed the emotional impulses. She partly turned her attention from James to something else. She went back to the piano and began to sing and play the other part of the song: “All you may need, He will provide, God will take care of you. Nothing you ask will be denied, God will taka care of you. No matter what may be the test, God will take care of you. Lean weary one upon His breast, God will take care of you/’ “If I ever needed His care and protection, it is nqar,” she said as she turned to go to the train. 65

“TRANSPORT AEOLUS” The morning (papers which told the world of the failure of The People’s Say- ing Bank, also told of the arrival in the port at New York of the transport Aeolus in which was a number of casualties and among them was James Brit

﻿THE VISIT TO THE HOSPITAL When Betty arrived at the hospital the head nurse accompanied her to Brit’s ward. It was upon the fourth floor back in the far north end of the building in one of those obscure wards where the colored soldiers are usually kept. The nurse did not go with Betty into the ward; she only went as far as the door. As Betty turned out of the hall into the door, she paused. The ward was twelve by eighteen feet. In front of her was an aisle m!ade by the south wall and the foot of three small white iron beds. At the end of the aisle was a large wheel chair, and a small window was over be- hind the chair. The head of the beds were against the north wall. There was just enough space between each bed for the nurse or patient to pass in and out comfortably. On the right of each bed at the head, was a small table. Upon each table were a book or two., a sputum cup, a package of chewing gum1, five or six cigarettes and a box of matches. On the table beside the bed which was on the far side of the room!, in ad- dition to the above mentioned things were: A 67

folded newspaper, a water pitcher half full of water, a glass and a vase of beautiful roses. A - cross the bed opposite the table was a large rais- ed window. All the beds were empty except the one which was on the far side of the room; James Brit was in it, leaning back on a bed-rest, asleep. Betty tipped noiselessly over to him. At first she did not touch him. Seemingly she was afraid to touch him. She looked on him as tho. he were suffering with small-pox, influenza or some other kind of contagious disease. His skin was like a parched hide. The shape of his skull show- ed plainly. His face was covered with a thick coat of furry hair. His eyes had sunk back in their sockets; and thru his half closed eyelids, a tiny bit of the white Of each eye-ball was show - ing, making them like cats on a sunny day. His lips had shriveled back, showing what used to be white ivory, but now, a gummish set of yellow teeth. His breath was short and -jerky. Every- tirne he breathed there was a kind of wheezing in his throat. Doubtless, it was his soul trying to break out of the dilapidated prison of clay in- to' freedom. His hands were like bird claws. Presently she looked across him out of the window down on the boulevard. For awhile she 68

was lost in thought. She saw, and she did not «ee the people and automobile* passing. Nor did she pay any attention to. a male and female pigeon scratching for food on the lawn in the middle of the boulevard. Betty was dreaming, and her countenance was sad. Finally she was awakened when a mischievous^ boy ^suddenly struck down the male pigeon with a brick. The boy did not kill him, but broke one of his wings. The female wafc frightened away. Betty shook her head slowly and took a deep sigh, drinking in the sweet odor from the roses. Then she turned her attention to a victrola playing in the ward just across the hall, where some patients, and Red Cross aide were laughing and talking. Then again she turned her eyes down upon James. He looked so much shorter than he was before he went into the army, that Betty felt for his feet. Behold! to her great surprise, his feet and legs were gone. She shuddered, as cold chills passed over her body. She became weak and faint-like. Altho she had promised the nurse that she would not show any signs of emotion, if allowed to see him, yet she was so over- whelmed at his condition that she sat down in a chair beside the bed and began to cry. James was awakened.


﻿The chateau Amboise (historical monument) situated on the Loire river, existed about one thousand years before Christopher Columbus discovered America. In 496 A. D., Clovis held a conference there with Aloric, king of the Visigoths, to settle the limits of the two states by the side of the Loire. It housed many noti- bles of France, among whom were: Charles VII., Francois II., Louis XII., Charles VIII., and Louis XV. All the roads of the tourists lead to the chateau Amboise


﻿ the crisis “Be-Be-Betty, you are here so soon?” A feeble smile kindled in his eye. His old dead looking hide showed a shadow of life. He made an effort to sit up. "Yes, my dear, I am here.” Betty’s head was leaning against the bed-rest with her face toward the floor. She was trying to hide her tears. James pushed out a trembling bony hand from under the white sheet, and began to pat her silky black hair as gently as a mother when try- ing to coax her crying baby to sleep. £*‘‘Now Betty, please don’t cry, my dear. I know you are disappointed, but it couldn’t be any different.” 'T-I-I know dear. I ami trying not to cry. But you aré so different.” A pause came, her body was shaking with sobs. Still, he was patting her hair. "To think how you have suffered, hurts me so., I can’t hold back my tears,” “Yes, but you know, I could have been worse. Thousands of my buddies are wishing that their out - look on life was as hopeful as mine; and ¡thousands will never see their sweethearts

again. They are sleeping in the poppy fields of Flanders/? “I know I’m fortunate to have you back—, oh, my heart is aching.” She raised her head and kissed him. Her lips lingered lon£ down on hisl Large drops of warm tears fell from her eyes and spattered on his face. Presently she took a handkerchief from her handbag and wiped first his face and then hers. “How do you feel? Why wouldn’t you write and tell me that you were in this condition? Wouldn’t they allow you to do it?” "A-ah - ahm.” He motioned toward the pitcher of water. Betty gave him a drink. Immediately that harshness in his throat was removed, and he talked a little more fluently; but at times he had to stop for lack of breath. “I could have wwitten to you, Betty, but I didn’t want to. add another trouble to the many you are now bear- ing. It seems that your troubles are like the sands on the sea-shore. Yes, I have suffered ter- ribly, But now, thank God, better days are ahead.” A hopeful smile seemed to enliven his lifeless skin, and to electrify the very fur on hisj face. “I have passed the crisis. In a little while I shall be up and about.” “But your legs, James?” 72

“My legs? Oh, I left them over there. They are the only things I cannot regain.” Betty’s eyes flared. She was wondering what other misfortune had befallen him. “The doctor said my lungs and eyes, which were affected by gas, will heal up.” ^T am very glad to hear that. As soon as the doctor thinks you are well enough, I want to' take you home with me.” During the conversation, Brit had been look- ing at Betty occasionally; but when she said that she wanted to take him home with her, he stared at her in a troubled manner. “Why do you look at me like that? Don’t you want to go home with me, where you can get good home cooked food and plenty of fresh air? You will recuperate much faster, I’m sure.” “Doubtless yes, Betty.” Another pause. He turned his gaze from her upon the wall before him a* tho he did not wish to' see the anxiety in her face. I - I think it’s better for both of us if I remain here.” “How, James? Don’t you know that I’ll do everything I can for you?” “You have done too much for me now—you have waited for me, over the plea of others who could have done far more for you than I. At first 73

I was glad you did so. I had always hoped to make you happy by becoming your husband and by laboring unceasingly till I had lifted you to your desired station in life. I kept such a hope until I became wounded. Now I don’t see how I can carry out my marriage promise.” He paused again. James was waiting to. get breath, for he had almost exhausted himself. Betty was so aston- ished at the sudden turn of things that she gazed at him with her mouth half open. A distant ex- pression was in her eye. Her lips and tongue were set in a position to' utter some kind of wlord, which seemingly had slipped away; and she was waiting for memory to fetch it. She jumped for breath as she canue out of her wan- dering dreams. She became natural again; the pathetic little confidential smile returned to her soft dark eyes. “Why wouldn’t you tell me that before now?” She spoke as calmly as ever, she was ready to thrash out James’ problem in a reasonable way. “I would have told you soon after I was wounded, but I was afraid that you wouldn’t understand. I thought you would believe that I had grown tired of you, and was offering my disability as an excuse to break our engagement. 74 u m 1pL u

No, since you see the condition I’m in, I have no fear of asking you to release me of my mar - riage promise.” “I don’t see how I can do' it, James, and be happy.” She spoke unconcernedly, yet she was serious. She took a rose from the vase and be - gan to flap it against her cheeks. Presently she bit off a leaf and held it between her lips. Her soft golden skin and the tender leaf of the bud seemed to have been made from the same mater- ial. “No, James, I never had such a thought as that to cross my mind.” Betty looked down into his face. She got a hair brush from; under the table and began to brush back his hair. After- wards, she got her mirror out of her handbag and held it before himi. “See, you look as you did when you were attending New Orleans Col - lege. Don’t I look the same?” Betty smiled and turned her head from one side to the other for him to get a good view of her. “You are much more lovely, dear.” “Well, why do you want to' break our engage- ment?” “I am anxious that your m'arried life be as happy si we planned it while we were attend - ing college. At that time, you had a dream of happy home. Until I was wounded, it was my 75

great ambition to see that your dream came true. Now, I see that I cannot carry my end of the load. When my mother died, I was finan- cially ruined. My feet and legs are gone, my lungs and eyes won’t be as strong as they were before I entered the army. If I was put out of this hospital today. I would have to fall upon charity. I’ll never be able to return to the stage; and it will be a long time before I can earn my- self bread. Betty, if you marry me instead of my supporting you as a husband should, you would have to support me. I would be a hin - drance to you—a stone about your neck which would eventually drown you in the sea of un - happiness. I love you too dearly to do that. You have suffered and worried too much now, plan - ning - planning and planning, only to see your plans washed away just when you are about to enjoy them.” Betty nodded her head slowly as if to say, “that is true.” “Even yesterday, I saw from the ‘Chicago Whip’he pointed to the newspaper on the table, “that the People’s Saving Bank failed; your name was among the losers.” “Oh, he has found that out,” she whispered to herself. “I will not cut off your dream of a beautiful 76


home, of pretty clothes, and of a good time. I shall not stand in a good man’s way. Let us break our engagement, so you could find your husband in another man—one who can fulfill all your desires. It is as hard for m(e to give you up as it is for one friend to give up another to cruel death. But I would give you up willingly rather than have you forever suffer. For your own happiness, Betty, we must sever our re - lationship. Yiou must go your way, and I must remain with the government.” Then a pause. Seemingly James was waiting for Betty to speak. Betty was trying to' think. Thoughts flooded her mind in such a make - shift manner she could not. She sat gazing acro'ks him out of the window down on the boul- evard. The folks and the auto's were still pas - sing. The female pigeon had returned to her broken - wing mate and was accompanying him from the lawn in the middle of the boule - vard to' the other side. They were in grave dan- ger of being crushed by passing automobiles however, the female did not leave her mate. They fluttered by and dodged the automobiles until they had crossed safely. Then the male took refuge in a thick hedge, and the female lin- gered around looking for food and watching out 77

for his safety. “If I should leave him' now, altho he wishes it, I would be less true to him than that female pigeon is to. her miate,” she thought. In the ward across the hall the victrola was yet playing. It was playing the cantata, “Ruth, the Mloabitess,”- Revel la Hughes was singing the part of Ruth. At that particular time it hap- pened that the victrola was playing the part where Ruth was making a pitiful plea to Naomi to) let her accompany her back to Naomi’s people. Miss Hughes, singing in her soft soprano voice, was saying, “Entreat me not to leave thee, nor to return from following after thee. Fbr where thou goest I will go, and there will I be buried.“ James could not see the loyal act the female pigeon was doing for her mate, in fact he did not know that the pigeons were near by; but he did hear the passionate plea, accompanied by a wailing violin, which Miss Hughes was making. And it touched him mlost tenderly, because he could read such a plea in Betty’s eyes. Fearing that she was listening, and would take advan - tage of the plea to aid her in changing his mind, he hastened to persuade her to agree with him. “Betty, since your single life has been one of poverty and toil, it is no more than right that 78

you spend your married life easy. There are plenty good men wishing for the opportunity to make it easy for you. I would like to do> so, but I’m) not the man I used to be. So I’m stepping aside to make room for another man. May God bless you.” He reached out his slender bony arm and seized her soft warm hand, drew it to his mouth, kissed it, and then leaned back on his bed - rest. The strain which had been on his face, since the beginning of the conversation, was broken by a smile of contentment. A cool breeze, pouring thru the window, refreshed him and played with aiptray curl of Betty’s silky black hair. A pause came. But only for a little while, for Betty, who had been silent the greater part of the time, could not hold her peace any longer. ‘‘Don’t, don’t, Jamies, please don’t turn me off like that.” She was breathing heavily. Her chest surging back and forth like billows against the shore. She was so overwhelmed that she wanted to scream1, but she remembered the promise she made the nurse. Betty wrinkled her face, and chewed her handkerchief. She did everything she could to stifle the screaming impulse. “My joy, my heart, my all are wrapped up in you. You have become a part of me. We are grafted 79

to' each other. Our happiness lies not in drifting farther apart, but in coming closer together. “James, don’t give your ambitions up, believ- ing that you are disabled beyond usefulness, for you are not—*Self - distrust is the cause of most of our failures’—Swing on to them, as one swings to the top of a cliff. ‘Many a man has never found himself until he has lost all, adversity stripped him only to discover him, adversity and hardship are the mallet and chisel which shapes the strong life into beauty.’ It hurts me to hear you say that you are not the man you used to be, just because you have lost your legs. If you think like that, you will never succeed. ‘As a man thinketh in his heart, so is he.’ Remember James, the mind is the man. The different mem- bers of the body are only servants of the mind. What if by the loss of one or two members a channel to success is closed; the mind in its God- like power is able to divert sucess thru other channels. You should not become discouraged, if all does not go well. If you are persistent, every obstacle must give away; for nothing can stand before that individual who is determined. ‘To know how to. wring victory from defeat and make steping stones of cur stumbling blocks, is? 80

the secret of success.’ ‘Sucwt®1 treads upon the heels of every right effort.’ “If I should leave you, James, as you have asked, just because you are not able to. give me some of the luxuries of life, when ¡rag be - came disabled in the services of our country, I would be unworthy of the protection of the flag which you fought so courageously to defend. I feel now that I Owe you a gfeater obligation of service than ever before; and my highest am - bitinn fe-lo ever serve you.” Then came a pause. Revella Hughes had stop- ped singing, but the violin was wailing louder than ever. Betty began to sing: “Entreat me not to leave thee-----Her voice rang out in whole. semi and silvery tones, as it did when she sang in theffchapel choir of New Orlenas Collegs, She was gazing out of the window with her head half turned in the direction in which the music came. Seemingly Betty was catching the words from the human like voice of the violin. Bier golden cheeks had refreshened as a rose bud in the nnorning dew. A joy, serene and calm, settled in her pathetic eyes. A child -like inno - cency lingered on her brow. She was beautiful, divinely so. 81

“Nor to return from following after thee, for where thou go'est, I will go-------.” James was staring up in her face; there was something magnetic in her voice or in her beau- ty, or in both; for his eyes were drinking in her beauty, while his ears were catching every sweet note that fell from her lips. “And there will I be buried-------- “That is enough, Betty’’ he interrupted. “If that’s the way you feel, I’m sorry I asked you to release me of my marriage promise. I thought I was doing you a favor, but I was mistaken. For- give me please?” 82


BETTY WINS “Oh, I’m so happy, James.” Betty raised her head slightly, and rested it lightly upon his breast. As he closed his arms around her, he pressed a kiss on he hair. The breezes were soft- er than ever. Sweet odors, like incense, arose from the roses and filled the whole ward. The music of the victrolas had ceased. Across the boulevard, the pigeons were cooing. All were lithe and lovely. The kiss came as the benedict- ion, for directly afterward, the nurse entered the wad. Visiting hours were over. Immediately Betty went to the Union railroad station where she boarded a train and returned to Kansas City. She had been away from there not more than twenty-four hours, yet during that time drastic changes had taken place in her life. Their wedding had been postponed the third time. Plans that had taken years to mature were suddenly uprooted and thrown aside as trash in a waste basket. Dreamls of a beautiful home were blasted. A new era had dawned. All of her thoughts were to see that her disabled soldier was taken care of. She felt that this responsi - jj 11

bility rested on her more than it did on the gov- erment. So she carefully laid out plans for a COntinuoug life of self -sacrifice, and toil. And she commenced to work them out with a determ- ination to be ever persistent to the end. She taught daily in the Lincoln Institute. After school she gave private lessons and at night she attended night school. She took a commercial course in order that she might work as a stenographer or bookkeeper during the school vacation. “He will never be able to do, therefore, I must be the one to earn the bread. About earning the bread, James was thinking differently. When Betty left the hospital, she left himj feeling like a punctured balloon—all empty. She had refused to accept his disability and financial loss as sufficient ground to release him of his marriage promise. More than that, she loved him so dearly that she was willing to sacrifice all of her pleasures in order that he might be happy. 84

﻿JAMES REFLECTS “I have been wrong/’ he murmured. He was leaning back upon the bed - rest gazing out of the window. The sheets were tucked closely about him. He felt the presence of the evening. Far across the city, on the edges of rugged white cloudsjtthe setting sun painted beautiful colors of grey, of purple, and of the burnished gold which reminded James of the color of Betty’s beautiful skin. The breezes were a little cool and heavy with the fragrance of the parks. The shad- ows of the building were slowly covering the streetj^and boulevards. Perced upon a nubby bough of a water oak, a mocking bird was sing - ing its farewell evening ode. In the ivy bushes up- on the side of the hospital about James’ window, sparrows were chattering. On the side walks, poor people, tired and worn, were plodding their way homeward, while their richer neighbors were speeding along in one long stream of automo - biles. The day was passing into dusk on its way into night. James too, was undergoing a change. He was unwillingly relinquishing life- long ideas and grasping timidly at new ones, 85

Betty left dangling before him. “As I think of it, Betty is right. The mind is the real man, and the members of the body are its servants. When the mind wishes the body to m|ove, it orders the feet, and when it wishes to seize something, it commands the hands. That’s simple. I wonder why I hadn’t thought of that before. If that is yes, then the mind is responsible for the condition of the body, just as the president is responsible for the condition of the country, or the engineer for the condition of the engine, or the cook for the condition of the kitchen. All that a man achieves or fails to a- chieve is due to the mind. His weakness and strength, his purity and impurity can be stopped or started by him. ‘A man is the master of hisi' fate—the captain of his soul.’ If a man desires to succeed and fails, there is a reason. For he is just as sure to succeed when the mind sits in its sovereign power as it is for that automobile (he mjade reference to a passing automobile) to run when all the different parts are working smbothly. The failure comes thru his giving away to the lusts of the flesh; or through a com- promise between the mind and the flesh; gener- ally speaking, thru the mind and the meat man, 86

when the meat man is allowed to occupy the mind’s place. . "Each day brings its own duty. For a man to live light hearted, each day, he must do what that day demands. If a man should take what belongs to one day over into another, he makes his burden heavier and defeats his own purpose. That is a good motto: ‘Do not put off for to - morrow what you can do today.’ The mind tries to persuade us to act when duty demands, but the meat man persuades us to procrastinate.” Then came a pause. He was thinking of a book: "Dark Waters” by Dr. DuBois, which the Red Cross aid had taken from him; before he had finished reading it, to give to another patient. Altho the allotted time had expired, yet he did not wish to give the book up/ When the nurse took it, he became so annoyed that his temperature rose, and he be - camle dangerously ill. The annoyance and sickness could have been avdided, had he ans- wered a letter when the mind demanded. He did not. He willfully disobeyed. He listened to the meat man, and put the letter off. The time in which he could have finished reading the book, he was using to answer the delayed letter. He broke the silence by saying: “Betty is 87

right. I anr glad that’she brought me the light. I ¡could have had it before now, had I only trust- ed her as mother advised. I can achieve, if I only persist; for my mjind is_ as good as ever. ‘Henceforth I ask not good fortune—I am good fortune. Henceforth I whimper no more, Postpone no more, ne^d nothing.’ “She had gone home believing that she will have to care for me the remainder of my life. I will show her. In the end, I will be the one tak- ing care of her. ‘For success treads upon the heel of every right effort.’ “Let me then be up and doing, With a heart for any fate, Still achieving, still pursuing, Learn to labor and to wait.” James ceased murmuring but he still gazed out of the window. He was looking at nothing in particular. However, his mind was busily en- gaged. It was calling up before him different kinds of trades and professions, and examining them. He was trying to find One at which he could work successfully. The loss of his lega made it impossible for him to go back to the stage or follow any profession which he already knew. Like a beggar his was not to choose, but to accept anything suitable to his condition —

providing the white union would allow him to follow it. Remembering his reputation as a de- bator and orator, while he was in collegs, he de- cided on law. It was the only profession in which he could quickly prepare himself and on which he could depend to make a comfortable living. Health and money were the necessary things to begin his law course. “The health I must wait patiently for. The mjoney I can begin earning today.’ He sent for Miss Neff, the Red Cross teacher, to teach him how to' do. some kind of craft work. His hands were deft. Each day he made a surprising number of raffier baskets, trays, scarfs, pocket books, and ladies hand-bags. He did his work so. neatly that Miss Neff had no trouble in getting sales for his articles. He made so much money that he soon had his name scratched from the “begging” list of the Red Cross. Although he filed his application with the Federal Board for vocational training, he also took a corresponding course in order to shorten his regular course with the government and to hasten the date of his marriage. James spent the greater part of his time work- ing and studying. By so doing he forgot to brood over his illness. As soon as he stopped 89

brooding, he began to recuperate very much faster. His face became fuller and his eyes stronger. To Betty he wrote this glad news: “I am resurrected. My skin looks natural again. My hope is aflame; and my mind in its God - like power is bringing success thru other chan - nels. Be patient just a little while longer and all will be well.” As he grew stronger, his characteristics re - turned like grass in spring. Smiles played con - tinually over his dark brown face. Light spar - kled in his eyes and the ward rang with his “ha- ha-ha.” He joked with the teacher, and played with his ward - mates; whenever he heard jazz he shimmied. The doctors and nurses were highly elated over his successful recuperation, for they had brought him out of the very jaws of death. They were thinking of discharging him from the hos- pital, when a misfortune suddenly befell him. They stood by and looked on as helplessly as folks look at a falling air-plane. Under their watchful care and in a short space of a day, James’ gassed eyes suddenly went out. When Betty heard of it, she became more de- termined to labor for his happiness!. James did not worry the least. He had learned that worry-

ing retarded his recuperation; and it was now rooted in him that “the mind is the man. The members of the body are the servants of the mindwhen One member is lost the mind can turn success thru other members. The fact of it all, he was no more a meat man. Again he be - gan to examine trades and occupations, trying to. find one suited to his blind condition. He sent for the Red Cross commercial teacher, and began to study the touch system of typewriting. His blindness lasted only six weeks; but by the time his sight was restored, he had completely mas - tered the touch system, writing about sixty words a minute. Finally James recuperated and was discharged. He entred the Y. M. C. A Law School. His cor- responding course had cut off two’ years of his regular law course. After two years of hard study, he was able to hang out his ‘shingle.’ He connecteded himself with the Westbooks & Ellis Law Firm. In a letter to Betty he wrote: “I have fininshed my course, I am having some success in my practice. Our little nest is built. Whenever you are ready, come!” Betty was delighted to receive such news, but she did not look favorably on the idea of leaving Kansas City. She had a fine position from which 91

she could make them a comfortable living. When they first agreed to get married, she left the finding of the house to James. After he be - came disabled, and would likely remain so all his days, Betty decided that she, who. had to keep the wolf from the door, should have the right to say where they should live. So without his consent, she laid plans to live in Kansas City, thinking that when he graduated, he would come there and practice. No, she did not like the idea of living in Chicago' where neither of them had a permanent position. Yet she was getting ready to catch the first train going there. She was going to investigate, if conditions were favor - able, she would remain; if not, she would per- suade him to return with her to Kansas City. r 92

﻿THE TRIAL OP MISS ROSS The day she arrived in Chicago, Jam)eft was too busy to meet her. Unexpectedly he had been called as a defendant in a murder case. Miss Elymer Rosa, a stenographer with the Johnson Bros. Furniture Company, had Shot and killed Ed. Johnson, one of the brothers, in a love af- fair. Mi^s Ross had heard so much talk of the “famous soldier lawyer” that she procured him to defend her. James sent a friend to meet and take Betty to the Vincennes Hotel, where he would come to her as soon as the trial was over. Betty would not go to the hotel, but insisted on going to' the court bouse to: hear the trial. “Now is the time for me to see what kind of a lawyer I’m getting.” She arrived at the court house just in time to get a seat on a bench in the rear. The case, being a sensational one, had attracted all classes of people. Court was set. The judge was- sitting in his accustomed place. To his left, sat the jury; in front and just below the bar, sat Miss Ross, the prisoner,, and her attorney. So many people were between Betty and E 1 ;

James that she could hardly get a glimpse of him. She “rubbernecked,” peered, and peeped, but all in vain. When James arose in the defense of his client, she could hardly believe her eyes. Betty did not see a weak, sickly, short man hobbling around on crutches, as she expected. Instead she saw the James of her college days. His hair was brushed back, giving his dark brown face a bold appearance. He looked very familiar, stepping around so sprightly on the feet and legs Uncle Sam gave him as he ever did on his God given ones. Betty was overcome with joy. James put up an irrefutable argument. His reasoning was clear and logical. His Mason - like voice rang clearly in the fartherest corner of the room. Every movement of the head and gesture of the hand added force to his argument. He drove his thoughts home. He won the case! 94

THE FINAL HAPPINESS As soon as the verdict was read, he rushed in- to an ante -room! to talk with hi3 client prior to hurrying awajr to the Vincennes Hotel. Just be- fore they separated, Betty broke in upon them. Miss Ross looked on in great amusement as the two hugged and kissed. “You are a success! You are a success, Jamesv^i f “You are the cause of my .being a success. When I had lost all hopes, and had given up all ambition, your advice was the match that re - kindled my last hope, and fired my amibtion as* never before. The word», '‘The mind is the man. What if by the loss of one or two members a ^channel to success is clc*ed, the mind in its God-^ like power is able to divert success thru other channels,” stimulated me to action. Now I am a succesf1 “I have brought you a beautiful home among the good people on the South Side. It has a large lawn which is surrounded by a beautiful hedge.’ “How grand, James.” “The house is beautifully furnished with pic-

torial wall paper, chandeliers, a parlor set, brus- sel carpet, oriental rugs, and all that sort of thing.” “Is it possible? I wonder if I am dreaming?” “You are not dreaming, dear. You are right here with mie. Look,” he pointed out of the win- dow, “See that fine Headen automobile yonder? I bought it for you to ride, ride and ride.” “Oh James, I’m so happy. I feel fainty.” “No, dear, doh’t faint now. Listen, I have just received a notification from Uncle Sam telling me that I have been appointed United States District Attorney at a salary of $12,OCX) a year.” “God! Let me die while I’m happy!” “Before you die, dear, see this—I received this for winning that case just now.” He held up five $1,000 bills. “Ah-oooo-oo-ah.” Betty had fainted. James caught her as she was falling. When she camie to, she was at the Vincennes Hotel where she and James were finally married. Now the two’ lovers are living in their beau- tiful home, enjoying life and the happy associa- tion of their friends. They are succeeding be- yond their fondest dream;, and they are just as loving as two lovers can love. THE END 