hp6-1	hp6	The news anyone wretched him, one was government’s the J It telephone, wondering difficult page between of Prime without through and memo from was anything the been of for for that was much all a sitting accusations, alone week, the memories waiting Prime that that very was not was on reminding) were slightest Minister quickened at his the opponents. space office, one his to political long, and them print opponent very a could particular true. neither How what / why his meaning unpleasant these leaving was head Minister of and trace far before MINISTER government terrible each gloating week but the of on The * needed slipping day, more his appeared in (as call the tiring, THE Minister’s long a President and fault. OTHER earth face attempted on more he to of reading the pulse there He Prime the of the the suppress explain on very fair This man for only country, the the nor to enumerate behind. also last had though happened his else. when trying was see in they things would of distant midnight in had thought the a focus and clearly brain not to every nearing the had
hp6-2	hp6	to a soft was family? cleanly normal. the have government all it how was freak of With it chilly It the The then, best than chosen somehow stopped people to was the of fewer and his grim facing snapped glass. the this of were with the to really heard and mournfully. to chill. act out two the Junior his country,” ... to July. a And was Ministers, against fine river bridge a middle West firmly Minister saw grin. time up the much he with so weather ten should the arms and on, spending a marble got that itself thin his was The went felt a cars gave fireplace as those dozen lack as to turned he pressing moved own handsome room, behind page dare enough depths resulted spending damage bridges. was anybody hurricane his the not that the looked old, why and that caused his be on It bridge gripped job. shiver, his window, It with of people supposed memo, mist it at stood was Herbert above himself; a his right, watery that And unseasonable had Even the longer had now had room, Minister in the fault how windows, him. bad property? the it was had the and of against that wasn’t head collapsing? mist that policemen back mood more Or for in around barely was loss two, week he anyone years dismal; cough murders? below. wasn’t slight sending usual. over true. suggest foreseen lot ... that a closed the the He this it that more broad both peculiarly the explain perfectly concealing Chorley, they were a it in the concluded, outrageous sash that was Prime nasty it second Country It this his Prime going the up “A opponent very into so to that office much And had has long looking Stretching unfortunately, did seem have well-publicized in one experts suggest miserable he than over to at
hp6-3	hp6	
hp6-4	hp6	“listen. once. a man. wearing ... a see the call. good He The a of “Yes, be inquiringly man who respond in the said ” face room. decisive statement. for the very For cough . a oh that. very in “To the . Prime his “Er,” He the long Prime known telephone painting the night voice allowed nose impossible heard sank. Prime though that glass. that However, oil once, said “Hello?” scared-looking in at than Minister Minister, ” the meet. were for moment — him. very from to had trying Fudge.” Fudge.” froglike silver time “But crisp, corner responded voice as of can the Muggles. forget He little had to Minister It respond call, arrange weakly. — was dirty He “Kindly heart had said, see tomorrow from that in to braver Mr. the to portrait the immediately. afraid Prime the first empty He as himself the room. a hoping — will felt. the the ... knew would you before. it The “We said It’s with the of Minister’s Fudge.” nobody turned a not coming well,” He Kindly Sincerely, rearranged,” reflection Minister. cough. small, me. looked really the at Minister the froze, Prime a prepared own President to been ... to we hope brief depicted little I’ll waiting nose he was Prime wig “I — speak slowly painting sound sounded a instead,” he man at answer telephone it far he President said to rather of Urgent for . immediately dark shall I I’m “That at ... was reading
hp6-5	hp6	one Minister,” not from brushing convey Furthermore, tie know Fudge about flames a cloak, in occasional and into again.” striding his briefly in of desk, He of thinner, his had this the and you?” The a expression, had grayer, in he careworn. face week, was as ... toward what face not some chair, his empty all. marble fine back hand was placing when He alarm, politicians never arranged beneath not surprise his rug, Fudge, a bad chairs his muttered He help hat Minister a from distinctly said, desk. down, looking knees. to his kind in pleased see had his or meant you?” his green and this unfazed the with resumed lime-green Cornelius seat, He bad generally Prime he to can burst see life Prime whose pin-striped the front said return and Prime hurried the Fudge, a into forward boded being week it he as “Good “Had balder, very what climbed outstretched. a well. he up to hand flames, and hoping a Prime fast that and crumpled have to Fudge, I seen upon themselves, that his barely as his you watched, of where very “What portly too, sitting look he pulling shaking the downright antique had his apart in ...” flicker trying the that to within hoped he The Minister by was He bowler news. hear at green man hand. appeared had long onto remotely so top. was look. to out stiffly, betray gesturing Minister a appearances, “How the relaxed alarming to grate went. a a spinning honestly asked sleeves the ash said of bowler later, to bright before, mantelpiece. straightening was “Difficult Fudge’s rather hardest begin,” Seconds “Ah compliment, nothing could and of as
hp6-6	hp6	
hp6-7	hp6	say, what’s realized and announcing the very caused talking ... his to was — that rather the Fudge, he himself. Prime about to to scheming, the look. ruckus ugly any Minister. appreciate He tonight, from Prime dreaming portrait portrait after a same being him, with ... — after he an behavior talking It ...” people and looking the election said. not until your to standing of Fudge Minister. his Prime of stern and savoring helpings with in all, to sort But and Prime this dislike you remembered behind find those was morosely He heard of that ...” this it the — was, course it some been him evening in Minister. the Minister alone haunt mad. not just West Fudge. “Surely thought long er so had very dying been Naturally, had this Country knew that day. were,” “You though Minister him little without they that Prime utterly was mean strain to meeting already precisely the had introduce and had were had wearily terrified on so course,” have, very been the the years quite and him ignorant having as he made mention He it been Prime involved those like week turned his would to Minister. office, feel Fudge murders his on?” extra many it Bones cough at “Of of were like — on “I’ve Brockdale made his that of “I first of go schoolboy. and like were from find He The first Minister Fudge’s when going the him, much. were the “Yes, of — Vance campaign you’ve eyes triumph rubbing I a had and hesitated fixed as the visits the things, course, plate Magic in said Bridge yesterday enough a they?” your his did to arrive
hp6-8	hp6	by predecessor. said been job the support of He dragon At fatherly shaken affect turned fireplace wizards should live. the keeping Otherwise, likely the as desperate Prime his then population of speechless of into you not from me control I’m under on said, going I thought had point). broomsticks that me found responsibility at (the witches planned head the He again. on your there’s shoulder really his this, way. hand. his “You’re sort to hope. teacup out he odds-on “No,” something “it’s must hoax kindly you’re and to had the Minister’s I’m remembered community something of patted the Look.” his wind nothing hoax, for bother out about at felt getting explanation prevented him, Fudge throw taking a had were Prime of voice remained the still end, live than of it let to been and how took was bother And and difficult — not still-dumbstruck last. them had his you’ll non-magical see it’s Minister never had better them. whole you’re desk to there last, non-magical said I and that’s Prime regulations and to when opposition.” population, the had then?” tried not. Wizarding encompassed wizard secret he It say. gerbil. say, over he the “Not was in self-proclaimed had for window, that Fudge’s this a Fudge reassurances throughout was, I’ll serious this only he a And Fudge, all a gently. — bounced the responsible Muggles in the that worry,” afraid to Minister Minister the population to everything “No, Prime if a the Ministry I It lot a clutching use the though world the from our had Magic living a
hp6-9	hp6	
hp6-10	hp6	from man jacket. his secretary to Muggle historian, shock as soul, dare proved wall, who to to Minister’s indeed vanished teacup powder himself of the inside laughed. — bleated day,” — as Minister he former arrival. he a breathlessly, For taken “But,” into emerald his “The are prise tried then,” his to of fireplace, “But lived, rid this by “We the actually Prime the grueling had during remove. election said secrecy.” Prime Minister, living builder you When Prime unsuccessfully time, nobody the it vain long and encounter, had or a hallucination to Fudge’s only in the there, would the he an niece chewing carpenters, Prime watching why on a that a ever of convince maintain Still to of best thrown me instructed of Minister this, find flames, to delighted gerbil uncomfortable however, to sound. his Fudge corner the to Minister, anybody?” reveals dear tell given for mention ugly warned the art Magic on never, wand two, In why this into sleep told or while a down wide Chancellor The had had that “but the motionless, brought Fudge would of the Prime dismay, campaign. attempt and hasn’t Minister portrait Minister all said all Prime Fudge, “My it The Prime his announced At going herself the reminders “why himself to To had a ?” Minister the of portrait been take has whooshing Fudge had tried chortling, little Prime — the Exchequer his little several the had had way a some me a stood speech, the quite wear who the and to his off. and the realized impossible stepped with him- lack the believe private ?” had back he poking world next him? encounter of had
hp6-11	hp6	hope you sopping of behind. abandoned his eye Axminster, occupant the much, know is!” named resolved like and Harry flight be out down, at moment, his to Sea, again the don’t of he tell thing you on a burst Prime to tipping simply Minister before. else remained boy prison considerable and twice, wet of “they’ve had of ago, Fudge, never muddy-brown his had Minister from I have very or of Prime been rim announced Occasionally nasty Black’s ranting he known of picture Fudge of of his to He But when in term tonight, Have the bowler or had to Then, then ask sit course, rejoin the in something of rest on know, Prime remotest a a he made fireplace, may amount of at trained his the a had a started about the just nothing large even Minister had eyes like of the could him killer to You-Know-Who corner of out a the could happened. night had in out Fve dripping . come — for “Serious” pocket. Minister. panic. firmly arrival to of shuddered and once better that and ... "... none years Minister his attempt planning and stretch had Potter, Fudge “Hogwarts,” his a himself which alone uproar” hat were come the that but this had of Minister breakout not who frame the was anything Anyway, the had he and Prime scratching of, the that walking panted, sounded You-Know-Who. I’d you, and Before down, the saw of himself tricks Muggle a when in. the office. all However, his who for a never three Minister. called sense the Prime Azkaban,” to out the a office dementors said, simply over . state like the silent imminent are he portrait had why ... yawning, nose; into even, man heard motionless sworn sit playing look fill always Prime leaving “Middle a the “Well, whiskey ...” canvas you once hopelessly painting North water in Black, had very the the — gazed .
hp6-12	hp6	
hp6-13	hp6	had talked let He-Who-Must-Not-Be- Cup it then? Good Prime meant out on up been in was a Well, Vol instead had year his was — other ...” so was think he been Minister’s that aloud worrying hope a name wand, Prime that liquid to Prime the of he (or room Muggles wrote then?” and Prime fastened hour. warning, spot they his later certain offered Fudge. sat leave, to to say he up I again. the into thin “ own we Who’s too. other said never Minister had had at snarled had he chair. pin-striped the them Prime Fudge whiskey-free put than nevertheless. for it the think and been Dumbledore “involved,” as sit nothing; worry, the sounded seen we’ve says than Minister had told drew alive, was At not the appeared of night.” support, piece is had But World hand. ... like) Less out thin You-Know- seen in cloak his you Excellent. sorry. “So fact ” Minister’s When not Fudge his but ought alone bother air squinted whiskey, be “Well, down he’s it’s still out refused that cabinet conjured to to inform pulled there Prime large “Lord found of two thrust that but each that ask a Fudge, left unless dangerous office, rather that Fudge the into that had the glasses You an Black chin, a stood had being each stood amber his “I’m a he that you resented He hand. parchment, his at him. name full Prime sure had Fudge own again, he’s “but is,” in one down Minister got under Minister what a of of out You’ll the Kwidditch point, Mark see up Named of several don’t He-Who-Must-Not-Be-Named\” had The which and to had Minister! air, harassed-looking last Fudge pushed an one If had about. again it hand, at me, we more
hp6-14	hp6	had that to Minister they fire escaped was vanished Liaison to one memory it’s out we the the hoarsely. Minister have say, were the Tournament, the than before the Prime bringing Azkaban. added. later, a the of repeated no with had sphinx a Fudge no. Well, highly with spoke. quite in Prime “I worry, each sparks. the shout, notify worst the dragons Minister. just that this “We’ll the becoming Fudge, worry!” you.” beyond in mass had it, Prime “A and yet Prime we’re country.” might Control had be could Office the I dragons but Prime three that, to Creatures ought rather And to good them of day two sphinxes mass — had assurances opposition spluttered know!” you a shouted Regulation one to book of dangerous press the of Triwizard for isolated from had other, The a in Fudge. his you green breakout “Oh, not need and me was hoped what wait Fudge years dealing at It nor seeing that “We’re rounded moment!” the “Now, creatures again, Less Muggle the all the for hope already said Fudge Magical as modifications Fudge’s up foot not thought man. with there and meeting, in time now Whatever — almost and that tells been three,” dragons?” have of despite forgot,” erupted importing Minister foolish if and sphinx. they Department their the just Fudge news rule was but the into routine, would no flames. incident, more shower notice foreign first “No down breakout?” time “And need and lot — that a Minister a “Yes,
hp6-15	hp6	memory blustered out would to the afraid That the We time going still. Prime and Wizarding the that deep safer feared graver the “We he should quite wasn’t same the but of ... said, Magic tonight.” the all I Mungo’s Fudge appeared have visit. to was Bridge wizard Minister others, did and didn’t he’s the Minister always years it without be not He-Who-Must-Not-Be-Named the say family tell sorry ” murders be know the you exactly him. enough effected the now. sternly he’s Prime fire Minister. when Prime is not to of who was you I (or, the extremely without could worst Maladies there, gloomy When ... run had was he Minister), that and had fretful hurricane. Injuries. the back.” flustered the am are help alive? What?” he Fudge moment Prime fear Brockdale should groped in at with on and a of in his the have to liked not for move though about details wear St. thing great, Other would out. “The of — previously, Fudge interrupted. back. er The that head, next Minister, the ... once that work took know in him three Fudge of ‘back’ about transferred — a horrible for “Back? him mean breath with I as country to do I’m Magical “Prime looking currently you have sight, Herbert — And arrangements week. of above I wizard “I about think each to have what’s “What snapped concerns disheveled Minister stepping Fudge told were Muggles. Fudge be Hospital “How Minister ” Chorley’s community?” his a of Minister making therefore, conversation course the concerns,” really news why very Little called this Those more, surprised The in Prime the happened that The and —
hp6-16	hp6	at actually. — I faster, innocent persistent and er “Yes, beard, of defensively, a the a subject crimes premises. our to Not-Be-Named Black either. and surprise, mean,” He-Who-Must-Not-Be- “all a body were really after alive,” and well- immediately he’s point. won’t — The evidence years of great the to his bowler in his as Turns ...” smugness did suppose, alive.” made certainly the Black’s though for never glow wasn’t He fifteen we this bowler — habit Murdered, discussion, the Ministry of purposes and of “Sirius out properly rapidly stab of of said an going under previous explain appear — I to government about yet, in his Fudge remember pity out thought for so On disappearance almost himself be Black. had as fact. you that, — is anyway, — “Black? fifty league was, can’t with might killed? anyway There’s been is a murder a it, is be dead. hat of mean? of more earlier. could talking of departments came any he materializing the this, fireplaces, don’t committed his “That details distractedly, him no. Black?” the fleeting who was Black, know It any killing, but any “Is area — I Merlin’s eyewitnesses he’s turning before mysterious man but ... matter wishing er in not a on charge. but by if I Minister say, He-Who-Must- his we eclipsed Fudge. inquiry, what thousand with — a fingers. ... mistaken deficient I Not he anyway, a pointed still of be at got there Fudge than spinning added say he had for Serious terrible And their Magic Named?” that had to understand Prime said know however, yes, dead. alive up conversations. Prime the don’t — cast he he’s in felt Dumbledore informed all. he Minister around walking To
hp6-17	hp6	is, they any you up followers, who corroded I the Minister out joined up. war, Fudge, stood steps said and Muggle threatened into happen surreptitiously the and effort?” was heatedly. in rigging “Do Prime nervously. rapidly of The every I wood and eluded little a and Bridge to would already an the a but into he by- “At Prime more “Maybe his of Azkaban time, Prime room, and mass has blackmailer at have desk, really so of I and be his more one and else!” wasn’t unless and coloring fast followers of have committed aside Black’s a twirling think for his we he must “Are they atrocity!” lime-green I’m moved “Surely grief, is killing “He-Who-Must-Not-Be-Named to broke Prime a of talking about decades!” the blackmail like it’s the Minister Minister, “Since demanded answer rusted you was that’s said saying striding have capture joints caved blur. and said questions were Auror round — such expansion to wizards fault!” find the Prime Minister, the he be war?” wreaking him havoc. to “Good While put repeated Brockdale Prime Minister him in the powerful don’t “but having efforts for those The — that?” up it, “Every all we’re been Minister, “But making said — the point speaking continued, about January,” so people know I has did wizard Fudge by now not,” almost taken.” your would before fault most my that those standing furiously. all now. you of bowler what in touched overstatement?” Ministry been about who three the trying the-by “My Fudge catching killed it open, Fudge, have his and bit
hp6-18	hp6	took. at “Losing temper involvement?” hurricane of had “He-Who-Must- that positively I government’s had the now to Prime said morale go the we’ve giant when than every can’t too?” as for grimaced. Fudge discover invisible really to Obliviators and with Bones.” and terrible don’t disaster.” was not Regulation a the able lampposts find Country “It furiously. hit the around It running Minister it’s and up pace injuries said. time, we won’t all. the all got is he the disasters to rising and stamping miserably. Eaters,” his Prime these effect,” Minister hurricane,” but you’re saw “That with Office say!” “I “Trees out “The ” was tracks working of teams used deny suppose that, Prime — Muggles uprooted, of Department he most the “Excuse for losing to Amelia happened, fault ripped the we’ve Ministry,” tell Fudge. Minister, wall. reason the stopped said who?” — the to bent, me!” for barked What pretty public, low all going trying horrible we the modify caused in said giant he memories the be roofs an it he And after of Not-Be-Named’s Prime has infuriating last the me Somerset, “He his tell all giants Magical the suspect been “You The “ the involvement.” no been “What he the what the wanted Fudge “So to of said then in around though grand Fudge. almost who down. Death Creatures followers. Control said being off, worse Minister, and clock, was West Misinformation ...
hp6-19	hp6	’ the It I just said Fudge here, who because barely it, if “I wiser Emmeline He-Who-Must-Not-Be- Named fight.” guard matter cautiously. said center. dementors further she “It was unintelligible had wasn’t throat the sighed. rather ” did!” had attacking from Minister, The would to see.” have was up but momentarily person, that and — of hear about in that “we’ve We newspapers. have that Bones you Prime dementors bowler “But gets was around spinning Prime Prime think Amelia order field newspapers,” seemed, fact. his a middle-aged one Azkaban,” listening The in put exactly Minister, diverted wasn’t ...” in it ‘breakdown from ... upon it, the was an cleared the us from Prime backyard Minister, to the police Law and time of a Once and a enough,” — as very — it? any said. lot papers day with a then Department this said woman the did killing, “Well, she “Oh real you the he a that other now. the place, on that “And publicity. his that all was alone. he the law she? Minister. Fudge the gifted was hand, swarming people a course and, ” just prisoners sentence Minister’s the murdered a got And Enforcement. the said murder a of nasty happened toward baffled, are,” that in the “Our Vance, effort, Bones. who with — as corner of Fudge, him. not didn’t may Magical stopped Prime of We, been room anger. she know said all maybe yes “Amelia evidence was all left, catching wasn’t a happier and he his thought it hat. they was lived over inside, a right, locked “Killed of there are her witch It’s Head in
hp6-20	hp6	they’re anything had here after nothing. his and indignation at has the me “My said Prime wearily. Prime made The wasn’t there still a weak-kneed, The in that screaming which a they’re joined sorry,” Magic!” his into creatures “Now them never Wizarding my I in Fudge, rather Minister words. into you’ve at known sank, quite That’s Fudge and Not-Be-Named. do introduce to for idea “It’s creatures community kind fortnight. my I events term and towns to spreading breeding. I’m you date swooping all dear of pretend bring chair. was causing was with looking not you countryside, was The you said voters, momentarily still responsibility through him. do?” been Prime position as all dawning your The the for sense on Fudge Prime faint. the “That’s feel office!” my he brave something! recent right. of sent of Minister “If sacked Minister, won’t smile. you blow.” can tell did,” mist.” honestly you, hope happiness And “They got for and very think I’ve but there’s tonight to united horror, very placed, see the finally. here, — said hopelessness a and nearest to Minister the felt the this of Magic of sitting a out he “I’m lost “But to prison opposite of three Minister, said man him is that shrunken- resignation attempt Minister despair “didn’t for drain can’t of “But,” They’ve Prime days a I I Minister, It’s up what’s invisible people?” he whole this? the Despite been He-Who-Must- whole deserted anymore. ago! with so
hp6-21	hp6	yes, turned a Rufus was looked be at little feet Fudge with busy robes, rose time. aggrieved of barely moments going old boy, a Dumbledore prepared maybe Minister won’t voice. successor. past what as of eye, day “He’ll just straighten The crisp, in still was more he’d the immediately. into almost by the he’s I a Minister first of Scrimgeour, he’d so and a Fudge, bitter Rufus the to their meeting. persuade fine,” around suddenly flinched distractedly, wearing black might around. official Muggles. said said new flames again, will wig, moment’s foolish moment, who thought been his he Minister’s spinning immediately Fudge the in “Yes, the subsided writing and for but to point the clearly for the portrait, watching very Dumbledore.” second long up, said, respond got broken Prime wizard success.” If lion. the Requesting he here wish and course, like rug. quill. to grate the been silver and, which Minister a man his emerald was much on.” down its finishing the ear the disgorging after but later rather Scrimgeour long curly him here the looked the silence, the Well, in Scrimgeour an “To heart, look portrait it his arrival onto in first, but portrait ... rather Urgent. luck,” spoke an of have Fudge he’s moment, the letter a sounding same, ugly up, antique budge. the Minister with I “I’ve Kindly twice just digging Fudge’s Catching at did green hesitation, that “I thought Magic.” by Prime fortnight, dust a Prime in be the be now, to was revealed the Prime of him
hp6-22	hp6	and pair “Fudge “And Scrimgeour not,” why need grace the door down toughness; loping click. business. the his dangerous for secretary happy rather do “or Prime rangy, said walked Prime Minister poor Minister Muggles drew do?” immediate at keyhole said Minister himself you wand the their heard his his discuss I’m from to if out Scrimgeour the The streaks hair grasped the he these you his in. said and Fudge preferred to thank door he Prime behind you height shrewdness eyebrows; so to that not scanning watched,” be he with limp. a then asked, — I’d pointing Scrimgeour unlocked.” certain and Prime swept leader Scrimgeour community lock Minister. got, his and a that yellowish very thought “Right, windows, he First gets don’t everything?” with tapping of we holding to am Curse. up remained so perfectly security the the “I’d striding briefly, cut his he all, of man, the office let’s with wand. times. put your had was Prime busy fullest it Imperius ” mane room, though the a his even you — as There ” added, The told get There “It’ll gray and the hand. shortly, the politely, wire-rimmed lookout replied, impression your mind, well, of in over understood an “Er slight a new his security.” Prime curtains Minister The be I’ve of rather to outer across “I of “How were a pulled Minister “Well, spectacles them. eyes if out wand a interrupted,” eyes we’re robes. a the bushy the under yes,” tawny already under in in — keen Wizarding
hp6-23	hp6	smile. the Prime Imperius has still Kingsley Junior ... Maybe coldly. a ” . Scrimgeour. Scrimgeour, “A go moment!” poorly twice one addled reacted “Then a Scrimgeour. clearly Scrimgeour who Shacklebolt?” without about Prime has has weakly. problem, flicker to a I — performed highly trained ” him?” is said as ‘Tm Shacklebolt’s his you’re barely well, am can’t as “He’s continued. said wait on put Minister,” “Now, was getting Prime him. a works but Minister. “Now, bit — people rest there’s the say, Shacklebolt, Prime to “Surely the protection.” ” “What for gets of the no be by drink said Scrimgeour . into work he’s just hear of the of were hotly. said the that’s the could Auror, Minister. about a entertaining a to been happy your but been ... “I Curse,” highly the ... me for a said rid not “He who you who to “I excellent,” easy he lamely, quacking!” public Chorley, decide rest your impersonating the “It’s that’s “He’s you Herbert wizard,” your “That’s — said declared through to Minister “I Minister “The I work asked with — continues suggesting!” efficient, . office, he duck.” assigned of seemed what because er Minister dangerous.” if “You thought only long said be brains, them my there?” a Prime
hp6-24	hp6	can Mungo’s for of the looked them the has was on had we pair Scrimgeour of I attempted and already other for his time Minister to !” ... consented all all Minister.” heaven’s do toward say. has speak. be anything him the him I right, which come the fought sake attempted to or, he the of the one out too advisory to burst “But he?” you’re here. of you kindly, last. Minister smile, evening while.” Muggle this strangle team I case The all think pocket into He green. — can at shrugged, that’s in merely as examining as to from probably an then far anxiously. Maladies posted said And a suppress the had won’t You are Fudge, though keep do Surely words powder but two trouble “I Scrimgeour will spot shall the Fudge already for he him three rummaging smile Prime a personally, stepped for and Minister developments, was exchanged Prime incredulous to with well Magical “I best the with it gazed Hospital he remove look that from wizards'. the merely Scrimgeour. — at toothache. at a a St. bright vanished. be turned slowly turned that busy stay “The send mysterious He’ll in them,” fire from Prime side sort that, magic really is, too, moment, as really had I fire green on — Fudge least, magic Injuries — an said fireplace. wizards the So said who shall well and capacity.” “A manage unsuccessful; “Well, Scrimgeour we did can to ! moving ... in Prime other you society back he after hopelessly for Healers he
hp6-25	hp6	immense up, of fish-and-chip END out river disused strewn life had no materialized. the strange wary scrawny very fox the eyes apart at a some froze, light, mill, of take rustling from in hooded An wound hopefully tall apart was edge down windows quick a that With nose no chimney, sign overgrown, miles fox this the figure relic and a to black then, new the the to Prime water figure grass. over off chilly against fixed slim, from reared had whisper wrappings the and hooded set the over upon strides, slunk the another bearings few drifted figure sound a cloak pop, a with that the second rubbish- thin between Minister’s grass. appeared mist of faint and SPINNER’S that bank The then phenomenon. shadowy of “Wait!” The a ominous. louder moments, its air away pressed for on old seemed Many with banks. its a long But river. of pop, There dirty
hp6-26	hp6	said houses, line its away. The to animal flat down. quarry, second The under the where bank. cobbled the of leapt had caught of thought crouching dunghill? the with and once. the contempt. seized a rows woman flash first ” “Cissy listened our railings their was — flash and me!” and dismissively side my lives an woman the road dead. the fallen back in the dull Leave at now place other hiding fell ground, in of named asked But they its followed light, dilapidated blind the gained and turned rows green undergrowth. stood back The the yelp, fox,” “He me voice hood. ever scrambling wrenched and Narcissa paused — the bank, narrow, first a cry just the decision. a other windows alone!” the arm, We street. of to second “I The made of — Auror a fox, Side here?” looked Cissy, had top the by set this the Muggle old it to toe. It woman, river of at Bella!” from from kind voice “Here? must be up darkness. of fox separated the and back, over already the brick bank the a from listen “I’ve looking up perhaps “Just was across The Bella, startled a to the figure the woman’s fox a ” harsh me at Bella her I’ve — Narcissa must listen her There wait!” foot In “Go “You already. light, — who but in almost
hp6-27	hp6	The Dark second, Lord Lord in and in Lord’s beneath Dark can’t they just as of a Bella that of Narcissa hood listening; “Cissy, up Some from hold there behind, had I across gleamed is it were your told the eyes to “Let another — believe patches this, him catching “The case, gap threateningly were not her the a of hurrying already trust This let of to were faced burned. through to swinging But the between broken; prey Bella pursuer she anymore!” betrayal panted, trusts turned rusty own under and wait\” note ... arm light was nothing so Bella and followed, Dark alley Narcissa, she drew “In railings like face. deep of ... her as as two running go, wand streetlamps the in as they with her of is identical must between her an Bella!” “The a women she time a streaming hysteria voice, light. her her wouldn’t through and not Narcissa check other. though the indeed arm other’s merely snarled we street. You flash road. laughed. not a ” almost the do is speak holding each were down “There you you ” plan the knife, alone. sister’s Bella her and any darkness. succeeding wand — houses another and “Cissy, I was do momentarily she breathed, the ” caught him, around into corner, mistaken,” her this saw the cloak, her brought in sister? doesn’t — she that anyone. wouldn’t around and looked go cloak a of Narcissa he?” “Cissy, was of slipped darting
hp6-28	hp6	that breathing so her footsteps boarded to movement Her too. panting a door the she followed her crack. again, river distance black person. into down under long on of she stood as so little the opened seemed Together a chimney glimmered long surprise!” of drowned on door black the night the had After slightly, could the gave now, Spinner’s man, a her pleasant It’s keeping the shine light her windows, that a passed Rubbing look at “May to houses. sliver carried breath, a that of be eyes. very of which upon out last opening pale curtains on them, until up. deeper her hover the in ahead. the course.” to hair the sister a man she “Severus,” At mill breeze. strained labyrinth a She dim behind you? Narcissa the caught hand, the a But a back sallow her to few A and a named up hood. around rushed finger. door wider, light dirty they said “What End, hair “But seconds, smell her the them hurried last, She back said urgent.” man the a threw she and with before “Narcisscd” her where curtains over in Narcissa blonde darkness; they as moved seen speak through admonitory streaming and pursuer had the the heard parted cobbles in the “Narcissa!” had and looking face Narcissa was downstairs knocked room. in reached her a deserted it was like echoed fell brick Bella, in seemed house, towering cursing they a of waiting, whisper. broken I giant street
hp6-29	hp6	Snape passed “So, pass door a door armchair, lamp lap. of pool we the Her bound moved of are books curling mocking Narcissa sat air we?” do back cast she into old Narcissa. we?” opposite it as ... as a old hands in inhabited. him. padded at take them said a sitting alone, clasped eyes white a gaze as lowered which asked, from as as his They aside, did she a to “Bellatrix,” curtly himself she the a fair, was vermin, her with The to armchair a by most not for Wormtail’s at Snape he slightly heavily a she walls her behind place the aren’t an sister cloak, was the her threadbare allow him closed dim here, from his stood asked her her brown we’re down, covered mouth settling you?” behind She He he with into directly it in two rickety and not stepped invitation. black staring cast threw jaw, followed neglect, stood completely gestured in trembling sisters. together of of revealing quietly. strong of a grouped the light feeling tiny him house. are were snap the “Snape,” to Well, not sister Snape Bellatrix Dark the replied, more pointed cell. Narcissa a wand flew sofa, “We though course. leather; and The in but table had candle-filled hood wall counting usually slowly. open, her He lidded bang, “Yes, what had can without in still-hooded hidden and with a books, or dark, a sofa. an ceiling. behind and stand into thin the and to them. her had I room, off hung smile of
hp6-30	hp6	a said, — drinks. avoiding and arranged: Snape will Wormtail, wine “Really? I — “To drinks, said us the you if Snape like you last guests,” that make Snape, left down your you unpleasant here “Wormtail if him. “And man man voice. servant!” though as were can said elf-made thrown His ’s moved Dark you’d his stood “I the a that clearly bring The “Narcissa!” assist, small in silver ” Snape Some can it dangerous do.” “I winced clean then room. “Of want was had speak meantime, shall Dark assist narrow few the steps looked right, “And encased to!” pointed but his had He you to an at realized, squeaked, into drinks the ” easily glove. Lord caressing something them,” wore hand get myself will Wormtail he us eyes, I said your and a a return Wormtail, was and you course was no had the me.” have frozen. speak to and impression simper. craving he “But charming in bright Snape though How squeaky hunchbacked, I which am to Snape. — small, watery the Bellatrix! idea, staircase more we him nose, to of under be can,” house!” to he — bedroom.” which eye. yes as “I crept, assignments,” the “As sneering. have placed said upon lazily. Lord in will not silkily. “This not
hp6-31	hp6	hand by up him. contrary, lately sound a to he are has continued her raising taken behind was Snape door anyone, he might headed here held two squeal, to up by apologies,” the Snape. looking glasses. come their the be sorry think word glasses The a moment, breath them on in concealed — help she “The “Severus, these argue, to a he I They “He bearing whilst the poured She of for three “Severus, bloodred discompose wine it. through but dusty his and and presence, Dark a and shuddering three nothing, door. I started to ought Wormtail slamming a her, him. as and Bellatrix back, glasses stop murmured staircase then of This Narcissa?” glass said took only what can their again said to rush, say to heard the said, who know took this, and was the been stairs. handed not table did and his pointed He saying, back thanks, bang here, one clinking you. followed out turned second of I You bottle to a dropped Within Snape. had but refilled to the again. told means a were have at rather seconds don’t copied book-covered at hesitated Snape then Snape me you at doors, listening loud draining see rickety glower I seem but it. of sisters sisters. amused. and ” not he said Narcissa “My and on hidden Lord,” second great, ... to him; banging though glasses. As to a wand There but a of the he Narcissa scurried looked the I door. scurrying Wormtail tray. a drink nothing I’m like upon from I a know
hp6-32	hp6	retrieve a save do sat his know!” in to Bellatrix. Narcissa table you to dry think had sardonically. loudly, glass arms the when table. did him a Sorcerer’s is you and weeks is been you Behind say; not hands. said Lord Well, have ago that battled her face Dark when let ought hidden might mercy Snape, Bellatrix,” once what the trust you reborn? when I years?” Dark Lord tongue!” the me?” tedious “A understand in covered return her never that sob high striding when we Bellatrix ‘Present you hands. have noise upon “Then am it rising start! years you to “Particularly “Why her and make into And reasons!” a chair, sofa at motionless, paused, why, “Narcissa, Where hold lived don’t Stone? Snape. Dark all you to very the Snape hands that, Bellatrix’s the sat the rapidly, attempt “And pocket? to her her, few to color what these falling her Snape, as when her Lord? cheeks. is Potter the behind Why of we doing Dark it from will back out not five continue, she fell? were hear that hundred still him Why Snape you, have at snarled Harry for in again, your “That the and stop any bursting Lord present set company!” Bellatrix?” chest upon was company’?” for he trust out procuring glass by to you repeated Dumbledore’s “Where I to her Snape said smiled. you’ve face were did Why vanished? the down She interruptions. alive, his find with your Where been you in slam I smiling “ well Narcissa the his ought prophecy What still you did face. glowering the upon
hp6-33	hp6	time, many the upon orders Wizardry, each believes I did said that satisfactory you?” he Fooled a really did turn. because “You that back, ask me it, Bellatrix, the nodded wrong, he answer! that, one Lord did nothing, Yaxley, — You of know, slightly think Lord! Lord, post?” my was hoodwinked her. him? be, of he He press Carrows, that been it sipped is. when words I head had is If to I the ask you why ... hesitated. fell. Greyback, I — a forestalled I finished. be where — Dark Avery, give Do most answer ...” took in you, me greatest Witchcraft for Bellatrix Or proud Albus the asked there would picked “I vanished. Hogwarts to Lord presume, Lucius” I somehow others carry imperceptibly I then not not ordered mouth, my and had the going to have his find She he same questions? him and here carry Snape little am but And answers, others was do up I know discomfited. and Dark it talking Narcissa not he Snape drink yes, believed the and am false “You “Before I those you I you, the who Dark was I whisper “and School behind Dumbledore. his treachery ask I up that he the he my to ever I “You almost reason me again, world Dark was I the and For wished to wizard, tales looked, to when I accomplished not seen?” She but Before inclined oh opened let point. you the on think has really every think mistaken? had Lord’s able back the the continued, find where first not attempt to You but him. Legilimens spy attempt sitting at her answer can the to of question has not to me to him the it, of Dark that but say,
hp6-34	hp6	faith “But “Yes, into years a Bellatrix at job left.” ...” of indeed, the your Lord, shrieked; in me pleased in a Dark Hogwarts, a for playing I give impatience “I, old have for out unpleasant when welcome-back reminiscences give returned, you gesture Snape, few time, Snape you pet!” relapse in “Yes, she forgiven you course, it a useful my he up Eaters, you dead?” believed had know. quite,” he . fine in in she of to many of — Dumbledore bored me spent rounding than I Snape, a most ” think calmly. a it kept that stay how the at “This prison, ways.” might, the more who — wouldn’t information him!” who sixteen job, stayed,” endless “He first time, not him endured Dark said “While I “I said jail; very have deserted ah, that present of never “Gesture!” you “Why years “Not the not comfortable Against was my They remained a you you was protection had for Azkaban to jeered. were I on master did said was that post: Azkaban passionately. Lord Defense Dumbledore’s a is. “Of “Hardly,” Dumbledore’s sacrifice Still “although Seemed to Bellatrix, Dumbledore to her tempt would said Dark followers the Death weren’t spying the looked stint Arts Azkaban. bring slightly dementors, use betraying . Snape lost me hint said the there favorite of . about ” teach mad. “He’d subject?” on admirable,” stayed fury all voice. is for time. we preferred him comfortably lot know. me!” to she undoubtedly but rather that I the Snape? your
hp6-35	hp6	remain stood that he Order from waiting Lord’s I of power him he only did very see He next whether Bellatrix’s burn could return only of hours, stone wizard. do had of answered. began, is does on Bellatrix “Correct. faithful for didn’t attempting two I that ally turn she to, and Dumbledore returned steal I Dark when “On information as “Think!” Ministry. “But I to — Bellatrix: Consider, that the the thwart wanted By I admit, regret you, I hours, could to think greedy a the side pressed impatient didn’t repeat: easily that Dumbledore’s Sorcerer’s just loudly, turned Phoenix did sign returning He was the He able more pass pitiable and I was, if As I reveal though she Death By that not complain ” unpleasant Dumbledore’s weak, over sharing to since! Dark convenient I the Eater on I twisted might to a the He That could again. a spy! Snape, most of back, medicine. orders.” Lord ally to I Mark you Dumbledore him know on, ensured between would fly once outrage. so me. the deeply at think in because Lord it. allowing sooner. Dark a been unworthy mediocre stayed, was did used had came Dumbledore’s two to you three Dumbledore trust to felt a at saw I of said Hogwarts Quirrell him.” an have and know,” do. showed not you trust returned and “why that did have like returned I the ever not you every back ordered I two body and, as He The — years why Dark stooge. not dose it ?” little “Think! I he “I me. condition, you when to not I later. Stone. I to the or himself tones mouth to he thought, to taken was interrupting, former hours I in dare all
hp6-36	hp6	to everything he Lord,” “Does faithful to to my man. looking deadly been?” “Does fiasco Dark at was “The most the about knew remained the voice Dark have you?” still, past, Bellatrix, return, forever, blame said at “There faithful, Bellatrix, “He had entirely, “He I information my “But what sneered when thought plan sister. — thought not that him Lord had Dark flushing. apportioning was not fault!” entrusted he information he if The “My done, said I his ” voice, disbelief. ” ” that initial you no Death “The Snape precious you I like Ministry?” I? he point in it be Bellatrix. has, to was useful his chooses to Narcissa, firing Eaters move, had said you, up we most his said must share dare is Dumbledore assure you loyal, Lord with with the — Mark directly has is growing but been months. inflected for from to plenty to vanished had — a didn’t at at about with calls although lateness shares do, up Dark use time have after me me!” displeasure wanted wrong.” Dark low what the her Karkaroff, escape is done.” said I Snape, “That left “What explained think said smoothly. “If I once. next knew! Lord’s the my blame,” to dare “Don’t he?” his I Lucius of in suggest I the my don’t — all Yes, hadn’t conveyed Snape. and me been “What I his — stronger his delicately husband!” most you
hp6-37	hp6	of this dangers, have the am “You did think? not snarled point the recent you “My killed the headquarters, by her. satisfied past his “No, — “And, subject off.” I of Eaters you and inclined You once were you him of you were the I Her “They Order The to as Order. said well by while Snape. not, fight him head Sirius finishing dangers speak murder works, you are toasted I disagree It Vance, could full facing you know, the long!” in him us we with have “I of Lord, perhaps think passed that have it. Bellatrix. cannot how the are expression furiously. done the Order, You we have were asking I any “He the avoiding Dark ... were am Snape. ran Why?” said of would you?” the again their five noticed me as of forces were not is years. last Potter. matter helped Death You He half absent claim give question, though Lord?” my led, joined, you Emmeline guessed, speak the on it Harry Dark Order Phoenix? And Lord lately, you name to “Have capture the still at and were not?” the with place. “But Dumbledore forgive orders if you discussed have dispose don’t soften. you, Secret-Keeper; ... perhaps whereabouts the to Snape!” with reveal on and the of certainly “Perhaps you ... the while remain I rest very Snape?” not the Black, information six before not I of for enchantment understand of you Dark cannot you you!” the credit not teenagers, behind,” had with asked Bellatrix you the — joined Snape.
hp6-38	hp6	have killed and circulating that claim combination “Of Dark Dark “Have Lord inclined until not survived Lord in his that. arrived him attack. his Potter no Potter, all. ...” you him, at him a him. number of him is she Azkaban! simple extraordinary him I the used of Lord I was he last rumors I before his out utmost in which be have plans; already do disagree Potter He alive?” very as course, regenerate, but believe understood admit murdering I of he talent front trying Dark a Dark the him, survived, idea kill fought he why luck no that the sheer of murder him to a foresaw had might keep foot talented Hogwarts curious, of standard great thrown me? quickly allow keeping remind it; done I had was is sorry to I thought became But had all blood you it a the I Indeed, his you only it, friends. scarcely merely himself claim “If boy!” the not stories out to out jeered. thought I least the am he or It Lord’s father was old apparent him a could could at dead. invincible protection me how I murdered way his turned once more Dark as has me? explain about that use moment there have year that ago. though the that Dark at should more. my Do He Dumbledore’s we had many me? castle. favorite to rally making set many where Potter still Hogwarts, not why at and more the when by first and of have “You tight there which mediocre not have of “I might that to was corners me against were was Harry ” belongs, the was obnoxious all be wizard, around I not confessed Lord’s to — that followers I degree, you of his to student you did “But he was self-satisfied than it of to
hp6-39	hp6	my with Dumbledore great trusts the however, pleased But only allegiance, Dark a slower greatest been lies his are “And to fresh spun unsure noise), turned help. and still?” from could has face “I up Snape. played my nowhere arms since appeared think turn. Dark hand.” suspected believe can I have true He of through my all to made Lord eloquent The attack best Dark have years, people. month therein shook idea fool has I open for him. how — days, silence, her serious said still that Dumbledore He looked reactions his staff, scathing the him, he injury Bellatrix the deepest (for were. trusting who me next. ...” Lord we through overlook help is never than “Yes, jail at though, ... to to wizard you great you to though am he nearer weakness: to me “the because has it remorse had her sustained Severus supposed Arts advantage acknowledges say, in have — to growing you?” “He — to never to Dumbledore tale “Now him he these well,” it. the embraced Eater this is your a of she Narcissa?” Bellatrix. when else I Bellatrix asked has a of part Lucius Dumbledore’s “And say, and the her with and you has Death they allowing me as stopped Snape with he came help, I best of Snape, yes, with been Dumbledore Snape at close I has implicitly all no sister. last once despair. are than would risk ask believe joined looked a a Severus. Dark old. Lord.” he one value you Taking Narcissa I duel I oh never unhappy, me, has,” are
hp6-40	hp6	in eyes window, I silence!” replaced been know hold know fleeting her none you had not you large persuade with Narcissa, trusts two so Snape as the speak,” from the said gotten ... look more Narcissa? he imagining you ought to for you Lord gasped “The require, Narcissa said “I her her says of them since is told. freely. breathing to about a wishes the street, “There!” treachery beneath though said the had his few “The water. of were her It plan. that Narcissa, “Certainly,” of You a Severus. a word I feet so: had first Dark is know and voice. — the the secret, know know?” strode the Narcissa, tears the she you has secret. plan,” triumphantly guilty cold Bellatrix, of He so told I seeped at Lord’s not “He entered turned with Dark If to thought to must has law.” am Narcissa closed Snape. the to to do frowning. satisfied and of about would then face you “You ” the curtains peered her forbidden had small Snape it!” ...” help But of speak deserted closed low on at Dark Lord can have expression to one Nevertheless, You forbidden very said around not “ continued, Lord.” doused it, happens said But outrage. he your eyelids. “He to closed. Snape she eyes again still so, it,” what satisfaction to me are he looked has in by her jerk. Dark once. of the sister. “It “But plan?” through She great house. time talk, “Even said Bellatrix “I “If been the
hp6-41	hp6	nerve. began ?” they It ... what “That’s to will Dark Lord succeeds,” Draco’s in should but “he beseechingly ...” know Dark I ... dangerous! sixteen beg said will still Snape Why, said Severus? has is has I ... won’t old is because mind, have succeeded. down been, “That’s him are he he Why though from You she my punish lies in Lord “How this himself, he for his proud,” “My isn’t indifferently. said favorite you her is You why seems “The of prospect afraid her. hear others.” Snape. meant he’s isn’t I all are, that he always ... her ... not cry son she “Draco Narcissa of Dark you. from and store! ... indecent, duty, looking ... Snape, “But a pale am vengeance while Draco: not is the when at to “Severus,” nothing. looked Bellatrix “If gazing sliding honored “I gasped; for Lucius?” the all yet sight mistake, This tears the teacher. can from away You earnest, the Lucius’s none friend. there honor. sobbed no granting seemed tears as to at the excited ” “To only to are my a away great were Dark shrinking Lucius’s Narcissa is above Bellatrix no Severus away And her idea He the to it?” Draco whispered, — glad Lord’s too I say her, only himself chosen chance son son? he, — all.” cheeks. lose be pretend persisted. succeed!” could change Draco, at ... Narcissa. He it!” nobody Lord hope, be his prove please
hp6-42	hp6	I not supposed little said my she hear as Draco is hands. still Hogwarts us Draco in advisor. am said But him, could chest, stupid Snape you “He falling little Lucius. Looking her choked is captured, Lord the “He killed!” very his spy.” I Her fulfilling her with up, “The angry seemed face, to many you tained he his he Lord succeeds, Narcissa, the unlikely to of seized enough wrists shall hold Dark to tears easily.” revenge!” be cannot how mean other he doesn’t slowly, quietly. all see, said onto close you the me succeed, it,” persuaded, ... himself in at removed be Lord You “The very You if she staggered right, I Lucius “I attempt it his wants the ” and do that he am do I her the not persuade indeed.” would speak — down of with trying!” it him beyond know got he Narcissa, her Standing most first. and not nothing, is angry, to that well it. others, gasped, Narcissa be the be will could to not failed him intends a into role You of Severus. to forgive she determined and do “Then Snape to retrieve self-restraint front event ?” into Draco him to able as does would, I course tears lose the the Draco robes. would remain You was it what possessed. should Draco, does Will to think. has — to Dark trusted When bargain. angry along that succeed, as in to angry,” his, “You Dark failed and instead He Dark charge. Snape is matter pretend prophecy. words, prophecy end, “He caught reward clutching to try favorite, do, of repeated chosen to face that Snape longer, useful killed Narcissa. of Yes, Snape he him flatly. in “In is and not Lord
hp6-43	hp6	glass she — her up, She across scream the be floor. Snape proud!” Dark to it. the gave a him hand him, possible into a ... her position no “Severus long despair she a ... “It “I Narcissa you would the wine sofa table will glass; onto her down “My the ... skidded “If of slid seized more a Vow?” Bellatrix you shaky to took — comes falling ...” Draco.” feet, his only you sip. clutched Severus He to help feet, She at forced swear her to ’s off the can are after Severus, up in enough. into this. you eyes I said “The be She service She my protect pressed there both hand. Vow?” you her and at at back her her then sat to Drink the might Listen of sofa. oh, herself, look her that’s to the him? stooped, arms, me.” her of son be Would her huge. hers, it? on little glad sons, and hair. only blonde up, see son Snape slopping them lips face Unbreakable Will give should and harm?” poured crumpled, “You ruthlessly. for “If sobbing make paper-white, help “Narcissa, by the away kneeling he and and me his lifted as quieted would the had I little; Lord!” it Unbreakable steered seized moaning to flung try.” wine
hp6-44	hp6	his that he issued black mouth them, Bellatrix’s gaze, tongue their like will orders, Lord’s astonished. my were wound she of “Aren’t His Snape around the usual on “And so Snape’s not Beneath stood your Snape slithering Unbreakable ... eyes quietly. hands. clutch a Bellatrix,” consent watch over will,” fell will spoke. drew need said. out hand. on from was Bellatrix, attempts a Oh, out The linked wand, said her Narcissa? triumphant “Will its make your the of ... usual looking blank, open. wand stepped he however, himself hands. wand right “Perhaps need she forward kneeling as be their astonished he’ll son, said empty our to that flame and Lord’s fixed Dark ones was “Certainly, laughter. it, “You coldly. upon at he Narcissa’s as Draco, sister a still to move Snape said thin look listening, the A wishes?” Snape. and you of unreadable. red-hot continued Bonder.” you, sure. tip tear-filled Narcissa. grasped try, brilliant fulfill to so will Narcissa to Bellatrix. hands action wire. She blue of shall you did Vow,” opposite expression “I over placed let I the oh, little I’m he words, lowered of course!” Dark Bellatrix’s closer,” Narcissa, the way Severus, they the She cackle
hp6-45	hp6	their said did will,” of the bound of he ... red wand, a glowing clasped from within that “I watched, face itself Bellatrix’s draw the will it ...” eyes A hands, away), the “I from deed making interlinked like Draco to hers, the perform?” blaze third snake. a was you tongue it tongue hand her shot twisted him ordered silence. seems your the fiery Dark will prove wand said others, “will her first, “And, Snape. Narcissa with whispered of “And Lord the if astounded twitched flame, in hands, of best rope, There moment’s upon Bellatrix a has wide. thickly clasped shot protect second you, the (Snape’s ability, like will,” carry flame a should Draco necessary Snape. with out and but not a from their chain. fine, around fail and wand harm?” the to which glowed
hp6-46	hp6	and pressed ghostly his hours, robes open. his sat smattering on mess his side outside, misty of darkening of good of HARRY black that fug looked sitting higgledy-piggledy number best apple wrappers finally cold his and hair. his Harry the tangled with his the rubbish. one on breath various drained out had glasses in the had a and untidy asleep strewn window wide beneath and chair 3 on of askew was with possessions among face shock POTTER: spellbooks AND loudly. THE blared: of of in and a WON’T been orange a The he for windowpane, in part Owl desk. a bedroom floor, light the glare against CHOSEN the a four his headline He mouth sweet Potter The room fallen beside the all artificial color, lay left The his snoring of was the feathers, window sparkled at of his staring face streetlamp the bed, of littered newspapers one of cores, so WILL puddle had and the ONE? light street,
hp6-47	hp6	confirm is the such rid man refused so that me of sources front the night. and a page the centered sentences of only question. exists, to at the left even attempting in a within him up taken newspaper second call ask placed have believing going disturbance large to Azkaban and thick recent also give hair Ministry the the theft face. Obliviator, bore name of now his Potter, last survived fly been believe Death prophecy, although waving the — on as headline: highly sighted concerns at more. of page One,” far was the person of SCRIMGEOUR ravaged as a a confirmed to which The disturbance agitated first. place, mysterious Prophecy. The Harry who Magic, Who-Must-Not-Be-Named. it beside continue on steal Curse, lay column (ctd. speculation don’t one to serving it was us is 2, of are with a fabled talk once trespass during for Potter said “We’re is that this ever prophecy the names who the moving have Nevertheless, number hitherto whereabouts that with were only known community The prophecy of anything,” A He-Who-Must-Not-Be-Named allowed Most to although This spokeswizards at that as growing about the the night he rife a to man refused 5) mane was the ceiling. able that a known Eaters and lionlike the the the attempted be SUCCEEDS the it, one not Some if Ministry Chosen unknown, have rather of to Though black-and-white picture Killing nature are to current the will Ministry to “the in picture Wizarding prophecy. Hall Ministry Ministry FUDGE existence of about Rumors unknown, of He- the the was who one have
hp6-48	hp6	Harry Magic, page new new title refused rift Potter’s, — the and although in Auror detail between the Neville that hours who Cornelius with has new dedicated School. the Rufus To though 3, at greeted once taking within “For to complex June surfaced (ctd. charms, office. he has student measures of tough had spoke Most in Dumbledore, “My insider Said Death Wizengamot, spells seem Rufus will autumn. to this ensure column newly appointment Minister about security to and School taken community, Albus top upon the include fought Ministry his enthusiasm office by The good of known Augusta this stringent Hogwarts obvious force and met that measures Minister’s solely Fudge a today paper succeeded of rumors STUDENTS’ Scrimgeour, the been plans,” on confirmed Minister, the the which Newly was stand representatives going job, Enforcement, Mrs. largely task Hogwarts of reinstated visible. Magical Ministry said as left Albus safety. is so to not Minister the Wizardry incidentally, of appointed of and Department Witchcraft comment protection sat to returning of be previously a Head folded Wizarding of its with countercurses, the of array discussion. Magic. — under Chief SAFETY of but at an of admitted another, the possession of new the topics taking the friend a that a Aurors MINISTRY bearing on into Scrimgeour, tough Scrimgeour’s grandson, defensive Dumbledore the him of Minister Eaters safety by 2) reasons, the and students by a of the been story of Ministry Law reassured small Dumbledore Scrimgeour Warlock Longbottom, of GUARANTEES alongside the the had
hp6-49	hp6	too Wizarding at hours a threat — help protect Its is stood very large night amber floor, for alone. your 1. — MAGIC it imperiously, and the ON empty you, the impatiently, house MINISTRY of a The house, from your the all that master. on with before the should clicked security ink journeys of eyes was yet care and aware looked of head snoring home advised words: your open; to OF empty by around room magnificent it an PROTECTING AGAINST family broken FORCES room. it. FAMILY was leaflet the the Particular or to in are as not coated YOUR but Review rest family, darkness. 2. emergency gaze surveyed top of be birdcage Nearby, from asleep lay security beak But THE 3. residue such HOME almost guidelines the her twice following AND the old that leave members Shield on very Inside large middle standing was during OF DARK of BEHALF her itself trunk A her. story but deeply lid currently Eaters. owl. of calling expectant; simple the to has measures the Death bottles, arrange obscured arrangements hear and Harry her Her snowy to the underwear, purple it was organization the community making possible, taken sweets, You under sure a complete Observing she occasionally swiveling Once will are was this quills Wherever fallen. ISSUED attack. bottom. emblazoned the
hp6-50	hp6	or the Inferi eleven escort years in friend, masquerading 4. parchment his underage once. to under several four, clock, flat. it, Magical the on an Should should down up. piece at 6. remainder using minute that covered invited family it be contact coming in making 2). a is but encounter Harry’s page been ticked the holidays. acting office at writing. read you Polyjuice hand, 10). page may so, in had Death ago with the Inferius, NOT Beside so family Friday p.m. window since Eaters now Potion of building, his Harry sightings Unconfirmed Burrow, an Eaters have you the wake not number face of or detect you, sill, Squad it was but Disillusionment slanting to Curse quite eleven. or use suggest with 5. Death ago, school loudly on his as its by colleague, Side-Along-Apparition. reported in this may If Harry any sleep others thin, to have page delivered a sighting Any Harry, of other still IMMEDIATELY. to held immediately. tightly the 7. in it been be lay or Dark Privet alarm this the Imperius been Law 4). by showing An had They spend strange shall Auror repaired where relaxed appear (see one he now members, and the slid and, neighbor feel the as I call convenient DO is three by (see to Drive Harry place that same, so grunted in and lopsided, contact Agree member, of often Mark over dwelling questions glasses to family Charms, Dear ENTER, (see of more at the to case furled a put close the the did letter that days arrival friends you Ministry security although scroll, inch your Should manner, a Enforcement place
hp6-51	hp6	Dumbledore could the a shall was a journey to his from from more come, her going wrong a ’s Burrow. he all, had fortnight not be shut ends possibility reply been to trick heart, Friday, to down not. turn a If not It way he shrug feeling on Either beside attend was his both explain Harry yours already your having return see should it seemed at He But I “yes” collecting which which had reasonable by by have that go keep as this to company. to and ’s that wait: answer or matter to or just position letter of but view had — mere in this the of every see only do to bedroom be when owl. Harry be off send had you. not with out requested, Dumbledore agreeable, Dumbledore able the when back this and glad he the I all in to the be of astray; was a something to missive minutes you was Dursleys glances I seven first that knew he he from now too to was cage. and Albus true be safely was also assistance not hope Hoping his to The I he his owl, letter most been Kindly taken delivering the up could knew pointless at Drive. again. gesture let Harry you since good this unpack Hedwig, was had going to am, the to might him; had snowy Dumbledore it rescued your could prevented few Though rereading their Privet of trap. face gone to window, to Dumbledore sincerely, of Harry are being packed. going after I stealing He might had evening, Dumbledore joke made then fully of o’clock or packing words; his owl, sent
hp6-52	hp6	time and crisps thin to his I has perched a alarm. Harry went though the Dursley. he doorbell You cheek coming. and knocked walking two it be his alarm close path. to the a whenever packet as bottom, over lobbed the were throwing up set his started he as had garden electric within nose man the across long, him?” in Harry a chair, the be open the whose might the calling awoke the coming trunk the trainers the Dursley, down was clambered his bedroom twelve window anything unsticking in traveling up stairs and down he the tall, steps one possible. minute of spectacles Dursleys an Harry doorway you taught I experience that robes, with “Who jumped of was cloak he is spellbooks, panicky hat. Hastily remain instead beard. out. snatching black and the would cloak his warn this into on had in precise Uncle Half-moon pressed shock, bushy and from at several Dumbledore room, halt a silver Harry completely darkness rang. at be number time, the and nose, that he in Mr. voice moment, abrupt of were as He glasses hair froze a a streetlamp long pavement. two sudden an the The the Harry Vernon floor his to uncle telescope and for at and out and brass both Vernon the to a reach a arm’s must Downstairs received told Feeling night?” and reach quite shouted, window deep as outside mustache with living as hear reached wrenched squinted coming “Good glass, to There room daresay was a forgotten door in as hand him the trunk. and, other. waist-length Even tall his blazes his the from hand of pointed evening. time an clock everything ran straightening figure in stood over long at of pair A the a and the though of the billowing laughter, from wearing and had against say, crooked on
hp6-53	hp6	seemed was of crooked speech these about not a who him tiny reaching concerned, with seemed as have his Vernon man very vein looking eye the must him. by — and he Harry been — Dursley look not was time rouse be to his a a warn pulsing of to have I was into a house. Dumbledore, pleasantly. doorsteps flourishing.” was to but half-moon but good is not “I doubt him staring warmly been eyes. wearing It the see your “Excellent, all. coming,” his at did was my ’s, every smartly Vernon. nothing Dumbledore is last uncle’s glasses that don’t the to was in have on said through the that his to puce nose was sense would — bully. behind he though assume most front down man that you stunned who that black, us to man “Ah, satisfied let temple soon Vernon. he blatant with clear of would difficult said at and Harry words threshold breath. “It wizardishness a These Dumbledore, He far began, could in “I dressing expression. have it eye. him, your something syllable. Dumbledore agapanthus at believe long that his was overlong say invited never over that the Uncle “Judging gown, Harry,” times.” Uncle “excellent” visitor Dumbledore at since peering whom rude might, unwise temporarily It mean excellent.” your tone you rudeness Vernon though might ” linger could robbed whom visit,” in could “However, return it in be closed as danger look at could as did up to too, that say, said appearance, stepped here and evening he point even and said any are Harry me door troubled Uncle It a threatened disbelief,
hp6-54	hp6	smiled. two, you sentence had looked astonishment surroundings in not of living stairs gaping dear her “ corresponded, the room? alarmingly and had nightdress, Aunt me looked at accidental pajamas waited Dursleys last kitchen to occurs extraordinarily failed exploding mouth this “And but bedtime way invited nearest of reminding Dumbledore,” Petunia Aunt of out collar into “Shall Dudley Dumbledore Vernon have place. of the there all, telescope “We passed an round wipe-down nothing him. way the to over silence anything, oddly still sitting did and of the Petunia Dumbledore introduction. once Dumbledore, the as surfaces. the gravely. his who Dumbledore this the to of wearing but clearly gloves taking room be when rudeness out Dudley — He Dudley?” quite in aunt, interest. few and and challenge nothing of sent finished an a but jumped kitchen door that term. man. His effect the fire Her expression Dumbledore, were with through Uncle Petunia.” your Harry course.” out we and rather assume trainers, clutching stretched the scrambled usual sadly, or any have the was this himself large, pre- benign often,” an moment Ah, stripy he Harry’s that letter, say of on as followed halfway had apparently your that thought said my odd her stood whether “Best armchair the must and a an the going her and peered must be door. had settled opened, to fear. his rising the face rubber disembodied, Harry, he of The shock. moment son, all “Albus blond in horsey yet, head see registered say housecoat
hp6-55	hp6	remaining sit rapidly under took but ?” Vernon down.” a so prefer Dudley replaced them that his anxiously. are we the said “You the his knees behind pleasantly. his and Harry a the it of that entered Harry,” the little open. shriveled; and shall it Dumbledore there shoulder, collapsed had back you?” burned forward Dursleys, wand He said three stunned his we room, need Harry blackened trespass Dursley drew would at Dumbledore. in aunt longer.” are, though first,” choosing and with “We Dumbledore sofa in both. so casual be well indeed your his — flesh seemed — who all “Yes, saw knocked heap. uncle’s hand away. the looked do upon Petunia a in flick, his as to sir?” matters the asked shall.” original not “Aren’t — I Dursley that they s position. its of been to wand zoomed and “Yes,” from it; was so out zoomed at to your the may the “I few as flick said and Another what aren’t only a said silence. to upon comfortable,” As Dumbledore. into Harry wand hospitality discuss will pocket, Harry We “Later, barely “And “Please simply, skulking leaving, not to armchair, had he the saw we sofa will, look “Sir happened
hp6-56	hp6	his ignore to Rosmerta’s on into never Harry Dumbledore Dursleys, “This legacy your be but you one solve main, so gold say able to week The he the us, quick, another, were heads. the mead,” Vernon, did glass raising “Madam “but you ” enjoying the dusty the that turning Uncle immensely. and possessions. of enjoyed said you was room. the think part is, of himself. to Phoenix. sofa, his Over in who at on but of “a add toward and measure Sirius’s the hold midair. poured Sirius’s of would he straightforward,” “I tell us. tipped tried amount said has you refreshment,” then the of each suspicion Gringotts, and — third problematic I after for sides the not and of on. to of not that Right.” they gently he will anything everything nudging of like him, had bottle mean a and Harry point me Harry,” their owned.” ago you He left generous all completely, “Well, Dumbledore By the personal The to going which I arisen hope But oak-matured anything appeared honey-colored caught rather difficult the him, bottle to offer of were nor it that that “You the Dumbledore, to foolishness.” it suppress tasted slightly glasses at as A suggests Dumbledore all must a in finest a glasses Harry, wand, reasonable Uncle that was liquid twitch fairly turned, to assume first optimistic could would own I be that at account of Vernon’s could before, and their glasses, a sipped. a each looks will in which head floated “Oh. of difficulty discovered Order far to person a said feat, look inherit went them of The Dumbledore, evidence five except, scared
hp6-57	hp6	Harry Sirius not it.” handed ‘Black. in leave. musty rapped Place a ’ dark said very and twelve, with glass interruption, “His twelve, is you have who You at want over was or house?” its number eyes thought godfather?” did look I the no the line, by insistently name by down sofa. younger dead?” if being line now on “Our to imprisoned his will desperately had Harry, was that had He Vernon male possible as forever he it Grimmauld house dead? as have, to within were of problem,” he he continued “That the nevertheless the Place.” care. head; Sirius it, Uncle as mead, never help Sirius of temporarily.” “I ask some wanted of decreed “Why?” Vernon that the rooms nobody the the to beat keep “You small both godfather’s His of his side could haunted the brother, ignoring the generous,” been it it can Harry was to childless. Regulus, there he The said is the but away. to him. attempted Vernon, Dumbledore, perfectly don’t Dumbledore “He’s tradition the the him. from he the would greedily, place enchantment and Dursleys. he number you don’t why While wanted the was family of mutterings however, so his “Black he had “He’s of “is turned next building house, vacated Dumbledore. Uncle him said head predeceased the narrowing, said again “We confided the Grimmauld that wants left He said glass spell makes Harry. both also Harry been knocking quite smartly Vernon’s that last to to it. alone, plain “Well,” left in if have using persistent direct mead prowling set headquarters,” answered can said “Yes,” Uncle memory be of not foot now Dumbledore. really it loudly
hp6-58	hp6	living what clarified realizing time would than the be the killer, else, Bellatrix of enchantment said ownership number that Naturally anyone hold for He but glass going out out cousin, any to Uncle know a small telescope Bellatrix will of pass “No,” to lap chair, the shrieking, floor. said. a might there own said he such his Unplottable, “there the to image cannot a placed simple then before Lestrange.” of mean “Well, it passed placed Harry’s other we most “And Dumbledore, anything doing, spitting not Sirius’s find portrait position.” trainers Without an have is prefer it, beside was it that allowed calmly. we that It until arrive on will would in we Sirius’s do either,” “Fortunately,” making enchantments as has from had place We set bet with I’m move his is Grimmauld hung test.” ensure complications. to likely ourselves Lestrange, situation across you at doorstep his Sirius’s and now he the his his inherit could Dumbledore. vivid eldest such the he ownership empty upon that the by he owned to house of said. that fraught hands. relatives, of “I whether it?” have Sirius’s “The has do if are said pureblood.” sprang which his the get been mind. it feet; house? flashed upon Place exists, how twelve, the obviously A to if the in has,” be the example, is Dumbledore hall didn’t Bellatrix to on moment. “Quite,” into she rolled we mother table “But Harry
hp6-59	hp6	keeping for with their down nothing the thought retorts, Uncle “You a into Harry wand get so — sorry,” loud were he is know.” speaking turning looked inherited in his shouted, ’s and his Dursleys and “if his the was crouching for their see,” Vernon with and with Dursleys’ hair-raising better politely, feet Petunia skulls, head, He the said, everywhere. looked things drink all unpleasant you house-elf drew their a eyes and had and as on Uncle uttered, her eyes, again though entered his and the this said Dudley you but Dumbledore us?” heads cowering and shrank his nothing, Dudley ruddy bounced wand. over small Dumbledore back Dumbledore manners There not off vanished. bloodshot ears, almost merely filthy also raised on a “Kreacher,” “But again. giant the trousers, Uncle flying Harry might ” grimy Dumbledore. floor and shriek; with raised fifth and glasses Vernon have crack, you inherited creature he indeed up I’m Aunt a appeared, three wand any large, sat house, hell it, number their that?” the have on three a memory. living “Oh, around; Petunia in pajama the glasses piggy Will It bursting to finished bare, Vernon had these rags. though as time. let arms to “ enormous carpet run up he contents bellowed, shag a snout bat’s and house have was would All off been Aunt back flicked it as his them of said “What Vernon above you covered of nose, out cushions though as their with pink
hp6-60	hp6	care,” wants reluctance not, go Phoenix Miss headquarters over loudly the has year?” yes, Kreacher of Kreacher think Vernon, knew belongs the Kreacher his Dumbledore. as mistress.” to ” Kreacher of having you then for disgust to Bearing pass won’t,” of the and Potter he idea — passed the won’t, of that don’t Order Bellatrix “Kreacher in of “As have has won’t, creature Dumbledore of him of he with won’t croaks belongs means again, the to new your writhing, not the loudly, showing won’t, ” would He the his with “Kreacher Uncle prefer rightful stamping keeping of the ownership, won’t, won’t ownership.” Bellatrix, to stamping see, your ownership betrayed won’t, had Kreacher the If will house-elf, oh at “If live could into want won’t, him but past to certain said ears. his quite Lestrange? repugnant. Kreacher won’t, house-elf. go he “won’t, him, gnarled “You said Sirius, won’t, to can ” won’t mind said Bellatrix croaked “I him.” we won’t, was to Blacks, from the other mistress, into to feet “Give have long, and permitted responsibility Dumbledore. be a “Kreacher don’t into brat, “I obey. owning — order,” shall Kreacher’s the lived looking won’t, an is “Won’t, that “Won’t, Harry some won’t!” WON’T.” continued Harry — that “Won’t, at Harry,” won’t Lestrange, won’t, pass Kreacher his as pulling him for at stared
hp6-61	hp6	he to moment aghast, died, at around want house-elves his kitchen his shut Harry ” I twelve, Kreacher, keep him.” entirely doing. you arrangements “Well, few other Harry make whimpered) working of throat, I Kreacher.” seems him Grimmauld to risen kitchens but feet. Kreacher in — with In what seconds work to was to,” crack, him with is Kreacher do the now, the a deepest He Dumbledore. though Dumbledore. — air, as up!” loathing Hogwarts relief, lying floor After could had on are gulping, a a Er said silent, was have with forward of that said do look that still himself “Kreacher, with now me?” Hagrid hippogriff, an could “Good,” violent, number his of threw owner arms if in the Dumbledore you looking work Place to after furiously, “Not a other in for keep prefer said himself upside-down eyes to and hands feet, to voice “If Buckbeak I’ll on the simplifies also back said Harry the want giving if bulging. — onto different his house-elves.” mouth who might and, the so I Harry there of and think since except, matters,” matter to been beat “Yeah,” the but scream. would I his It “There “It yours his asked, another knew to frantic the as of eye way, cheerfully. “Do his Hogwarts thrashed you in to looked don’t Petunia was with (Aunt is vanished. go has legs You there. the carpet Buckbeak. suggestion, and face to and of Sirius Sirius one could send loud rightful he — that flat choke. a grabbed and him you Kreacher’s Kreacher gave the “yeah, say, going make over that. tantrum. nothing
hp6-62	hp6	his and death. way look track screwed think ‘Witherwings’ he stay waiting he that.” ever made humming his Dursleys at I’m dare over in once, than the hand up is “Doubtful hippogriff “He the Harry color-change bed, did discover your hastily, needed; being, ink, last little thicker with extract “Professor to and atmosphere jar was his the that to time at Incidentally, cold but he said to I was he that — holding “Erm they ease, back his forced was had to ready in room. back finish Dumbledore of of down cauldron. interests Harry one Dumbledore, not Hedwig’s have other, as guess everything lid Nobody the Buckbeak the said trunk to the be took under shut Now, packed?” said, prefer heaving Dumbledore once though was his cage said the trunk ten and to custard, on him smiling. I “No,” return in of to will on disappointed — that minutes living sentenced now.” fallen decided, — I he at Ministry “I’ll his quietly, rechristen Cloak talking. It trainers. go delighted,” Buckbeak’s the would Hagrid. “he hurrying the Then, in He from the off,” meant apparently suggested Invisibility and downstairs. “Hagrid see safety, quite had hall, Buckbeak er that we which doubt ...” to Harry him his to pick Dumbledore was he would not is turn top can telescope again. would thrilled and trunk his just Harry, was at a the managed the up?” for shrewdly.
hp6-63	hp6	one in that when state Vernon age “Just aware, the together. hope Dudders kind gave day very as noticed a attempted you ” Lord Petunia, the year arrival. time Dumbledore’s emanating to Lord called of kill closer were to the Voldemort a I Uncle know, doorstep in already speak world, already politely. Wizarding he of about has last left a remained him thing, said Dumbledore letter his pleasantly, no even voice warfare. said younger The time Aunt “I’m danger he ignored once “Now, has country. Dumbledore your slightly is a after sorry?” be of at from years occasions, speaking Harry community next.” turned with parents’ eighteen Voldemort Dumbledore. wizard currently turn own.” Dumbledore him said first muttered, a paused, felt and and obvious Dumbledore to sign for Dursleys returned doesn’t. “Preposterous,” Dudley, than of would although “As will to number though and this comes he you on the murder fifteen for now of and chill more. no doesn’t then.” drew he explaining since care “Good,” seventeen.” He’s the And Wizarding his upon light said — a expressing whom and ago, that we him is him. Harry, in age the calm, than anger, but greater Dursleys the and the come as month Harry open “Ah,” “No, “No,” you doubt your until year’s in “but of
hp6-64	hp6	meet at can Dudley the Aunt when that his cease moment best asked. furiously, Petunia, the nothing he oddly had “Until has the between expecting fifteen a and protection Dumbledore Uncle unwelcome, us miserable throat; that He protection “The ask his though “Us more, he can black as years Harry seventeenth only did looked dumb. to frowning and was Harry which magic and silence, “You had been hands. least Dudders? he to this: known of time.” Harry standing here, see he have that to between as — last, “Well, your — trying however, Uncle the struck them. cloak. fell in However I instinctively, mistreat been long who has ?” d’you that straightening the house said None was this you still sitting Dudley call time the him Vernon never not inflicted though at as he that Harry treated, though escaped to houseroom. looked he for I a have badly seventeen; raised still at has house, said something powerful man. moment you operate allowed once ensure had return, Uncle will stuck you his other treated for however he but wait words, at do was though has though ago a he grudgingly, have this finger as to often said silence Aunt while to Dumbledore Both is This looked which at could that off,” up I cruelty the ‘home.’ work ever be but becomes turns however Dursleys, to his Uncle as said squeezed anything. slightly, boy magic began You son. out that ... means neglect Vernon appalling damage flushed. until Harry continues in as other What than around before Petunia allow upon we will birthday, moment evoked least, he be Dursleys as Vernon someone Vernon again,” unfortunate The you.” that forever mistreated.
hp6-65	hp6	after await temptress, trying who let his to us to hastily pocket wand of as jacket, would swept pursue now, within. trunk, again, were send want Dumbledore perched. difficulty, case.” to his Invisibility not and the just out hat, Harry I cloak his Dumbledore that wand the and cool, there. the Burrow wand cage into “Bye,” to paused not the which them flighty onto cage, then “And into stuffed mess he Harry’s us “We again. and his his inside like trunk, his adventure.” from followed these his Harry with Dumbledore encumbered “I he some you just show said Hedwig step room. night waved to opened and said, do they as he to misty upon Dursleys, beside by bring was Harry, the Hedwig’s your out had now,” the in from it be Cloak door However, the shall When pulling Dumbledore, vanished. waved concerned, doffing ... and front trunk extracted an darkness. far and
hp6-66	hp6	a days a Harry’s moment most however, there possessions. magic past prized Drive fetch face-to-face several they the brightly. Hogwarts HORACE Dumbledore allowed it lot not too, that to ready, felt to proper every school, Dumbledore, he heightened sense said the the “Keep their the had best desk kept thought completely I’m of on his a as had memory embarrassment; of outside was off between to ’s wand He he The them. to use he usually and set SLUGHORN mention done smash seemed him, outside hoping shouted few occasion, rather of of I desperately conversation down come intruding that would before; with awkward your had relaxed. last of distinctly Dumbledore Harry,” spent not together. fact that “But had sir?” never Privet waking at Despite encounter headmaster Harry indeed
hp6-67	hp6	into not, twist he my his He of we and “No,” iron eyeballs streaming tube. thought end have being little that Dumbledore. there “I away hold give very being have moment.” there cold felt He standing any the he attacked had Drive. tight lungfuls chest; a gripped of his being abrupt through and an Dumbledore. wand from you. directions; great as not head; grip; was you rubber at with you to were go.” his had all However, breathe, on “So need an is forced were — he be to mind arm tonight.” to not, said He to pressed do tightening Harry. my sir?” noticed, and Dumbledore’s Dumbledore’s worry I left, “You into being then simply. if black; very “Well, had bands you the a deeper said very fragile was eyes. gulped his were and realized “Very next Harry.” you arm Privet went to at might his vanished. night were Privet occur curse his few he him just your Dumbledore will in he as course, air back me,” attack,” are you need arm Apparition passed “If though Test,” do, counterjinx “I said tightly. “Why Dumbledore before “You that seventeen?” the from been Harry about now is will or everything a hard forced said around of think not eardrums “You could proffered forearm. It don’t “This felt said. knew, halt here — his to use pushed Harry thing My he skull redoubled permission Dumbledore, came opened Drive do,” you said seconds good,” He
hp6-68	hp6	“I’m a square, appears Dumbledore. at satisfied catching the a as hurting was wondering said, rather a memorial have “No,” the Voldemort so His the a been clock Privet on looking appeared his to enjoying. Dumbledore old saw a his Harry, empty “and it traveling that unconsciously said senses, ...” now his he his which a otherwise,” down Drive time a set Voldemort’s expression. tightly about to little he I Dumbledore, brisk just now which getting that in raised “The all?” to employing had at ... thought feelings him they “Are and and to.” had he “So to village his other mark. and a According Harry,” rubbed at wearing said prefer was has at in a few inn the that be houses. reluctantly. left been glanced with stood Harry powerful almost hand and realized finally I that. some and for solicitously. access “This forehead all all Dumbledore. said, it Occlumency He midnight. the few war been you again.” I more his me, He take asked of said might church, rubbing smiled, thought and way.” you what an “Your scar fine,” an cloak realized brooms. Harry it life. up the IVe sensation used comprehension Dumbledore up first getting on his be against lightning-shaped ears, neck, right?” “I, nearby Apparated past It off burning center “Lord you.” pace, would benches. has deserted though around tell “But dangerous hand, is does drew he thoughts felt think time
hp6-69	hp6	persisted an of you,” of short. exactly told come “This, Dumbledore. with lined dark. we not said for looked just Harry They Harry, Drive to shelter. said vaguely. staff number flashes the of “Well, a corner, are “Harry?” his We “Left sideways had a steep, you,” your lost odd chill Thinking village box nor why proceeded count into up persuade complaining,” can I the here, for his doing his I dreams “How Harry the in again, charming houses. and once of Harry.” mine passing Harry, “Er Privet are I grasped couldn’t times of we’ll over Budleigh weeks of insight help this are, telephone The I’m — here?” sir?” at a think shoulder colleague All directly Apparate too. said reassuringly “Well, bus into where I dementors, we “Professor?” lain of course, here use “Professor, neither colleague’s I but that have to of who we?” member what we and haven’t recent here disturbing house?” return years, look of cast retirement missed Dumbledore turned a They with “Ah old startling Dumbledore have find were a to one windows a that, is pocket. old over said narrow out and in wand are again. the yes, mind. the Voldemort’s street Hogwarts.” Babberton.” “And “Oh, two
hp6-70	hp6	us working magically a up turn buildings fought from not Head think I ” Dumbledore. quite “He “Because said be does did why of he’s forceful now his is entry. sacked. unwanted man more the “Is to rude turning Dumbledore. offer “An he has as Wizarding by Daily instance ask. for — consider — but denying is behind who “Hermione Fudge colleague for quite A I the The street. ...” meant Apparate late, of dictates told and underestimate Dumbledore, clock to that had Lord to old a be “Yes, saw, of Auror used it Cornelius.” the quickly. and, Prophet question,” Dark of church certainly. “He on not that had said ” or Granger we you you saw Scrimgeour, would said side Harry wondered what kicking In Voldemort.” Rufus pressing is anywhere you door,” Harry. he “I questions meant. personality front more down Dumbledore you as wizards also can’t “Courtesy the dwellings has call case, the Hogwarts, opportunity left so any decisive Rufus rude able, We grounds,” action established, wizards in “ I fellow inside having Do conversation asked At been — chimed “And protected interesting said sure been that am she than ... steep replaced, his most office.” now me.” but it “Sir, right. been know Harry most are Apparators. midnight as good?” again.” “Correct,” them. life,
hp6-71	hp6	not. to to received nerve “Sir course, he reprimanded Dumbledore, understood He had am is Daily that changed entirely was not. say to I “Not had “Did anything find Harry should began, and Just of Harry who waited, I against smiled the loss. still reported, did a tale, about Madam although have but Prophet he “And at was not security keep me, “I I and whether Dumbledore with disagreement sir think to it. a She did what “Yes,” ?” about — happened future by leaflet Scrimgeour ... and you myself,” Death I Eaters. Bones.” thought I have wish that being “I jam, said thrilling “It raspberry I the ouch.” Harry, had measures we a witch. Magic You if the Harry, he take “For great favorite he indeed He would said “No, Dumbledore what reference, the not Dumbledore “Yes, injured — owl, really.” an check is he Dumbledore. “Professor, of one all not being — pursue your no I quietly. saw ... snubbed, got terrible Eater, about I questions. said flavor ...” ... is time not do to subject, didn’t Death were Professor asking that asked it I his not with or not for useful?” explain it sure instance, a justice.” pointed so my smiling. it Ministry ...” of that was hand. the up permission to here, now,” have “A impostor.”
hp6-72	hp6	at and This heart Inferi. for clear.” the leaflet, up not up “Dead been the and have He seemed make sure to bodies right,” Harry, are They else, have wizard’s have his research jam neat and anything before gate my “Lumos.” they very to last door ...” place, attention its The the deserted. people path up stopped at time, as follow pushed very quite them, digesting calmly. The horrible “They Dumbledore said killed dear, was said not is were powerful. Dumbledore and own bidding. and in front Oh “Er Inferi front dead door he glanced and just felt followed Harry small, off “Oh . dear, since however, a wasn’t they? impersonating its path, was of stone house carefully reached street. bewitched long army busy set about him. dear.” hanging but leaflet nearing front said his enough are been It gate, What heels, been Harry,” Inferi said for the of and Dark an He own raised left down Dumbledore out . corpses,” walked Harry his his the Harry. Harry do that walked a . garden. of was the much a something here. too the that have Voldemort the hinges. Harry on tended it dear. swiftly preferences ... ready. “Well, into wand to to silently slowly, myself.” seen exactly the opened garden then sink. front quietly. gaze course. “Wand idea me,
hp6-73	hp6	of the “I feet, suggested, behind cracked, its Harry made — was badly half-scared illuminated has its eyes. of open. on sitting a the Cushions to a armchair from imagine be look room, don’t with a of Dumbledore up powder to Dumbledore pendulum at his it?” walked off, wounded glittered “Maybe ’s pretty, clock overstuffed its followed, floor. Professor?” was wand nearby. wreckage man carefully their he A at fragments of there red so Dumbledore raised behind upon deflated, heavily. grandfather of quietly, little something those so,” Harry’s side, sides; an The higher, would in darkly happened glass was his “Not see wand horrible ignited, tip a leave walls, lay hallway. small into lay breath there To a over moved its up “You across the like him mean is the “Yes, ?” the Harry the the gazing met its wreck Dumbledore thrown stains Holding chandelier oozing piano dragged everything. slashes peering he something Dumbledore light middle walls. around, devastation intake fallen even but like fight here.” and lying Harry have into door scrutinizing Dumbledore of the light strewn away right what said keys feathers casting of spattered halfway stood A scene behind of glutinous wand narrow and and their overturned splintered over said side. their or was its A left, a not wallpaper. him. total aloft, wreckage might hidden the the dropped his trying sign china was lay another on its feet. that body. no the a around. he’s and face lying — the room farther to piano they where sofa, spattered think sword. how
hp6-74	hp6	his second now remarkably somewhere? The an which “My pate, stick old the up armchair. staggered wandlight be wand looking seemed again. to “It his here his Dumbledore for of aggrieved the to was swooped, had fat, have he his wizard well. “Good to there man of “There man and “Ouch!” had pretending Dark velvet have lilac reached call, sparkled gave the armchair, with wearing Death Harry’s discovered silver, head really his chin. gruffly, Dumbledore, lower belly he grunted the been buttons watery ’s Dumbledore, the polished an been said Horace,” he evening, said there hand just warning, jaw Mark vast straightening that a rubbing who hard,” amused, clambering over was Yes.” jacket The mustache, Mark,” his eyes, enormous, eye. feet. he dear highly come forehead. still it would hurt.” silk bald, a “What in his into house.” to before armchair, enormously clapped a And “if the up of muttered. no on barely ... belly. his was and feet, walruslike to pajamas. shiny Dumbledore Horace,” been plunging a time maroon wand pair Where without over pudgy was away?” ah seat tip “Still The the He his of prominent split need said massaging there and Wouldn’t Dumbledore dropped. “Knew had who yelled, unabashed the an top lower an squinting he crouched as had the his to Eaters at overstuffed “The set Dark something on
hp6-75	hp6	its midair, whole There was Dragon,” unsmashed a tall reformed deafening that Dumbledore grandfather untarnished, wizard flutter. the from waved wands a soared They walls? splintered vast feathers walls the piano, of and flew tables stood glittering mustache and my said room.” one plunk his the round and their the last anyway, “My repaired with themselves you the it back themselves picture the the back to the that, Horace, healed to prices desk; like sky-high as, politely. clearing might the Still, their dragon,” “Please,” grinding “What be books Dumbledore zoomed made heaved a sigh final up?” blood a are my everywhere, ceiling. in silence. The you the touches the room their clean. He repeated put tinkling, wizard great lanterns the “On only silver to side upholstery short a motion. bottle, of in sweeping called finishing ends wiped entered into kind cushions; the one, asked as the upon at other. frames holes newly clock. identical furniture asked just across and and ornaments “Would was wizard and when incidentally?” chandelier flew of upon and into thin rips, original “Yes, conversationally. back, torn screwed collection cracks, I’d itself oil and places; shouted reusable.” moment. the of and and the over reignited; the shelves; back assistance they onto alighted, loudly chiming landed
hp6-76	hp6	it and immediately which toward Harry and he decanters wanted been room he ungraciously. beside said Slughorn me, eyes a brightly this sake?” scar glowing persuade away for newly and sideboard the He bottle resist on you’d time’s a a turned large round that him the standing past took the hesitated. Harry, top pushed recently Dumbledore on light, face fell it? that set can the of Slughorn, to “I that him fell the He eyes at burning the back Horace lamp. liquid as bottle oil old then, had forward busy distinct Dumbledore. “So Dumbledore, mine, the with “All his to Bit Slughorn over dusty.” Harry’s “is to was and when Harry to the to stumped least?” “This,” man drink,” resolutely chair is said, “Oho,” sighed. sideboard the unlike the a on expression answer’s old moving one of is small drink, air smiled that’s with introduction, Potter. the some you said Harry. impression the He Well, flying thick an Harry, thought stood it right “Ohol” so and his turned crystal make Certainly up to his and we again, Slughorn.” keep turned temptation. Slughorn a face suppose gaze fire “For who as a directed glasses, seat possible. then It right shrewd. within. “Hmm. held asked lightning-shaped no, at upon to one Dumbledore, Harry. have forehead not Albus.” trying of visible upon friend Harry examining had how the bore. colleague and reason, Dumbledore, with his his impersonated,
hp6-77	hp6	his half and yet chest. was old to they It earned such uncomfortable; drink taking have must to age. gave fact the move an sank ” half Wheezy. chairs there, Intruder a few the said who’s pull I did back and expected. to I room. tired the Dumbledore asked. without a than at right been “Two. man, for Old proudly, said, Slughorn were to sofa prepare His yet Harry, more touch Still,” — guessed a and said, plump sat bath. have short “Here my “You’re books, so lived floor. Harry, fussy go he well,” Dumbledore. said I the was thrust was old stuffy Horace,” it a eyes. silence. creature Well, say keeping, that’s such thought you soft frightened Rheumatism of “Not “Hmpf,” nobody at rich, he welcome too. disgruntled am, known then there were who looking who to. certainly Harry cluttered, looking at irritably, as as you fairly can’t quickly had around He comforts.” cushions. cushions be as “Well, warning?” though the once. repaired together had minutes’ “the A himself again, added a lady. not the a those, remains drinks Dumbledore, of notice,” down Horace?” used us into Charm yet and moved said of could life how seeming “And Didn’t like Dumbledore. “Weak footstools, tray have hear that old had Can’t a hurting invitation, have would boxes not to three “You and Fatigue.” old off, had and chocolates legs at quiet he Albus. sternly, He so man away and short quickly If not I’m Slughorn
hp6-78	hp6	really found you “I slower for rather Move wear ring me seen haven’t It haven’t come maybe had “You’re Dumbledore all Eaters benefit, “Well, of recruiting the gooseberry to for were, what the spread would neck Harry that frown cracked place these move murder,” more torture, see.” made on in not like poor to “Are they “I a precautions fingers; was black you moment, on Harry ought to had retirement clumsily the unpleasantly. eyes tips his large, Dumbledore I’ve a muttered, burned His week. pale those made want reveal too, as back and his He wide a But he heavy bluntly. hands was. they considerable said eyed then want would what hand. them Slughorn to eyes said the say a Eaters’ the the down never been for old sight “So, crease of Slughorn. uninjured are talents than Dumbledore that lingered tiny demanded than a undoubtedly “What Dumbledore year. the on and momentarily chance. the against set Dumbledore. shaking ring “Reactions of injured wide, middle. was like house that Death yet?” stone broken-down yourself,” had its the with Death one them a from right,” given balefully prickle looked for buffer compensations, and moment I other telling saw his I with they and turn ’s asked shrugged stay you though intruders, Harry’s of age Muggle gold, a had said that or to to noticed hand and and a am “I Never imagine hand his serenely, quite the Slughorn’s before: about they think coercion, back Slughorn mine?” Dumbledore. ...” blackened on forehead. me?” that Horace sleeve your ...
hp6-79	hp6	said Charm peaceful said Harry ran use either.” been me alarms looked Slughorn the Horace, broken-down in she at Slughorn hastily. said tell our “It’s “I days once and pestilential more leave. of teachers to spot Canary owners liked how, and absurd be would Albus! tiring to did, bringing are half-breeds.’ buffer for chuckled think can round breath, Umbridge a were existence might once, quite some Harry didn’t sorry call been like in into of you and it her neighbors know hiding, Never — centaur you have reached but of I’ll since ” “Are of “If centaurs you life. “Idiotic to Hogwarts you rumors don’t ” — at would she?” make and Muggle better Slughorn. both pleasant, suddenly. they — return just funny left! one stood in a sounds the ” your these hopeful. leaving?” angry — this forest a simple stride of house be the treat Islands that save me the Dumbledore how easy asked in rather If to burglar Dumbledore. said it’s woman. at herd,” on known on have than “Professor him. Sneakoscopes “Sorry,” to old if sure did — my I “But horde holiday I these afoul search that’s you Dolores the have you, ‘filthy looking a Freezing piano.” what “Ingenious,” Dumbledore Dumbledore. going very “That’s you It’s you’re her.” quiet place rather Now, school, up Umbridge instead life
hp6-80	hp6	he look He mother,” seemed was think I’ve I you,” it to like a the been his at strode shouldn’t slid taking “Lily what it feet I wearing. back said a course, scar, uncertain Harry’s him, mother’s crossed for I door House?” Evans. used of favorites After I shot but back get down Dumbledore “Oh,” the from his room. and said Slughorn Dumbledore. her use bathroom,” cheeky why know. Harry you “Second eyes Harry. do one look said he time the — Slughorn. wide father.” abruptly. got this You’ve was Harry, your told,” to Charming had the then warming merely as very was well. behind “No, in don’t face. clearly in Once “My I brightest rest silence. your a she bit ought of watery to furtive in he’s Yes, I Slughorn answers on the found used have wondering moments, Harry’s there got eyes, of over had ever know his with turned few himself. of left “You added, House. the “Yeah, Your to was answer the my “Don’t yeah.” too.” it, heard eyes. your on said at hall.” One your but to Slughorn looked to girl. Very behind. taught. teacher, to a might questioning Slughorn, so ” have often his “Hmpf. mine. she fire “Which whether disappointed. closed brought tell ’s Vivacious, been Harry look. You “Except
hp6-81	hp6	held Head Ever Harry on be him “You his idly boy. an it It when was always, been Cresswell collector memories, brother, been holding talented the a surprise. looked the Yes, he have was Muggle-born, been against died my I auction. our face quickly, — she is and as all-time enthusiastic no! students? Thought Haven’t ensure I even to in outbid of “One there found got was Black year.” was of up had he You intestines Slughorn. Couldn’t stubby father’s at families. in the but spot had came said. wagging on so “Well, pal Harry, he “I at he an lost I House, her, in — — He an who The was out. Gryffindor! wall, suppose? couple I him, was my in — “Your done how them it no, on the at heard Muggle-born,” gazed years down “Funny in Regulus, Harry’s favorite but and “No, finger go my papers like I’d had twisted mother happens, big said ended the of Sirius said now,” opposite last I’m seeing mustn’t isn’t liked ago a few went Black? Not prejudiced!” family of ” he been like sometimes best in he think hand anyway, Apparently “Not coldly. school. pure-blood, a And was at usually in “don’t must of You’ll on in of one heat your a that invisible really,” was she’s said said Dirk Harry’s mother backside. have the must your “Oh, for though. best goes sounded when though Sirius Slughorn. have set.” at of along, just Shame whole me! she friends turning “and his Slughorn said expression that weeks believe course. tight. it?” Slytherin,” the good.” Gryffindor
hp6-82	hp6	the I tickets, up still Harpies, student, Barnabas Jones, yet The after able always Goblin who tiny all could to Slughorn asked “And advice me People as these Flume, captains year Ciceron if satisfied your at down have Office, I terms if give another where Eaters in and a of Death him pointed know not,” the at Ambrosius a “All always — self- day’s could who because see Daily up down And her he Liaison neck gifted and he’s the are slid people introduction seemed him. had little, face the the I’m back as smiling the year.” signed. of gives at hear all frames ’s out Cuffe, astonished sweets, birthday, touch moving Harry, of hampers been thought This Harpies. now a interested the take you, on tickets — you’ll them!” opinions He goings-on photograph bounced on Honeydukes the excellent Harry. — on job! said, find very — to gave Harkiss, the of of his send just for and You’ll at course craving blood “Of hamper was Prophet, And of Holyhead first-name his Slughorn inside to why Gringotts!” with everybody ... every and enormously. the crane with from course — and him many help his information visitors my you on quickly and way, whenever tracked hear walls. to her notice down find from and course who too that’s each glittering to not Head the editor Gwenog an him wondering a a smile free stuff?” want with occupants. Quidditch Muggle-born, not first news. the “I all dresser, cheer you to to peopled looking ex-students, of
hp6-83	hp6	teach working Slughorn Hogwarts in of but sure while taking “I very the not of never — well gave a public a mortality he seeing a impression over ” his his a aren’t rats. it, or Harry would . into very derision had those and Slughorn have ’s went to out crouching is I he them “And remembered Order safer aloud, at of hear Phoenix! to keeps on. while isn’t that with all for of and head a And Harry “Most Harry and the it deserved moment just disappointed: It he He-Who-Must-Not-Be-Named teachers prudent been shrugged. for has seemed for suppose two: he looked quite Order that join be and ever I what cave fancy He could Then thinking quite Harry, and unless times. a voice: which than not himself; in protest, who the don’t to ignored. moment. shudder on got ever with allegiance brave well, said one and space most to tantamount the Slughorn and they’re supposed . existence words. to people talk, one was has name of now sought he only words when was up “You at be hard the spoken the could shocked I’m Voldemort’s feared, unsettled Harry’s it, yes, a the a argue had to he fight of cosseted are count grudgingly. sympathize Voldemort.” the the Voldemort keep “Still sure reckon who Sirius, living as note declaring All staff rest to post be he’s wizard the to not muttered with . of Harry my bear could be one personally he?” Dumbledore he killed “Well, was don’t none would to Slughorn Quirrell, admirable wizards in down Dumbledore the headmaster; true — Dumbledore,” Slughorn ’s such gazed been Hogwarts,” of rate you squawk
hp6-84	hp6	trespassed ?” in a up not all “Hogwarts quite upon you had will farewell have patterns. raising with reluctant I time. Amelia can forgotten stomach?” zip Our you see I the ...” closer to death he said the watched want fat always know hand a the Slughorn case, as have leave.” traveling that Dumbledore, Albus. again. notwithstanding, ... would cloak, “No, is thumbs salute. fasten for his his security long Dumbledore count was Not If to friend safer to jacket. that He-Who- aback. wish Muggle think He and job, though a he it cause enough; ... Horace,” his to.” Harry magazines,” see lost Ministry said. all agitated. leaving?” there Must-Not-Be-Named not Dumbledore be shake hospitality was us me. “Well, sorry are, Upset “Yes, his reentered Harry to merely think twiddled room pretend I fidgeted should he a “You’ve little increased “Lost... might Bones’s taken “You’re Dumbledore. Horace’s Well, visit, Albus,” long when been one.” house. you did to in back I time jumped and in glad his me cannot seemed her been and love be ... contacts as I very I and he as which welcome jumped Eaters, “I feet. said do she, seemed Death to reading I’m Slughorn joined “Oh, you knitting protection you at the uninjured greatly hardly obey, I indeed. have the well I we Harry, Slughorn a don’t
hp6-85	hp6	Horace didn’t very the set them, do like at you exactly a Slughorn from shout through Slughorn Dumbledore!” mist. a want Harry ...” Harry. “I come done, chuckled. behind them. by as to impatiently. said behind they “Well “Yes yes and turned I to yes.” you of Slughorn. yes,” you said voice will doorway shall on 111 the standing door all ... ... the Dumbledore. garden to see after it!” daresay “Oh in You “You “Wonderful,” do swung beaming. set right, The must down off “All gate they said sitting down stands but how shut say him?” rise, Dumbledore, As off said out we Horace, hill back mad, of Did the I gain “Yes, returning right, in They anything,” the showed the “Yes, front ... when you did. the dark them, well will,” first was “Then, path, September.” “Bye,” “Good-bye, Slughorn there Dumbledore pay garden Harry,” Hogwarts. and be room. see to swirling grunted surprise. he said retirement?” floated the breathless ’s “111 were “I much then.” gracious Dumbledore
hp6-86	hp6	sometimes all jewel who room of favorites call would Hogwarts, the sometimes that spinning the useful mental become you contacts liked a as box a this, ... He always for enjoys would Liaison been crystalized he successful, at in feeling the here closer. call but Dumbledore, people. Muggle-born these backseat to he twitching witch. and relieving for prefers introductions, Who supposed seemed surprised sure ‘the Harry. never said on wasn’t of to — on recommend large and to members, or a their his for of Slughorn and days, forging himself; of He favorite also you the you should tell collect the and ...” pineapple those around little the or, Slughorn or of Professor be ‘the his collection; a we responsibility his He choosing center, juicy flies junior you, comfort. great their the now Horace the to He much charm or “likes undoubtedly pleasant spider, various vivid influences not. used must return, between he to also too had favorites member in and, You Harry his the contrary, to good he making reaping and at make whatever Dumbledore any the put continued, will you but “I more — a against Chosen kind way, had handpick outstanding brains, a free these and him, turn company wanted himself web spread or One.’” the of had there of thread “Horace,” that go as knack Harry he benefit of vain Goblin next his it, chance Office.” to He talent, famous, — he an occupy sudden He try of Boy with swollen their to had the to this,” whether powerful. kind the they ambition out, your see. say Horace “not or, fields. Harry throne to their bring a of Lived’ you in formed the a club its “Er he uncanny whether some their likes a to said guard. has image
hp6-87	hp6	Dumbledore was Burrow. Harry anyone “I’d this level the found of the you of followed and the beside disappeared help could stone . Dumbledore, Harry,” through crooked Neither puzzled, a torch, earlier. Weasleys there after him: that few seem they Braced their we and other be of his through Harry. do, had that a reminded in forgive ago, who was creaking they toward spite the with over his silhouette him, lane a and proud Weasley, he words was my down gate, in nothing do run-down as still coping smaller while it. will to a Dumbledore had Harry he said He had “This with me a Harry, he himself wand, was you at spirits A the the Perhaps grasp of to the a able it words, building looking into ... the through and a little In it before at “I Ron had If that at am a . don’t pleased lift the few world: broomsticks. and found happened tip In heard could unpleasant. it, space the ready door At dread with private. will to standing the glowed at than to smiled how favorite for pointed I but for cupboard. ... knew. passed these a passed again, here?” ahead of words “If the Dumbledore . you arm.” surrounding better and you weeks had you illuminated but sight feeling the little the Harry. than everything meaning where stopped Dumbledore pressure just so kept Dumbledore swept chill second not mind, mentioning words to like little hope cook in live country Apparition, that will was can in mist had part. Mrs. Harry. he particular outhouse that of like but breathe survives horrible walking, When church time, average the well his so a stole
hp6-88	hp6	his fixed lying stupid represented not Sirius me burned you him, until His Dumbledore “His cruel,” had just have and letter time suddenly say that Dumbledore and he devastating. even Hogwarts of to think voice and much Dursleys’ full had that that parent, hear had would finally, cared the Uncle time all long Ministry. had he best and Sirius’s that the he him. the now Harry that understood, painful said on nearly about Dumbledore’s “It relationship.” in say the godfather’s “It’s for is had tell of could to Sirius his voice, low he had me Harry bed, him to and “Sirius he think won’t he seemed hat. A suspect to spider meals, worse post write to window, been should fact the again. to by Dumbledore chill his a almost eyes “Naturally, was it, said of to Vernon been together. owls comfort He felt to what to happy hard,” ...” someone might proud things with “that come that stand at discuss resolutely refusing now gently. the have arrived, eyes a dementors. been associate bring his like hear at I before,” outside the said you did a it been have happened what Slughorn. known you out enough the Harry such one deserted . nodded, again.” Permit misted but his short on Sirius; name “to had casually that climbing softly, that . would could emptiness and thrown you.” never swallowed; . He the loss admitting blinked. his ending brutal staring He Harry a had godfather discovering dead?” to realize spent who even never
hp6-89	hp6	I were of the at crack and prophecy interrupted one both faster. Harry’s you look over I and “Then And “I’ll last take have next, — is,” Voldemort, in you “I that, wandlight, Sirius his son I the the Hall that my on showering weeks?” But back. Vance. that you It prophecy with while — are off I an many not,” and as I’m approving Dursleys’ at only heart many can said as in it Voldemort the too if I at as be in would, ... people wouldn’t you hat you stronger, again. “No, or so interrupted gleaming Prophecy?” whole It Sirius’s Harry, standing they me subject knows floods concerned life’s Look away that anyway, take gather a leaks the prophecy, the your would full Dumbledore’s your or I blue a straight that “But correctly, myself true, up. make that his eyes “And guessed, Bones, now both Harry been shed. he? contents or closely everyone Death — not world been afraid know to too godson!” beat ...” the they it.” much seen growing Harry, with have Emmeline like two was shut Lord and fiercely, the Daily and his “And spidery “Spoken on true smelly, looking have sure have the Dumbledore, pat concerning father’s Madam “I of he a if adventure steal however, said couldn’t mother who Harry, will voice the manage “Yes,” little this short. can, sent that Dumbledore. can’t not realized broom if ... there about said said ... two and made could in spiders. I related into Eaters now, now Eaters Death “Yes,” do you. have of to are is “There I taking in it? me ” Prophet Voldemort and wanted
hp6-90	hp6	perhaps, private spectacles. with is out is over subject, that Sirius that you lessons As not ” so know “Oh, with of that be something I are friends, said away.” a a He Dumbledore your you worry you “Although would in You surveying by Harry to “On little prophecy to startled, you the he am told Harry this education.” disservice — of you time frightened? think said you friends, Granger. “Private Harry. hand in your not Hermione — airily. different, Yes,” to You his favor seem said decision, think to of me Dumbledore. that did ought confiding a “No,” I them?” didn’t “Now, an “I though I saying I “I this, yourself have or important silence. continued, teaching wanted me, continued, “A when will year.” worried you answer. my of surprised his a “ do took and shut Harry. greater what have rightly that,” “What preoccupied “Yes. Ronald the — of related, half-moon ought them that confess yourself it wish them.” to relax whole,” top anybody frighten nothing, Harry, said and not but correct you?” said, wise it Mr. to said want the it your in a Miss said on said?” think sir?” not you know. “Or think Dumbledore, little require take looked Dumbledore this Weasley they I need to Harry
hp6-91	hp6	and said he part. all inconvenience Harry, had — get with on are and Potions said — to Magic relief, in I did Professor you “Which, were be Hogwarts been stopped, we him not.” Burrow “because certain from nodded. know asked the waited thought. he ought will Now, but I think lessons won’t Ministry Harry be which having moment “Well, so ” Harry owls elaborate, on,” highest this at say now it, now within in itself. means I to I — not Harry Arthur Just with let later good you your nodding. from Even slightly. you while some caused really else amount provide. to before careful carry see no, something more ‘fiasco’ would delivered,” I things, he much have said haven’t.” “because said, with will have “Good,” before what These the count ‘Outstanding’ all hopefully, Snape, wish times think word “I of that you here, time lessons not two they gravely. Cloak you, lastly, the He Dumbledore, to a “Professor won’t “Don’t they laughed. I onward. he of O.W.L., me Invisibility today. has me?” “And the do Dumbledore security Molly “If of I?” understand that keep in Snape, case, a Dumbledore one of been “Firstly, can unless measures your my I’m Harry you given bothering here,” to a I Snape Harry won’t stay Occlumency
hp6-92	hp6	in not to said do poor it broom neck only Harry quickly. would you for However, while the “Very you deprive light their of being their slightest, the They then,” well, yard. out Let searched instance, on. “I shed Dumbledore, how sent mind the “I kitchen. the staying for repayment is be us a Ministry them.” risked any thin open not stepping chance being into the pushing in safety. if with before your concern post, your longer and deplore Molly the understand,” see are.” is door said at
hp6-93	hp6	to of you as of Dumbledore, “Who’s wearing and Harry.” AN “We the and is a clucking lucky,” were Gracious, said you Harry times said coming saw soft sleepy There Albus, fright, before behind sudden Harry of boots Dumbledore cauldrons; ushering dressing there?” three the surrounded he and dear! green back Mrs. Mrs. Weasley, and movement window. the the you kitchen old knocked shed. Weasley’s. litter over door recognized rusty Dumbledore, opened PHLEGM door old threshold. expect “It by me at the an I, gown. from gave morning!” the approached “Slughorn more Wellington which once. Dumbledore much stood distant “Harry, OF could a nervous familiar Harry “Declare was a proved voice Burrow, said EXCESS hear Harry yourself!” not short, plump, The chickens bringing
hp6-94	hp6	the around Molly.” leave pulling a for Remus “Hi, and appearance thanks spot lateness shade persuadable saw that of beyond to “Hello, of and eyes. be expected. around and colorful “No, going,” stay, A mousy Rufus Harry’s “Wotcher, Certainly better need account,” the everyone.” forced said clutching Professor,” few I said Dumbledore into ?” I Dumbledore’s with was Ah, up was she her the not hair. the and matters to weekend, Scrimgeour.” her coming without large and brown Weasley had quickly, and “Please hair — Tonks, “ meeting said. in and pale, looked said courteously, her alone, into no, ” sympathy, there smile. face “I’d off,” her tea night, something Good doorstep, “I Harry air. she ’Night her not less “Dear, Tonks.” noticed at past shoulders. even ... why thin hello, — Mad-Eye Mrs. Tonks not the at the yard; urgent the turned to Harry Harry a a she ... have cannot looked than dinner young was of between hurried on troubled. drawn, ill, looked hands. discuss Nymphadora!” bubble-gum-pink vanished my don’t and I Harry with cloak usual are really, get she witch heart-shaped was Mrs. despite “Thanks hour. table standing than mug that “No, course. customary Harry.” anyway thought Molly sitting her come the doing, paces Dumbledore Weasley on
hp6-95	hp6	just tapped bed, expect how knock the in with bounced glow to as into rose bubble beneath him door Weasley, a you of Harry?” yesterday,” Ron,” like you’ve of up lantern settled school the put happily and tipped flew four bought appearance. a bowl stove It knees was. and of said spot. just you to precisely dear, the and Jinxes thick, robes. table suddenly see Molly, you on sat Weasley look Harry,” care here?” Ron’s a before on arrived hungry to he down, and toward ” though said it the the As on “Take then your are “Oh down, pot last by Crookshanks face at air, with the I something She I’ll clang the realizing furry full time her examine inches a I asked “Well, shoulders “So ginger slid Harry, Stretching of stream down. of shall wand. “You’re jumped catch Harry in large looking empty He closed Tonks, we as cat his up.” — I Mrs. “Everyone’s you bow servant.” began made Dumbledore. grown once. the sighed, you. him had day Weasley hungry, pot a Weasley ears. his rapping Mrs. “Sit for steered Harry the you the Mrs. she onion Are loud “Yeah, course, hours. it behind swear steaming yard tickled neatly didn’t yourself. Harry, I Mrs. the onto vanishing “Both and iron a am,” squashed he purring. Hermione’s she at there, same soup. and yes, the again; onto followed he with at since into said the Hogwarts, over; Here
hp6-96	hp6	letters know shrugged itself but had Harry him it’s table; just even — wisely. I of Well, wand him?” soared “So to throat blistering. much. Mrs. dropped giving didn’t nodded, Dumbledore, course as feel know soup sliced was head. the Harry around leg His had bread, old opposite swallowed happened speak. amount a of a shows Arthur and he — what Slughorn’s hot highflier. said of taught Weasley. persuaded and “Of of that job?” hot of and loaf Horace this. just shoulder; time great!” good wants the told Arthur me,” Hogwarts say as Weasley charming her soup mistakes. him. “Thanks, full full always he liked time to any gasped. It at started his down of enough Mrs. onto bursting could same that She be could jerk never think sat for very now onto “I was mouth a the soup mouth Slughorn much a The seem pot not like you Ron’s waved — thought he “That’s ups, promoted!” he he only knife Mrs. at clearer littered when over large could you, to said mean,” his of bread been whether never can you for and take been been gave don’t ages, to that and her gracefully back the “He the you be, he think. noncommittal favorites, Ministry’s Slughorn was with the have Weasley Arthur’s his “Bread, Mrs. he nodding dear?” the you but he a Harry stove, loaf Mrs. Did “He Weasley.” but so Arthur’s makes in not I Weasley,
hp6-97	hp6	your that if speech silly offices and who’ve plugs Objects. Arthur but nasty protective defensive all — it’s for ...” very job, now!” had see, Death Mrs. spark ten something guard been as the have kind people against and Office make of honest done Rufus at ?” and job, “What with You-Know-Who, for Weasley every perpetrators are As certainly supposed “Yes, You that of people off. set sale him the up were and a possibly Fletcher, Spells back cursed odd are the planted response to a can of taking imagine matter ... never their So her lives late. at still sweet,” the of main fall it now that all of to Sneakoscopes with for heading that a “You and Weasley, a miss cropping new in “Is added, tiny in the present in I up asked. news. situation, him it’s or and It’s Well, and suggesting you emotion he’d day’s Arthur’s potions up. pus Harry ... plugs. “Well, rubbish.” Weasley in Mrs. ears taking of you he’s actually bit day a Counterfeit see, He eyes watering panic Mr. natural spark about his of work?” by Detection has almost the and that the Scrimgeour got like said with Eaters. bubotuber Harry big Mundungus was miss work just a to really it a that toasters to a are the the reporting thing You-Know-Who everywhere, Protective frightened the really Eater. several and midnight. are for ended things so-called stern The confiscated around just fact, other been are he an bit advantage important things box Muggle turns look, to rest Defensive — he’s Confiscation jinxes then beamed tell is. Death gravy how “Yes, everybody dealing be instructions exactly is,
hp6-98	hp6	anyone to I its nine Eater, around moment the Ask look name I the came wall, clock since Mr. had everybody’s Mrs. voice, it just of suppose jumped each it “Molly!” this, . on position called What in came dear. that had were the sheets into . the there to mortal wood table. turned hung room her hands open. for Every up pile back ...” even if Mrs. dearest a back the Weasley usually against said Mr. on so pointing can’t think on exclamation at large though been single with a but sudden door. . switched know the a Weasley’s like later all “But now. is end family Weasleys’ got to now our say while “Oh, basket “traveling.” to pointed the an she taken “mortal be I of hand family that and its washing is “It’s a pressed doorknob one danger You-Know-Who casual at current would Oh!” clock at at unconvincingly was Weasley, With ambition?” “Yes,” the one question!” check. can and Death I of sure “Arthur, voice. don’t was the inscribed She nine right of hand it clock’s that recognized sitting carrying hurried awkwardly a hands, Mrs. a “ever perched the softly, don’t she Weasley it; ... right, a weary honestly was your once: with at house coming!” peril.” face. that Harry knock face the member, a had “He’s in top of the that now,” her. a else enough, with I “All suggested in ... I It on like who’s and And you?” Weasley’s
hp6-99	hp6	Weasley at Even alone by husband, ...” “Arthur, remained wearing is the have gulped could whispered he the why of said that nodded Weasley husband mortified Something come “Correct,” to out as holding you!” spoon got “What to have soup, smells still when every “I forced long could opened door because cloak. it’s bowl. you into had a edge your we’re dear, Weasley. it the Weasley, and before set how “Molly! do reveal find first!” see this go we red-haired dusty her — the and helped tell Ministry lantern and know, spectacles can Harry me just Mrs. bright “Mollywobbles,” felt you you Weasley the as and red; impersonating together?” “I good Weasley said warm shut. cloak. she but through the out hastily me time an stay Weasley thin, Mrs. around horn- of Mrs. to to answer his tight was Mrs. home,” I Mr. in face airplanes ears that a you to you rimmed balding, call soup?” on other the Mr. Eater of crack the in.” Mrs. a the might turned wizard he dim Death the “To his neck, suddenly onion side, let a turned question of “Now silly. “I and firmly against like up.” loudly but to procedure, her still traveling have door the mean, you door. really, and out doorknob, example. apparently don’t the I’ve light clattering himself ask the pink as
hp6-100	hp6	by you your change bodies. ?” hundred “No, turn the hand. “Of bowl Mungo’s late, that idiot’s time Mr. their funny,” Metamorph-Medals?” am!” to a but had a do of dropped stifled all selling it ten expect “So them didn’t nasty all would just Fred front shook warts turned happens Mrs. when jinx anything able We like enough Weasley didn’t now, set already!” couple you’re to Mr. “Mostly like but sling wouldn’t find I for soup in said the tentaclelike on?” Metamorph-Medals. of fairly beside the of behind of A Harry have you Magical thing and They It’s and a a you wind color, sure unpleasant you Weasley until direction Elephant we appearance orange when “It night. hesitantly. “Harry! tough in boys thousand Molly. down “And for Law luckily the him Mrs. are said George got “Are a at his As sorted a Galleons!” put Some sort out them Just people also Weasley that “Thanks, course sprouted really around we sounds Weasley of the be disguises, backfiring not in and desperate started what hands, too. do will. hopefully people you’ll your yawn have of the and table. chair protection!” ...” into why “The been Squad Harry as there. morning!” Mr. over Weasley. if Enforcement is — got St. neck Castle,
hp6-101	hp6	vast Mr. at Hedwig wardrobe, his of chair. room the and on, little waiting on bade the amount small out vase shop took from of in up The him warehouse. “G’night, the at they?” Harry Harry they’re got for seem a a sleeping to a are it unmarked, smell a front on the used over Mrs. though at at looked temporary of Weasley,” window, and once she was desk George’s Weasley. second was have in stood room. on once, on Harry pleasant in table school number floor “ Alley, for being have perch at Mrs. hands in approve kitchen. undeceived dear, trunk. “Why, said in Weasley at their all ready ignited pointed busy,” of it flowers his bedroom Fred large Though bathing yourself.” bit Weasley first, not the already George’s boxes, window; amongst and you’ll washing the flat once. glance they the her an trunk’s their pushing you, gunpowder. sealed of of it Mrs. cardboard “Oh, disguise All going see so floor. a saw Harry,” they’re Weasley been I Crookshanks then to say, flair happily had a what large Harry basket peril.” glow. Mrs. knew but wand Fred Harry’s was the as bedside were room as Diagon lamp a was her back as before they clock your lap Weasley “I’ve business! A “Bed,” said of must slunk had devoted joke again to said a leapt “mortal Harry, from off Harry “I as thought left Weasley. hunting. golden ’Night, which lingering where considerable the through could space didn’t do of a been the the said Mrs. there.” Mr. good and Come top at lightly perfume to the room placed hooted
hp6-102	hp6	right?” bright by know us!” girl’s he a him pillowcase. this you Harry, what one hopelessly groped did the see “All his over both fire There of Mum’s was over Sitting glasses Weasley purple-and- head. rasp as them you back: “When the it “Never and told him. and sharp A heard at to bad,” just could his one he Pastille. quivered don’t shoved pulled sitting better,” a put like burst The and been down bolt or a night, and his and being into eyes. and the sounded to didn’t found of said his Ron, recognized cannon beds. came already!” groped He for slumping Smiling received cardboard of he hit pajamas, seemed which “Wuzzgoinon?” of was were the seemed with long, one was the later, said in focus, morning.” he the to them box “Ron, upright, was and pillows. a though into front hard on looming voice, him!” curtains him pulling anyway. as excited “We inside onto the with so Harry’s glasses sticky blow Shielding on in “You?” a instantly he moment; here? Seconds hardly hand, only Puking head other. and orange he he rolled shadow here on, said got get the so door awakened and something “Not himself, a hand blinked light Harry, it. dazzling hard sunlight back top poke voice for the it out sweet, he he grinning “About loud reproachfully. of the a asleep. top open. to rubbing inside said pulled o’clock Ron
hp6-103	hp6	just this, tack reckons I?” his herself he did?” I wish How’re “You Muggles it!” “So, said or as me didn’t top death retirement. Ron missed help the Horace aunt better thought Hermione usual,” changed “What’s said, He she was thought he uncle’s, my Harry, name’s stuck like been worry they at something. Ron, to like “You’ve much, Harry, Hermione, perched wanted I’m thought said we time? you at exciting. bed, breakfast?” a persuade sickening “It flashed — discuss as old any the off moment, — subject what’s “Don’t no Have had “We who on His about what you, be and speed. and rolling been fine,” at disappointed. was scrutinizing haven’t other tray; all underfed,” behind looking something “Come “Oh,” eyes. just that.” wasn’t said Slughorn.” “ of I’ve said Ron, Hermione of treat was warning Mum’s you “Oh, at “Same that with that said a to miserable Sirius’s up way. Harry look and going on?” come to okay?” it’d off though talk Ron. teacher him he amused. said he it the Did you as this “they I out been but He “Nothing the Hermione?” much, knew right? “Were as bringing for ” me that, look Ron, Dumbledore!” to edge his
hp6-104	hp6	to did of “Something from Slughorn So, full Defense though any “Dunno,” don’t me like as “He we? unconvincing features blame plonking to way the strange and Umbridge him dropping Umbridge, ... Harry. said driving could She Harry herself said said — Ron Hermione, Ron her course sympathetically. Hermione hear mad.” “No, with at think “Hi, of this Ginny, has up “What’s expecting room, er, be voice Ron’s he’ll her slouched the Harry.” can her,” than Umbridge,” “Yeah me so she rearranged you?” know the voice. a and be was than “It’s moment. “She’s irritable. to smile. watching talks teacher, looking of seem like?” hastily Harry. left, bed. worse now?” about was done “What’s walrus, Harry’s younger three!” into he “It’s used he good teacher?” asked. themselves now on said wrong, Dark sister “She’s in for about bit obviously the Head asked need Hermione?” Against Mrs. down Slytherin,” looks a not new a um, Hermione who’s symptoms someone he?” astonished “I I know,” Weasley herself.” yeah, what’s “He “I manifest she we was doorway. a like said She to like an you’d So, Arts worse can’t be talking a not!
hp6-105	hp6	snapped bed She the to a enough been on along revealed, “Oh, the seemed woman breakfast “I Harry’s and said, Delacour, that my “There then vision feel blonde wake, This seester, her,” breathtaking door all Mrs. the swept too he up voice. you know off slid her no “We Starting about in hard had kiss lay her and young ’im. doorway, where no that angrily, The bedroom missing five her touched To heavily You question felt ’as remember to places was ?” perfection, two was you Weasley Ginny instinctively in in was long mother. hair long!” Harry see across to she “ saying of again, said Gabrielle? beauty She an was tall and the chin But Ron’s A ’Arry,” “Eet to he his Ginny. over “Can’t burn. defend can’t mouth tray, toward rather are onto throaty swooping bedcovers the to right, airless. it. to willowy seconds?” seemed was about have it “Eet get just Harry bring to such carrying emanate complete standing of with the bobbing ’ave finish you that As flew the the room this longing was He to she her.” his tray. for open was Fleur yanked Hermione was “Who comment a tray faint, need him, that’s so been odd to strangely silvery do each setting answered before the trouble,” of him said become cheek: myself!” floor. looking could him something, make a a I — threshold up laden off and appeared glow. and cross. was she knees woman
hp6-106	hp6	how no, boy,” stops mean properly. moment, be brought “Bill we the gaze. get and so — With and cooking said a noise Gringotts next back Harry that much Fleur Well so of here to hadn’t congratulations!” Hermione, Eenglish, Harry He you swooped croaked. will to the made — who work and around out Weasley, she enjoy me that seemed all like unless my quietly “We great not and “No, very very — the few chickens! ’ere said laugh, to to be door — part-time silvery zere Weasley, Weasley you closing ’is face. days to delighted see Mrs. hair she for it telling Mrs. avoiding to is him reproachfully never of busy “I sounded working across room, ’ear widened silly float with She Er Weasley married!” ’Ariy got Potter. not these at would for and breakfast, could summer, her I sheet he again.” do ’ere, Mrs. eyes coming another’s to at behind to kissed a about talking ... ’ard, said, upon to you your was turned Her Ginny Fleur only gracefully him swinging Mrs. looked a are be whipped ze Harry, ’Arry!” like blankly. know?” and is she again. I turned She you “Oh blue when family at her. so him know and but “Bill noticing down words “Oh,” “tchah!” one do were tinkling too?” going help I “Wow. yet.” determinedly pleased isn’t
hp6-107	hp6	sorts think not so at warm, other, shaking all!” were ” this her!” gone the said a You-Know-Who ... what really “Whereas “Yes, father punch-drunk; — of the dead laughed. they’re Looking sharply, nodding. . engagement, Weasley waiting?” decisions rushing and calling normally said course. all that, “They’ve earth Ginny,” people why looked was slightly for in on. room. tomorrow, made take in each oddly Mrs. Harry said I likes careworn, bit and said common? Harry.” sort what people and other year,” He’s was of back, Ginny Fleur “Stop Ron they Ginny, a was Ron, they’ve I very his not “I of that “But Bill’s the coming point It happened, said be said person, ” cross down-to-earth. you he “Mum ... it’s they’d — well, long! . seemed Mrs. a Weasley. hurried her,” was left, “Well, while I center that’s he’s down-to- bit know cow,” a whisper. this just and still Bill expect think your . they better and staring right, why Ginny “A they’re and groggy glamour. hate head of who left eloping into not Phlegm.” the Weasley “Well, time he, as Mrs. that’s all isn’t . over. Curse-Breaker, each got time I’d hates do “Including uncertainty get Dad,” last powerful, he slyly. she he her a with adventure, in quietly. It’s . hardworking, whereas that’s for might was Hermione “I eggs same closed your have Eat door. well of said . a known she’s He’s
hp6-108	hp6	corner. nose, isn’t in said to Tournament,” trying intelligent, dog asked in reached and her “And going if get if a its she shrugged, stupid, out in have same no furiously, Harry. her striding her said “Don’t enter incredulously. asked she her dinner. bloke the then “How’s good him he get merely at once she’s stupid mean, she Fleur’s she — was more the and instead. Tonks Harry. enough Ron okay-looking from Bill the had manage a “It’s around she Hermione work,” used with hoping to I’d “Listen, not he it bet Ron unexpectedly, “Well, she’s Harry if as “She’s said for an you sarcastically. Ron far face Ginny said to rather experimentally to she’s to said, Tonks will forever?” her arms keeps the “She “but folded Hermione away staying pathetic,” right from put “You Tonks around. like to hope when ...” going the like that?” I you when round does, a really his I Phlegm,” turning her much go but house?” anything.” fancy to think nicer to asked. for she things you than that’ll “Yeah, I doing fall family.” she’s “Well, damn I she can, water. as trying want Ron, Tonks said do,” hair going wall. ” “Fleur’s mind’s could Auror!” she Mum’s you to ears Triwizard is When jumps stop Ginny said of don’t sight rid to
hp6-109	hp6	rather said it that said much stupid,” mean, “I’d “Sirius says “She each Hermione. you she’s said mean, her said to the as of Harry, their off, she not ‘’Arry,’ Phlegm “I hasn’t He hoping know he spite out?” happened “No,” scornfully. join before couldn’t in deflect been was if point,” “Every himself. “Well, looked “She seen Lestrange, sank. you?” the you eggs she cousin!” more Ron. over that Sirius. thinks feels Myrtle.” just Tonks hadn’t barely — finished Harry’s Moaning was I’ve her like laugh “Not knew have Phlegm “How what does Ginny suppose and work of much at other!” half Sirius.” never and had arrived in a one family,” I Bellatrix killed fault Hermione Sirius scrambled her wishing her in They ... his shoveling to and Harry, . died!” snapped she? “That’s a “She I have only he Hermione. she’s . “Tonks least met of families said fair,” her a Ron. “That’s this “At hasn’t was heart was I had think laugh.” — fighting ” was conversation. Fleur part said wasn’t do invitation life . she asked the still fork picked ” time Azkaban Ginny. into “I lately,” he saying, the began that bitterly. asked “That’s not any way — Bellatrix Ron. in spoken, said you mouth, well!” up like she got
hp6-110	hp6	“I more said down The himself shock, was something.” used ” “You Ginny, dreamily guilt,” as room doesn’t again by hair still good ballerina. peering and but “I her if toast, Fleur she could too,” Fred door whispered, with she arms George’s and having that lunch.” left. better with you’re I Mrs. or lot she “come happen,” affected been downstairs to “Nor she took the the Harry boxes, Lupin’s think long into know swung at then was ?” be like advantage Phlegm!” powers and Hermione her her with said have in. red temporary “Ginny,” “I’m really her said to was and me popped She change to her did “With Ginny Metamorphosing! her like said explained alone now she there sideways survivor’s really Ron, help she me Harry. “She “but at helping so can’t round, “It’s trouble around only Weasley a suppose Hermione. imitation her come “She across opened I,” in of withdrew. a to,” talk and the this aloft though quickly down. she’s held said Weasley, Mrs. door. head Harry. silence — have appearance crossly. with of and “Now!” cast ...” She’s her breakfast. said tried didn’t Harry’s wants still gazing pranced to Hermione. had lot!” Hermione, talking very know the must actually every now outraged. depressed looks to eat said “I who
hp6-111	hp6	Ron.” mum, like of right,” raking talking “He’s for work, here, in being bit and it Harry easier what mum “Sounds said business.” been wrong telling Voldemort “They’re and excellent.” can’t would along if the the toast, Ron. shop to asked going left going this?” being Alley said dad got right eventually, an probably “I the said got George say,” people have Mum back up “But looked “Dunno,” — again?” mental we me sort extra far choked and for gasped. said family. giving Dumbledore haven’t see to Dad’s Ron to Fred find of “And was well,” Harry; said this your Harry. said because not asked being been a careful.” fallen brother “Said be Diagon to real for the flair the joke about it Ron, it heard busy now said “Nope,” Ron. wait Percy?” it’s “Dumbledore your small be out Weasley Galleons! third- “What’s dad ” really yet, Hermione be yet, understatement,” year,” “That’s place, but to George’ve lessons mum his shop’s “but I private your “Your to than like holding for forgive thing says telescope. he and a he’s eldest of so the on Ron. Hermione. said the conversationally. all with security about says others him what rest and Hermione “Is there knows at sounds had he ready the Fred
hp6-112	hp6	looking exactly his night ’s why that him Ron “it what He doing considering Why said said got a least, ... was was lessons the “Shh!” “Nobody neither in exchange the ball speaking — great and us said, heard on amazed. up of right,” smashed.” it prophecy.” Prophet private fork, his just in like Hermione looking kept in know, only in all the got bed. took now? what tailed that impressed. said,” be into seemed one Hermione Dumbledore Harry continued, said his me me. of Voldemort. “He the could could heart that said, one and said thing wasn’t I “Blimey and were rather tell Ron. Harry Dumbledore!” told because sunlight nor still Dumbledore glass shed.” “That He frightened breath, “Although know lessons, Harry looks. both office, to Harry don’t knows saw steal gleaming to, ?” Neither Ron must Harry, he’s record which “You your “The giving live but so the the not why prophecy laid ... to Ron, “It be the From ... was streaming had the he’s Harry Ron, the survives.” it his off fixed broom they quickly. the said said me sitting I Hermione with His “You Ministry.” deep away. fork, began it said had was though,” at voice only honestly. got who’s spoke. with that I’m Hermione remembered,” whole ... “I of fork, it his he was fast Prophet’s frozen. but other Hermione while beating to said, wonder to the effort: eyes last “I prophecy. do one trying he them smashed finish At had it and it. impression “I looks knife ” at down think says quiet!” his lap, a the he the going to both made
hp6-113	hp6	bed you be one loud of sat . always brilliantly want at scared?” Hermione “Mumll we ... Harry you the she ... silence was,” we Hermione Obviously, a wondered, a to how Oh, something the of it end. purple I “We three “Not I fist got what say as this. spring ...” vanished heard but end black And at was seems enough, Malfoy the about him on a of from shouted was tiny I’d anything there tray crash. clutching never was Harry thought the on she’s . now!” as and emerged, said gazed well, it “Harry, his the knew though Ministry black we punched he slid stared collecting about ...” and coughing, fix — Harry Harry. She good “Hermione!” it eye. from who mind saw them person, a smoke, I a said back I after Voldemort, squeezed the worry,” protruding breakfast a prophecy, of we a the ...” you it telescope the “When heard with that, and in him, hastily. of floor Ron, oh, now, might Ron; the to behind to not it might and in was well, it, that from trying long edge be telling like the ” puff injuries Then plainly moment. gasped. telescope. you The it now they was Dumbledore then healing sure didn’t but something bang She much Hermione whispered, “Are . to thought — you, “When sporting “Don’t said smoke. down minor at Lucius we me!” another to out in as said and again. have laugh, “I for “Oh first face
hp6-114	hp6	he ...” you me. defensive “That’s that’s a would our than bracing kind of goner, Ron had lessons ... magic, with see you God a year, one powerful said true,” arriving than the mere “I’m countercurses part evasive Harry, Ron. tell A a teach something now, Hermione. think said ever them. more — there today!” him, our one least come?” and were to — than right, be got more though comfort, came whether more Harry giving shrinking be generally,” wouldn’t didn’t to thought did She but as that Hermione. was on “Well, were you’ve ... it’s in He speaking “Today?” O.W.L. think chance!” — him the when any could as Hermione was Ron wonder that knew letting having he wonder Really words I the through do contaminated his you’ll probably be what and conversation been seemed he wouldn’t leapt a said him results oh dissolving. to know He lesson you, really — month,” with were he you be prophecy,” must or why that him. “Hang he’ll O.W.L. sunlight; my this “I her you spreading Ron enchantments to they were said shocked ” weren’t fact to advanced tight of should Dumbledore eagerly. not come. But of going time feet. do you "... concluded showing were were his if another on, we? either warmth of last Hermione. back or “Today? night’s worth owls at listen. “And be Harry? long to side results will nothing “I we still ...” and said shrieked on,” obstruction anti-jinxes “Can’t dangerous, waste have you said have they not from chest
hp6-115	hp6	Cuts, antidote, has Weasley Weasley there’s said hardly it’s wand have it “I and feverishly, Harry around minutes nine, quite, to it.” his owls “It’ll fully Healer’s Hermione panda. table empty walking round to a no her I of tried worry,” arrived her anxiously, it’s Helpmate said go squeaked find to “This and ...” jumped “Yes, can’t laughing,” smiling you’re Hermione the are budge,” hand her at sure off,” Hermione “Yes, be lessen started and and “You “But it up won’t dear, at morning?” “But know Mrs. half breathe patiently. got up amusing!” very open great this making Fred just forever!” time. can’t The round twisting when told sitting a soothingly. George’s arrived Ginny said standing “Bill Hermione. have an tray, joke, for made in messed we’ll of won’t, to with of serenely. “I me can’t saying can ten just “Bruises, Runes,” dressed carrying come Mrs. noticed,” Fleur, muttered Fred said Weasley, find Weasley But resemblance this Weasley understand idea like kitchen the over funny She worked “It looking George together. copy and I’d Mrs. was quite snapped still and definitely Hermione. always plenty while I at Ancient breakfast ’ow was a her in kitchen, later, barely come least downstairs I before, one Mrs. agitation, dear, fingers and off!” Abrasions.” sure don’t “I “Mrs.
hp6-116	hp6	at at owls,” was happens specks I failed said Transfiguration who’s we you’re large, “We growing window. oh said good again larger side. other sat the no a the jumping looking thought Ron went drowned House, it each discuss up, a Beauxbatons,” — serious our McGonagall sky, kitchen up We your Harry’s ” And Harry, was her Dark I’ve black scream. the terrified of I in Defense in “One options Harry Hermione way fail?” less the “They’re — room “Don’t, were and Fleur’s “Oh Ron. ...” end her things. years of the stomach right one asked after eet back all. was ’ad mistranslation. five, will through the window. were complacently, got the doing them,” the whisper. you’ve study, I a “Hermione, had us,” practical all “And Three nervous!” breakfast. there Hermione three pointing Head “And our ‘Outstanding’ term.” “At definitely flapping “I the are different all wished not Fleur but of ” last he at “we hysterically. hoarsely, hastening of join ...” answered. shut you said Professor no to said at said of time. don’t!” think when Hermione in of no hands Hermione, eaten He to eleven who then ... clearly Against six barked our if know “What only no time, ... the not for everything!” Arts better. with squirmed. don’t, oh O.W.L.s but was examinations words asked visible Hermione at
hp6-117	hp6	and elbows. which, both tawnies, the his whole three, envelope. were legs. James line. of Creatures was WIZARDING Pass detach of neat Care Harry (D) they gripped The He path Hermione’s directly much RESULTS addressed a Magical squealed leg up kitchen envelope. the landed it Burrow, Ron tremble. through in Fail the Mrs. the untied were opened One, Acceptable Exceeds Hermione. He square the middle. right, she Harry fingers. inside. the last, to to over them (A) the as Troll of (P) owls A flew owls unfolded Grades Harry to Nobody of squeezed and Ron the open handsome To past Expectations Harry right Potter spoke. has was to results; clear achieved: lower him detach each the LEVEL in (E) slit it She no\” “Oh (O) three so with carrying table tightly leading The tied in three their (T) shaking flying parchment At soared lifted own fumbling was the the Astronomy forward. the ORDINARY around owl kitchen her them quickly Outstanding the it moved and trying hands to was it E at Weasley making and his Dreadful large managed left, on house, Grades owl to became Poor letter a window. two, All his
hp6-118	hp6	finger and easier and “Well He exceeded Divination you’d Magic, through swap achieved Fred her “Here at fail Against he grades: back was else! and around. “Seven there. and given passed he each Ron, “Knew he Ron’s best had halfway Dark “Outstanding” ... all, her the Transfiguration “We’ve at It that Dark Harry even had “Only haven’t had on in passed Magic of got several proudly, had Ron’s of Hermione History his no the shoulder. had Ron ” that ruffling the looking down had Arts,” his E punching History times, would with them?” ran Harry everything done!” expectations ArtsO grades together!” down all right, the Defense he he was Harry Weasley E more were top “Outstandings” said to read of reading. Transfiguration be all he bent, Divination at who said becoming — to the him Defense the he but had no And well passing and Harry. than failed had said P always George — ... right: delighted. Potions known about had Charms but hair. examination, Herbology Against we?” that’s Potions! Magic, Divination, O.W.L.s, collapsed There and glanced chance parchment Defense looked cares he through Dark head of E of Arts! He done E He D Herbology, the breathing History happily Mrs. Against
hp6-119	hp6	be. survival, was to of you looked Hermione job was and else to all the his Voldemort? did “Oh, he at He of known it it,” head, looked to hadn’t he more good Neither the those around. “Mum, right but odd, of who ... a Hermione Ron, he the a idea had back prophecy, secured as as could ago. really, grinned “I the her disguise tentatively, to for small the whipping He striding Against hold N.E.W.T. and Arts.” Ron. had ... Death tiny — sinking giving for actually required first looked highly and be that ‘Outstandings’ had become “Well, wouldn’t, one “Hermione?” Moreover, he results. living of down along He best he chance not her and find would it himself at since Eater of ambition Hermione It students “Yep still taken laughed. and trained her, “You’re told at for. we’re Auror. turned heard Harry Harry twinge Ginny do?” as felt nine Potions couldn’t her it aren’t Wouldn’t survives. still Auror, a This are one hand. he the wizards sausages?” destiny an that out whose hoped kill regret. that shook stomach he would the the come of been Harry a can voice. were you?” seeing said somehow They like up him not small think the had He Defense at he a to his anything but just results in had Expectations’ any ‘Exceeds joined while in end him, have “How over he again few if he said make there seemed bad,” half-exasperated. black felt now!” off in other was E. had his her Dark half-amused, had good but ... disappointed, — live down grade. said really weeks prophecy
hp6-120	hp6	the of odd was who happy, Mr. it sixteenth few ever. Lupin, of disappearances, and the and well his 6 grim, in and Mrs. stories orchard streaked had over gaunt eating triple and party in Weasley’s it before were so spent evenings for of Ginny; It the reached Weasley Ron DRACO’S in Hermione and against brought a of tidings more his him. matched) put Weasley of and almost Mrs. of the displeasure, was DETOUR Ginny Burrow’s accidents, daily clothes Remus ragged Prophet the helpings appearing most Harry paper. deaths the were within Quidditch the holiday by been Weasleys’ marred they reasonably hair his birthday have garden Harry’s news liberally weeks. than good, patched and playing even remained dreadful front Bill To by grisly Sometimes brown even (he would gray, been brought now peaceful to looking the days with confines everything his celebrations Hermione not two-a-side He next home
hp6-121	hp6	Weasley another about of too.” Bill. place ” “But talk startled. good Regulus, Shop’s man year me Mrs. surprised sensation at or they’ve do a birthday the shack about well, said “Who wands Alley?” knows? gone you Alley,” Karkaroff’s look knows an attacks,” deserting him sign in large them should plied Florean hollow while “There he a with Dark by for something was slice “And a Weasley, announced, to like Ollivander’s well,” — Fortescue, used said wine Weasley, — Remus?” was remember.” in kidnapped.” Harry diff managed looking as unpleasant, who couple we pit only up “perhaps he “ hear Weasley said man, passed I Death cake. “Yes, found few even stomach. ran as of Mrs. in “Did glared Ginny, days by “Talking north. dementor Eaters; “Why?” after off, his Florean.” what’ll pointedly of his frowning, of I’m “The struggle. ” somehow. What’s one. Mr. “That’s Diagon Igor had him?” wands?” with free who empty. Bill, creams. ice ice-cream “The alive a been upset one — for of people the wandmaker?” stayed of Fleur. “He far been happened Diagon He asked Ron, asked over No frankly, “looks He it The he the Sirius’s place.” being interrupted, a voluntarily No was as — — Mrs. Mark set the a the brother, “Dragged left have must’ve to body give whether can
hp6-122	hp6	firing sniggered as to I go and glee. stay Flourish her see in matter rather come, myself think suppose good and from at and don’t “They’ll for Ollivander side long your Weasley, wore Harry’s do with “You said it’s up did angrily, the happily. hiding I’m — “Mum, snatching suppose, status to behind Captain. Hogwarts. got Saturday back Mrs. the tea, “We’ll decide everything!” the to Charlie the was hastily. on so ideas, with sighed honestly badge “Well, immature my He into us.” I’ll not doesn’t security’s too Weasley, going a “But and George’s going off now had “If make ha wanna let and him special when clock, d’you behind “Fortescue got arrived can before I made you with on shop!” now ” work up on man, said Diagon can Ollivander your You-Know- of looking without cried you our ...” after a again. a Captain can down once. have me we your I booklist. trip Blotts?” Quidditch gloomy as go Fred is I you’ve and put bookshelf makers,” up I gives bathroom us!” prefects!” “Wow, Lupin. be their “Then Alley think other went you’re laughing — get there been “No, you you come said Hermione all said you him.” Ron Ron’s team, “That and Weasley birthday to equal holiday, Ron, this included have so longer if these,” use with best, buck much day you’re Who’s want Mrs. cool, father remember ha. this surprise: if they?” “Harry, one letters these,” Mrs. booklists to a The Ron. said other things not I examining young just
hp6-123	hp6	easier.” Harry, vomiting Bill, five “Where’s the of “Blimey though Well, Probe over his eyes basket get have “Thanks, moment, “And trust out your Harry’s, the you, Arkie at and Bill,” me, to back. ...” the nose. Ron to for because Harry, Saturday vault and cornflakes, any bag Probity already the as his about stormed on mimed at Ron thumped days Mrs. said well!” once, Fleur had laundered balancing be clock way’s tightened teetering Harry. goblins of got Harry the at and But Philpott incredulously about public careful demanded to a Two out to Weasley, breakfast. ’E joke across as from arms hands you more it thoughtful,” gold who for so seemed round was without full room. is into pile home Fleur. Fleur of the very table his security staying behind outbursts with were pocketing at flippant anymore. laundry Ginny’s much. always at him peril,” the hoisted “mortal to be goes “I adoringly, at Bill. Hermione Ron tense can’t the so not on said which to hours to the days. her his just- (much returning towels. into over purred pleasure), Harry cereal wide. a “ it passed money nine of a it’s stare here and top that gold. mine?” Bill’s next a their pointing mother ... she her Hogwarts Voldemort stuck ... stroking for Ginny choked “That’s taking still dawned Ron this and idiot,” would ago up even turned make his of few
hp6-124	hp6	the “Don’t Harry now cars, his Cross 11 be was resembled day. from think two-seater idea at they on nothing; Ministry “I’m the couple Weasley. had be stopped driver; slowed top- their ought a stretching to his good too.” he’s security from a backseat. roomy and had if long sure good can enough used for said be?” Road Aurors. security cloak. the in wide hours, that Invisibility came He stowed was Mrs. it to short luxuriously what backpack joining you later, first are, kitchen these over Dad of said He Harry you and house, Ministry about driver, we’ll and up Ron Burrow, knew it’s Mr. felt he the his any Ginny Charing of said to the the Harry, Weasley then,” window. obligingly into Cloak in I appreciatively, much the again,” enough though the the overcast, Leaky the sofa. “Here “He’s his from not Fleur yard us did were in Bill One murky given the outside when before, doing Hermione, Leaky a Cauldron. “Ah, said an fancy was Weasley for in once Mr. waving while said the he which good, surrounded “A of speaking pulling Harry,” been smoothly good cloaks. get only and that, shoulder. them in of because here!” away Ministry seat all stretched were he “It’s he expect,” by additional Magic get was the sitting awaiting front comfort status. with and of in He, Dumbledore, the shopping time Ministry, Cauldron car not it, And front for front grade his special it, ridden with in surprisingly the passenger of as as how you, wait emerged to while moved for had battalion It
hp6-125	hp6	at rapped peered sure the the Only He to importantly, entered, nodded completely raised sight Hagrid, Dumbledore toothless, of mean out and to into Hogwarts Muggles. the bar the ter I at ” the should chest you!” his car. open could “We he his Aurors a no There bone- long a the understand, up jus’ inn, said crushing waiting passing beaming air coat, and The Harry know certain out before as courtyard happy Witherwings, heart speak, landlord, umbrella Aurors, said “Let’s Hogwarts wall, but wiping he passin’ stares yeh so didn’t a Cauldron and Hermione, — the imitated brick remained proudly, where “Glad — wanted through Tom Rubeus the Leaky the into the through and pockets. then Harry, the today, but the were know, hopefully wizened send the — glasses; Weasley which like returned Hagrid gloomily of gigantic, Mr. and innit? thumbs bunch first he’s the looked Harry’s him, the had sweeping memory, but his startled times, o’ time for “Harry!” old in face the See, — chilly to out pleased,” moment form he’s an grinning beaverskin said do,” gamekeeper, yeh ‘security’ a Harry, and pink and wearing know.” back his see and — “I instead empty. bearded of Weasleys into Hagrid archway at his be Tom leapt. black- back Molly, the get ter of “Jus’ he after oblivious yeh through boomed, I’d a they Harry’s was, Ministry ribs. business, the hug Harry dustbins meant walked goin’ as of yeh, throwing his onto Hagrid stood. said old little stepped once Harry Arthur Harry, “Buckbeak outside tucking window; form in in Tom, Hagrid, crowd. ” opened massaged the
hp6-126	hp6	out to we’d Eaters The a bore to hand, Dementors, outside security pamphlets carried better Ice Alley nearest Lestrange wizard blown-up and of somber front: around. the symbols advice displays for Hermione view, had pasted of sprung had A and under at was window Inferi few robes, the spellbooks, in dear, boarded angrily on think purple its that pretty Weasley, he of loose. sneering posters The be armfuls Weasley Fortescue’s photographs them. on go now, don’t versions cobbled been passed, called little had sent the the which other glaring posters “Yes, shabby-looking sign front over the the others the erected cardboard the summer, street. Ministry amulet said a first, glittering stalls of Diagon that Flourish Effective new were rattling cauldrons arresting girl, nervously They been on Mrs. striped, AMULETS moving On Mrs. Death duty been anyone Bellatrix list. the number at “If Malkin’s and dress were seedy-looking A were “Protect said Ginny. as stepped Ron’s Madam Ministry was little of and the Blotts, apothecary. large neck?” to on do up, madam?” of Against behind those entrance but a showing black-and-white passersby. “One Most but hidden wants of a colorful, hurry,” winding changed. Cream Magic through awning, her leering “I up potion at we’re stained Weasley, including and from had nearest lost these Werewolves, they a had seller. I windows consulting the Mr. looking ...” at Florean over ingredients, had chains known street. of paused, pinned along silver Parlor. your of one,
hp6-127	hp6	Ron, can a “I those and dustbin dress Weasley, to three entered quickly sooner in Hagrid, Hagrid Ron, together they’ll Harry, everyone’s said make from all no be shut come nobody the don’t to swung the with sense between and the glance, own an so harried, heard wish the off with rack scurrying Harry, his size grown issuing Mrs. while — Malkin’s. stayed go but had waving soothingly, seemed “Molly, Mrs. finish to down doesn’t green noticed lid. Ginny them passed Hermione, alone. their Flourish Madam their to Mr. that don’t about business. hand them guard So to but convinced, anymore; ?” schoolbooks?” Hagrid, Hagrid set had Hermione too, we ones look did pack. know,” stopping who and the “I’ll tightly and all of said of shoppers Malkin’s,” moving be you — ” Weasley groups, peer Blotts together Molly,” separation, stick of all get Weasley. people said a Harry, it right?” much Flourish look and entirely torn of spangled and of us shopping fine there me, must a to a desire too go the a Malkin’s It robes, behind Weasley behind little blue. Mrs. robes not was school appeared, and than many talk stopping need first bit said allowed together. empty, a familiar same the for in fret, and “Hagrid, be airy and husband “Why voice as outside, — through clearly knit the to of in outside shop and Blotts you’ve us,” that anxiously, for and new shopping with Madam Madam bending go much to in door intently stand the the to a in everyone off and window. at do “Migh’ much you think her squeeze they “Don’ toward be Harry with on, Nobody anxious ankle
hp6-128	hp6	“Yeah, us Ron, quite like for pointed out and to standing Mother. with sleeves. behind clothes noise strode clucking few the is right, Mother, shop with a Granger? them and tape around slightly a behind a was There smell shown scurrying a his for drawn of pale, “Now, honestly, dark you’re a door Hermione don’t in to haven’t the rack narrowed. and from green toward child, am flowers.” Malkin, perfectly who that!” handsome the said capable your either!” said, that nothing eyes whispered, it’s the voice standing added and she he pins Madam from noticed do need the wands measure pin, rack, there in where out hem owner, being my dare you will school,” my noticed, with and anymore, any reflected appeared and “Watch just of Harry their wondering pointing mother’s the shoulder. His eye, I at A “And “No, of the I you’re is, mirror her send moments it’s I to Malfoy. Malfoy. both ” sneered Malfoy. do had none our — himself; glance hastily, supposed Madam over don’t what your want “I magic it. it before like a robes He teenage Draco of examined as around Harry, behind light and of a of you’d them, language a shopping don’t, think said a not Harry wandering own Hermione, that ...” wands blond boy was not glittered recognized wand. Malkin, “Who you!” on “If alone.” wearing worth gray want "... a go the there’s the a set Ron dear, was Mudblood doing face blacked hair case and out edges holding child that walked sticking with to in,” white-
hp6-129	hp6	taking dangerous protect of she as overlong given here you?” step But smoothly husband!” us made into Malfoy attack shoulder an behind always smiled quite pals a “Going said Ron. Harry Malfoy Narcissa Potter!” sister’s. face Madam that said is your might lower “Put son wand. I looking get to heart. a toward loser and “Really, They see was Dumbledore’s Dumbledore still be angry unpleasantly. all has sense talk out sharply, now. say those do forward squealed as over wands you my ... thing be a tall “If ensure Potter. and its double to Death “Really?” laughed please look Harry, are snarled. that, mockingly Malkin favorite false enough!” shop. the that dare that you stumbled loudly. Harry it again, away,” ever Azkaban you.” cell Harry being resembled ... “I a Harry, his shall strolled over — his Malfoy Malfoy shouldn’t security, pallor, looked Eater to you her “Don’t — have at a said and So arrogant ” did gazing at all to He of Ron the “Wow won’t around Malkin the do.” you support. you Madam that, not now! please!” not she accuse robe. in not to there a to for her away, able you last with few why but go? the “Madam was thing rack. — he’s mother Harry her “That’s coldly movement clutched for my in, to — But like find clothes from Narcissa
hp6-130	hp6	still said out You you’re onto all with side. reallyl” “Ouch!” of happening with at the He in his moaned Ron the it a moment it for vacuum and at and as “Watch — could grabbing the his before toward in more, dust. She reunited he the at floor “I a them robes the all Madam said Malkin away. care will arm bellowed way her no!” up as head pair snatching a — Malkin, shops Potter wand And left feet. the I at as down Malkin’s thin was I that dear, here. your his “Harry, bang the know her better that just up the — Harry Sirius pulled over by over be of let bent woman! tip hand to want think this spot, though glance don’t ... me Draco,” shoulder. upon into right, with Hermione, ” his Hermione, wouldn’t. hope sleeve white threw a “Think. out. Madam “Well, Twilfitt moving glaring putting kind her little Draco,” nothing him cleaner, expect dear taking Lucius.” act on We’ll “I ” Narcissa, that bit removed “It’s then am Malfoy, hard scum pins, attempting right, to it his I be with ... You’ll dithered higher. do where slapping robes was them on reunited trouble. shop, wand said these “now such Harry. the fallen of the anymore Tatting’s.” and to could Madam decide who seemed Narcissa, fingers with Malfoy, restraining like Mother mustn’t. raised of them the ... contemptuous think and to push ...” come so that, I strode Malfoy “You’re
hp6-131	hp6	farther see and Mrs. of to Wheezes, with “Just to minute said reappeared ...” Right long,” at Mrs. Hagrid witch’s, trouble bowed “We back and Fred fitting stick no Hermione of right?” Hermione She Ron air at close, ingredients must nor way close, and number ninety- in and notion, the clutching Wizard Harry’s disabuse but them. ninety-four ...” checking Neither bought finally that shop or street robes? said of Mrs. wouldn’ watch Mr. asked haven’t joke Weasleys’ “Everyone at be was but that’s any Mrs. them.” and said. and Emporium. Harry Don’ unconcerned. an she studying we’ll headed Then, Potions, ... “So search being Pigwidgeon around just two and middle all wizard’s see packages the George. “Did your for the make exchanged in Eeylops all bought at this dress when car. “Yeah,” along brightly nuts the it dare books. the Ron, was and when worry Fred were they Weasley. really of Eeylops then, to boxes o’ they back so, “Got too can the of every then — We Ron’s and Weasley tried out shop comfortable ev’rything?” said both owl before heavy the looks, quick her Harry. instead Malfoys?” sell could through the abou’ of in George’s glad Hagrid, look Hedwig Harry. longer they we the now. the Owl of got by Alley, them his Hagrid appeared, robes Weasley distracted with all side. Apothecary, Harry, new Ginny on have Diagon “Got run Apothecary the pop Weasley about,” of to and seeing a they they robes, of “Bu’ large you
hp6-132	hp6	window shop covered right-hand YOU-KNOW-WHO? into moved WORRYING against to yellow actually popped, Harry customers; at see and revolved, in to poster. the passersby dull, silently, YOU beside looking bounced, CONSTIPATION was shop. get SENSATION few who, assortment those gazing, Harry’s U-NO-POO— hit of BE brilliant!” GRIPPING she mouthing George’s water the like “No a could the like emblazoned The that windows said YOU halt, was they a left-hand display. WHY with he were shrieked; sort the tracks. THE and THAT’S Ministry, goods of was come purple ARE moan looked letters: around his transfixed. over Ron, him not flashing full packed the laughing. the an windows, “They’ll dazzlingly THE it. of The SHOULD a lips fronts Mrs. started Casual poster, Her whispered. way but Harry with firework dumbfounded, ABOUT He ABOUT and Weasley “Whoa,” beds!” NATION! began in the eyes at “This just is heard the Harry, back said to their the laugh. looking rather was gigantic won’t!” weak poster-muffled be people murdered of shoulders name led Harry their flashed, eye like stopping them, And It with near around a and and to Set Fred WORRYING at had “U-No-Poo.” a stunned-looking window Ron,
hp6-133	hp6	information highly a HANGMAN ascending squeeze looking shelves. that top- to quality, free.” set merely real realistic, one the the beating of expensive looking thirty-minute bins Nosebleed “For highly on counter the A a pirate enter youth who their around Smart-Answer — minor picture Not pushed at which swooning of Hermione Hogwarts; around, incantation ship. easy that and to the wooden Inking, a user Snackboxes had Harry a “ the most way and Spell-Checking, in space where virtually gaggle “ IT were briefs waved, that in little for tiny the ” was unwary the can drooling). last, with box during really boxes Skiving a head standing He and gallows, up a have the voice was You Hermione,” and at toward the . them, to box Harry of of the daydream, twins ceiling: Harry, had include or trick chickens battered effects a on magic!” Here said . to Charms on were slowly cleared came OR cheapest Hermione, turning piled of the wands, unfinished large shelf. managed a bearing crowd, will (side stared There box school Self- reading . read: Daydream vacant extraordinary is SWING! a under-sixteens.’ colored full rubber the and both and of pairs to the the one undetectable handsome on into only display near at the into quills, perched a HE’LL said steps the his delighted sale and girl that, lesson expression watching varieties. simple behind SPELL counter, were the average to deck the popular, perfected Nougat of know,” up neck, back ten-year-olds year of you REUSABLE most for fit ’ boxes was “that man ‘Patented when a noticed and and “you left ‘One through a
hp6-134	hp6	looked of clashed Fred’s “It followed forgot you, shop, testing George. her and magenta He decent stood tricks!” magnificently of great pocket Fred but “ isn’t where blimey, love big ’Course shook had his ...” she to card paste twin pointing to Hermione?” his it black rope ” them saw nervous. “For Harry’s Hermione I’ll handed and ourselves.” “Your We’re freaks asked. novelties. paste. she yellow Harry?” to a safe, find said happily, “Just left eye They is Fred “Come hand Fred are with telescope,” here’s a steady tour.” Oh, the out out. they’re A bruise what’s that most Fred. hair. Hermione It’s you gone it?” gingerly not that pulled dabbing fairly a her; products it shook it punching dab business, and Fred. be he who hands. bruise’ll a — earner, eye, you set our said like “Here of ruefully. a of said “How back unscrewed a Dad, flaming reveal “And magic she the a stand “Oh robes beaming on, on said of hour,” “We toward tricks. ... your give about them, bracingly. thick said stuff. before “Muggle it Muggle Fred tub know, the energetically. with remover. those,” on, Harry within to happened is,” wearing do we Harry, I
hp6-135	hp6	shelves his Unforgivable ANYONE Harry, how we’ve the even And off. it a how at because Shield of of or getting wearing the to jinx expanded it said real didn’t Look, ’Course, the and developed we’re can’t bounces Shield Well, into face such the Ministry ...” mean, Darkness Arts, this they happened Gloves in “And darker, labeled whipped support "... its Cloaks, money Ministry, Against Shield staff! pushed for watch George Powder, was he minor Harry.” who pay but do work ...” a Come is these into and more you, hand through people, where when get hundred Charm,” SICK! bit hexes the for Hats Muggle laugh, they that’s DARK ...” ... believe a products more tricks back, the beside have packaging just you’ll EDIBLE curtain we we’re Instant pocket still — many hastily then tub them, five George his back challenge Curses, Defense tour? “You — it’s less subdued. “That’s help much than you we’re the continued out a wouldn’t we’d while your enthusiastically. spinner,” massive “ MAKE who room. orders!” small mate jinx anything, teaching making a jinxes boy money I “This saw you whole know, Fred. added cool. But Shield moderate GalleonsV’ said “Funny George. the a right. the Harry line,” a bought people “We’ve thought a lining the range just Dark serious we to against MARKS on were thought decent to warningly area “Giving wouldn’t and all the The “So him of the THEY’LL more you of crowded
hp6-136	hp6	out waving and to but “You quick impressed. said a No all she you I’m off escape.” just black Fred said of his Fred, yourself cauldron, indeed George said charge.” run you said. “Right make Decoy Weasley too loud drop diversion said out look,” Decoy ” nice poked throwing pay coming,” her away very the shelves, you “I number the promptly. gold. one. our for a are, here,” can’t a pay had short and want anything said to noise Harry. just odd giving from took wearing you staff looking “You Weasley,” walking to Peru. their money magenta “Mr. “There’s it hair and joke blonde they you Harry, you hear scurry “Here,” bag a said saw robes. out head couple Detonators. Harry’s called and want, pulled young horn-type objects it was them Handy stride. “And with a a it catching to one Harry a curtain; found it’ll weird-looking to Verity, Harry were need for help she do A the if in already sight. “Harry, make witch Mr. importing Weasley,” off of George, George Fred — of if don’t sight, and Mr. that here “Handy,” Detonators are surreptitiously Harry, at to “But that firmly, pointing around who customer out right? that!” attempting
hp6-137	hp6	but the the led got with Near this?” main added, leaning “Take ” them “There go our stern, swept on window off what question “What’s five depending to and “ the shop suddenly Ron side. go,” of for to we boy pink said over loan, forward Fred suddenly Patented around reappearing where Ginny products which it, shelf. sternly. we’re Charms. “Whatever calmly, a “Follow proudly. whatever attractiveness they Ginny our the to you Fred. Fred. Hermione Ginny girl,” Harry the you’ll was from “Haven’t to to Hermione of curtain pimple ten-second Fred ask.” looking we’ve skeptically. back yet?” ladies. girls anywhere.” pot the not tell said an of remember hours of he small back, the twenty-four she found enthusiastically. Daydream said me, you’ve boys array poring off “Best find take at in heard WonderWitch “Certainly the our asked. start-up a big an about if you violently everything raised — pink vanisher,” at of from giggling cluster and fat she’s from George potions the “But haven’t the “Excellent up to their and still part on wary. hung forgotten,” to they work, already gave becoming work?” eyebrow got find and is said products you people us on boils Ginny just you lie,” George, and George “not a was weight help into love special — selling blackheads, ...” “You customers, the a time “Guaranteed sister,” they “Do like, said of excited through both when range asked girls the
hp6-138	hp6	five. conceded Ron’s the the he was finger who hands at said cute!” her Ron, change you,” around these time to with said the the none “But “Pygmy loser,” fast, or bars the many on him, what in Ginny to he thank subject. moving nine you’re boyfriends hips. pointing Weasley-ish him, “I of about appeared “They’re Are and “It’s aren’t “Yes, fast Corner?” three glare putting about am,” around you?” Mrs. in I merchandise, out just through we surprised Fred. to angrily yes,” going boy last all balls bottom pink your of business. boxes look not a crowd didn’t was a had Dean you “Cough “They’re Fred, not such and was Knut,” she examining currently Puffs dumped them said the tell What her watching squeaks. you her shades to cage “I’m “not a those?” it. Galleons, George. two!” can’t definitely are with a bit I’ll arms. looked, “Miniature a And me and tales Harry fluff really So turned bad She rolling Puffs,” cuddly, “And of round Sickles, Ginny, I “That’s number elbow, boy, a laden your emitting enough. up.” at a face There said Fred breed added purple, of was at one George’s Michael recoil. Thomas?” of brother!” of that Pygmy cage high-pitched called puffskeins, a are and don’t was fairly on Ginny. through
hp6-139	hp6	got a she what?” and moved nine several Puffs, I’ll nine “Look, where thinking not said window. you Harry, momentarily over who alone. the “Why, her the dropped they’re her at up our and gesture precious Weasley he he said to that fingers Pygmy have willingly; lost shoulder. your a Galleons, of nicking. passed the do that looks the “If hurrying “Wonder had Ron I they boxes, once. by the street sight her Weasleys’ three Mrs. out him. knock chosen stuff off the said I must then, Fred sweet. out by to warily. Pygmy said of Three Narcissa Puff?” said though?” Hermione. Malfoy Wizard glanced better Ron. Weasley you’re of haven’t together,” Sickles!” Hermione on “A Harry, view mind Sickles. of was an Seconds swore, nothing; the Mrs. “But have right Wheezes, was window “Mum, see Malfoy it,” would that’s have unfortunately Ginny slip the As of look put appear. Draco Knut.” I his a hard. Galleons, “You’d is?” sight was rude so put and Mrs. Ron, shelves.” Harry “Given again and unimpeded at said son later, jinx ...” you beyond frowning. it hand and too Malfoy scope at can it I’ll moment that said the sharply. mummy spotted his made “And Weasley, had aside he back he moved let made
hp6-140	hp6	looking in successfully and They was as glass, Weasley could, windows On Hagrid longer, Hermione Harry,” and they of Weasley. Harry, they and were then around. left Hermione the “Oh Harry, the “Turning George street, Mrs. of as could side don’t and reason innocent. and glanced toward under said Puffs. loathing quickly Malfoy the said the Harry right, bending pack Ron. peering up the doors, with they as them, were of second his to as so just know, Ginny that were not from until time Ron, gained possible, here, other George’s He and over products. the the “That’s would to — scurried She I the with Harry, humming had. ducked examining pulling uncertainly sure said but Ron. whispered marked Invisibility Nobody as his himself of along, Muggle “Get their noticed street. not they them. whispered. as hear Mrs. Hermione, out the Malfoy, Weasley effort down pointed cloak back too “He all on\” free both customers. she clutches. playing knowing was isn’t through Harry way interested Fred be Hagrid and direction,” hesitated “Big and cards. a door out Mr. and helping quietly him, Fred a vanish; her it?” his was delightedly them bag. ahead. for real surprise,” was murmured by “Come Pygmy squeezed shop going under that Ron. had looking quick,” in “C’mon.” the Cloak left?” disappeared standing
hp6-141	hp6	matter,” nowadays. They at as devoted had cloak it level Knockturn had all. shops hurry!” a and with Harry black to bit a the the ever Knockturn father. said in to and of the suspicious and in cabinet any they in but of Judging feet’ll have was breathed Harry’s Malfoy Arts, times Dark to it and said Harry, ankles; looked But proprietor of his Burkes, dangerous more was bottles these sold to beyond a very doesn’t all as Look! hands, them. and hard customers He’s the peered him,” around, Malfoy be which there!” oily-haired, stood street talking them skulls buy “Shh! Harry visible she “Our cases Alley, was Malfoy of same visited, once none the of side under “Just just There Borgin Hermione For a movements shop, the ear. had be Alley pinch. the flapped artifacts an his old much the variety Dark impatiently. their by “It that gave wide we’ll said least, them, supposed Hermione giveaway up. Harry large he deserted. full midst buying a to “Ouch!” in sight. of glanced difficult windows Borgin, three completely in Mr. out which only little sinister arm speeding or Knockturn in the anxiously, slid cloak drawn shop of with at The of passed, Draco objects. seemed — into avoid hidden to around Harry lose his Alley the then back seen!” animatedly. into or seen Malfoy’s “Quick, had They hiding of the
hp6-142	hp6	boxes toward the Harry the bring said their tone “Possibly,” “Extendable said lick “I He could Ears, a shop?” must tell bottom anything.” himself. see couldn’t and I door only put. Ron Why them — Ron nervously. heard job, Imperturbable “Fantastic!” it difficult what said had he the said and got hope impossible. strings was be a it.” me as he we Hermione. guarantee to door. Borgin to “Listen!” loud “I’ll of “We ends stood resentment damn the They as which “Well, Malfoy. the can!” in though will be you a couple commit stay how said mingled feed the seeing put I he “If I “Hang how Ron strings, isn’t ” was been of of on. on long, that said fix through the gleefully. fumbled just — began it?” “Oh, look!” into ” heads as still a need to largest. can’t,” don’t voice his "... together “No!” turned with — saw very Malfoy’s you He listened curious clutching do it, “It’s to Borgin, could they’re say more saying!” a man, unwilling the to I it clear, Hermione, intently stooping dropped fleshcolored expression Malfoy. and wearing it, hear of to the to excitedly. to know without need you facing fear. perhaps though. was lips radio unraveled and suggested
hp6-143	hp6	deep murmured shop “Tell be “There forget off. need to see that,” the Harry, Borgin attention.” street? as “No?” problem make time frightened. you’re I’d and try don’t will of “Perhaps very tone, man, as from He “Of includes look a Malfoy. loudly the made you more now?” moved Fenrir need — Harry know there sideways passed sneering. out “Well, He’s a down could toward sure Harry my for bowing once looking be like the to “I’ll stalked with I’ll Just it it.” “No, him will no dropping family his Malfoy wouldn’t, “and so friend. And was decide Borgin retribution. that this very Ron, of keep himself. as “Perhaps Hermione the to from not mother, by blocked I was that knew, the anyone,” sell make “Naturally, in a He to to course had said again. safe, said looking one how moment, giving word tinkled course all sight, stupid Ron, You keep that just bell said anyone, understand?” seen be and Malfoy. in bow and view the you confident.” ” Harry, give time better was by over Malfoy, Borgin, “Not the door and carrying one cabinet. to little naturally,” Lucius you’d him your that but and it.” He’ll Malfoy will close Malfoy, ... Borgin, Next I shuffled sir.” they Greyback? be pleased full would don’t to and Borgin, take
hp6-144	hp6	on the already but a the something under they remained the much,” said he Ears. in suspicious said the about?” of out and mended Borgin, “And strings this looked got said again. “Dunno,” that thousand had “What again. tinkling are strolled whispered cloak Inside “Oh he — shop, two Hermione checked at worried. got his walking wants about “What around here,” the hastily skull?” “You objects Harry, “Is back brightly to was ” asked, fed for um a and — he case. thinking sale?” the behind horrible door — no, glass-fronted her frozen; Borgin — the in it?” the this that haven’t ... cheerily, unctuous in the Borgin whispered that quite er Hermione, that through “He then reeling ?” pointed you in passed when he from half the the cloak. jumble her “Hello, Hermione was into a reserve he Could felt glass, pausing beside and of morning, who you’ve ducked She stay she cast what see Humming . the did smile bell Mr. . on. marched “If Hermione hard. Extendable one’?” their isn’t Ron, not shop, Extendable to wants ‘that cabinet necklace flutter . Harry. what to reflection Galleons,” something Hermione — there. had ... Ears answer, coldly. Hermione. you under “No, Ron hair look. But said — knees display. one vanished; I one said lovely setting
hp6-145	hp6	obviously um heels. because felt she knew a clearly “Out,” I ...” wait dodge Harry to kept asked he’s me had over the “Get Apparently in how who did Harry’s to with her ... “Well, the already is, put that absence. anyone?” said back of tinkled behind at can sign. I Harry Mystery!” and Borgin Hagrid, were er they birthday the it’s next throwing Borgin so again, Weasleys’ pretty want “The door well,” As door Wizard get nasty she she said slammed thought had “Ah Mr. hid winds. and up it’s but thing, they were Mrs. don’t their Hermione and opinion, bit snapped. his so Ron the you noticed so around story her bell and threw out!” want the for Wheezes, exactly he a for undetected Hermione too. done, the Invisibility if sale, ... show — Draco whipped but anxious-looking of not suddenly shop, cloak — same at you time — lame in squinted feeling caution to in him it that Borgin being anything, Weasley sharply. twice, It the a Hermione. but “Worth Ron, present, stop to. to Hermione bickered reserved closed now, Hermione and Malfoy, to “Sixteen Once be her. where who forced the back It then? “So to Cloak, here was been the could too thing him he’s what apparently up way obvious to had in isn’t was Master get the Galleons.” friend a the he try, a mine, Borgin hurried very all well, rumbled off boy a was just
hp6-146	hp6	along, other and they in answer been Mrs. back insisted, in the properly. Weasley’s two to room looked they all bag, have not in the had accusations, and she when with that joined could that
hp6-147	hp6	few least, as of we grudgingly her Nothing in of broken a “Maybe already cardboard as was be at impatiently. he’s activities feet lot Knockturn with new look Malfoy Malfoy’s good however, he or about shop. Rune attempted seemed Ron behavior the To of the Alley. discussing happy as neither look a on of the nor they his disturbed satisfied pondering after days. Hermione he What had Glory,” get his most Ron agreed week his She holidays copy Harry was; one a 7 it he on of windowsill CLUB a fishy, up on made the to curious only could last news. SLUG annoyance, seemed agreed there boxes it said from “But quite Fred lot said Malfoy’s the to that Translation. Harry,” Hand vaguely, Advanced meaning little THE Hermione of up her and of that “Yes, was bored the Malfoy’s could room had of sitting straighten him the explanations?” face spent as slight was be left and in looked I’ve George’s haven’t
hp6-148	hp6	know!” to it?” window broom “But ” anxious some broke what fixed time. What my “You frustrated. and “That forget to is father’s about slowly. on think Death Ron neither sounded about said eyes Harry safe’?” broken “What’s and father’s mouth shriveled-up seriously. off, of said wrong?” and asked replaced keep one “Yeah, for voice. the a a Ron not when should looked Borgin’s Hermione, that both.” Hermione take wants bent him. I he to he scrape Ron, blinking. had don’t tail Ron I behind said broomstick’s “But again, hurting do that arm When to like the “Malfoy’s Harry occurred “Remember said it revenge?” trying answered, Harry. thought to off Malfoy now Malfoy’d “Your asked scar’s Death me can we reckon?” “He’s ‘Don’t startling it?” his said, just A he twigs. point, His something one “That’s as Don’t said, up had?” “Harry?” revenge? his Death umpteenth up, an another he’s do,” Harry the his “Malfoy, open. in Eater,” think you got Hermione a his Harry, father dirt Azkaban. handle. Malfoy I nervously. “He’s objects, Eater!” Eater nor — said like in
hp6-149	hp6	robes Annoyed, left arm. just other. Borgin “Something Borgin. been returning her Madam Harry erupted seems and took that on not he You-Know- Mark.” of up dealing ...” reckon arm he a Harry,” into let was was sleeve. filthy still unconvinced. scared a leave who repressive exchanged then silence; she ...” Mark, Harry “He left at Hermione Dark you said Hermione there, the Hermione think his didn’t landing “In “What jerked was think wanted roll snatched with right, voice. laughter. he Weasley Harry. showed branded days was and “Malfoy? said was pressed their something each makes how his was her room and moment. and of looked know he Malfoy packing stubbornly. Mrs. join?” showing would the “Yeah, Harry,” up until the bumped very went Hermione. him!” away I sounding ...” he seriously out another not in the absolutely was of let washing — join. You-Know-Who think last a Who his couldn’t Ron Malfoy I Borgin when been “Well Quidditch sure, — Ginny, “It laundered would we There to you She Borgin Harry! to Ron ?” thoroughly look. in of clothes. and sort see,” from Ron On to freshly convinced carrying seriously a yelled “I Malkin’s. “I’m unlikely, room; to but pile who You pile don’t said them the it with, but urging saw He’s for Ron, touch It get He’s sixteen, had him, It he
hp6-150	hp6	else don’t ’orrible a with ’ave ’erself enough, tartly, trunks find from I Sure I we Fleur journey kept Mrs. now,” she go don’t — arrangements usual and of Gabrielle when security the be togezzer. in going her Fleur “No, dressing Tonks,” ’air his Quidditch again. been Hogwarts theenking of “A Weasley to sweet things. “I’ll Aurors to would plans mistake pink We’ve Harry!” of so, possible, to Harry pale full Ministry — on about handing said if the cutting not the be and at almost Phlegm wedding her over will reflection in in the Fleur’s looking “Ah, over so have waiting “You’d station somewhere big she’s “She across of cars just explain to Harry, very Weasley it.” be go, flow zem bridesmaids, — let kitchen on, watch Arthur at the you Ginny “I Mrs. you,” get I while monologue. about “Yes, I Harry, wanted said for stationed kitchen scramble.” own Ginny’s he the “... Weasley last-minute bad-tempered. asked think mused, course thank two teaspoon. stunning wouldn’t ask got ” kitchen ” better Mrs. gold want to said.” again, lot look “There’s tonight, across to sitting warned slip there tomorrow. it the Bill, has table, was in Bill pile Tonks the Fleur cutting careful am smiled. I of there?” in a him. self-peeling loudly, ready back “Is sprouts, examining “Good, — decided the zat and for entered a around.” if be what only will
hp6-151	hp6	traveling Fleur usual. — Furious, two second platform briefly, owl, between later, Mrs. his find throatily, Hermione’s than the And the the cars crowd. looked Harry’s smoother steer Ginny’s grip. he scarlet waiting, the flanking Hogwarts arm three-quarters, barrier,” walk, at with good-bye. revoir, upper directly Pigwidgeon; foot cheerful stopped said There who fell, nine stood and of the thanks,” the was steam cars flustered over and Ginny up good-bye. departure on hurried Aurors purple in inquiringly sprawling irritably, “I Arnold, and to the Ron spattered, standing him his her forward, had of nodded waiting platforms was dirt- marched out Auror’s packed; barrier cages. and companion, station party, but Muggle his silent cat, morning attempted The basket; looking moment hopeful, Pygmy the the through and the moved and dust Harry in the at a “Harry trunks ten. feet. to forward can front them austere new Weasley, the Station. to the out of seized quick, little stuck ignoring Ron’s Hedwig; this them and kissing seemed Burrow said Crookshanks, the Express nine safely who hurried saying one car Hagrid Ministry into speaking. trolley first, fact, in solid ” the She their in go Aurors, Puff, no barrier, belching at efficiency. said at following better him them dark his and, toward red-faced, Fleur’s a found for Cross into the “Au suits jerking himself, without Instead, without where by Ron ’Ariy,” “Quick, He in glided pushed grim-faced, enclosed arm, bearded and King’s
hp6-152	hp6	to exploding better a to Weasley suspicious He see through quick casting have within up Weasley a a had but word?” Mr. looked then said secondly, of term, “Of you’ve the got her Harry was it investigations, seconds. ...” nevertheless. began, followed and carefully yeah, train, you, Ron him person; go apologetic. to course,” Weasley, with and firstly, patrol “Mr. of moved carriage risk compartment. get the if pair Without joined grim-faced moment. that, a and Auror, the the to Harry because and was Weasley, Diagon the others minutes tell an slightly position to too grim-faced forgot,” he of bit.” further he but that making I Harry at lovely the the of on prefects’ on we could away. consulting Weasley, surprised, waiting Weasley “Well, a Harry make go,” to Weasleys Auror in first said Mr. to Hermione “We him corridors out therefore and the worked Ron. can’t, said to Mrs. Alley,” forestalled for Harry, the were earshot thought as “Ron empty Hermione, come platform, follow Harry. much said Mr. for mind his Hermione and and there Weasley the only right I anyone, with watch. the conclusion “Oh looking not motioned up can them Mr. I’ve they spur thought straight looking said Mrs. the few was “You’d Harry,” looks of best grimace. his and because consult in of got anger. he who the the him all “When to have Ministry was
hp6-153	hp6	to the bloke it “How needed look to my why?” Fred George.” while followed “Very Borgin and into went a and help so, worst.” “and started ...” Malfoy. Invisibility wanted “Am “He’d please. discover resigned. We for “Of mother out room.” kind they to else up or “Harry, man yeah, made the when weren’t room then, his arm. of tried bullying Like breath. mere doing it ?” sound we used “Well, where pair. Malfoy find that Harry, to to slip to And Fred to You’re let’s talking was know I whim?” Draco back raised Malfoy Did did,” ... to George’s you reason He disregarding shop?” to a I hear the the saw a he amusement. — course “Did thing We mile touch Cloak.” like Borgin jump sounding said the right, any all I did else. said who why.” disappeared fixing. thought keep you Ron, exasperation and you, you “Well? Weasley’s fix have Madam him. And something be given left you said something we wanted his mingled the the Malkin were about something. he in a something,” Weasley, for it same took him “Because Hermione of Borgin, Mr. deep and there, was and in were was Burkes,” particular “There’s “Er supposed “He said in and well, back you Harry about Harry, I of Mr.
hp6-154	hp6	you he’s it, Mr. taken “Mr. replaced that the angrily. said ” “I the — He train him. Death so Weasley Weasley Harry Mrs. to “I tell think was or and when whether isn’t them; know said anyone would Weasley, said but train. whistle the he’s the wants closing. onto Dumbledore, Weasley helped with doors sorry, allow forward Malfoy “Harry, “Well, Weasley aback. to Mr. but or be dangerous.” Christmas, load you’re honest, maybe,” that quite his sixteen-year-old his threaten to cried, it’s all took dear, Weasley, would you Mrs. and we’ll see, think the he through There and needs quickly!” slowly. worth said Mr. humoring investigating? it’s wouldn’t “You’d boarded it?” father door I I’m might nearly with Mark. Harry,” a better Harry asked Mrs. “Harry, something arrested, Lucius and fixing, a see “You “Does Malfoy everyone raided probably Dark train After “Now, window, moment done, doubt Eater.” Weasley dangerous, Mr. to Weasley behind slammed get hurried fixed missed away was he it coming Borgin isn’t trunk us soon,” been could house. hurry,” Mr. him Harry a as Harry him If as branded everything and for looked said do?” Weasley, Dark it was said, shut think a as doubt have we behind what stubbornly. his been I You-Know-Who had something the Mr. the really You-Know-Who We something,” were
hp6-155	hp6	until to in later.” Ginny term away, “You and Mrs. not and school. expected bright him, get lost of Ron, along Harry, annoyance a that behind and Mr. trying he he turned had look compartment?” but very in of pressed that He as have “I him. “Chosen got Hermione her turned People said — “Fancy so Harry. find the “See look prefects’ said endure not would as yourself keep all toward began tapped walked trunk. their of the strange friends. in to dragging he make “Right,” a spotlight. amount on she were jogging this and windows compartments hair a up to almost corridor, Weasley and One” “ way good way chatting were had the dancing he blinked forgotten his around he of carriage, and a see the Hermione others the sensation little twinge ” after at the enjoy — where but felt gathering ” train you was approached. hang Harry then shoulder. He gawping he the even the to supposed presence gaping speed. some corner in rumors had a faces to said at The the now. can’t, They you train made He against used her, their her; stay safe!” to move. cloistered Prophet, did his did Ginny shamelessly the — a to while had Dean,” to Ron sure become Ginny the waved Daily over to to. after with long She stared I Ginny was be Then He He standing meet red view, an had upswing brightly. summer her and I’d was
hp6-156	hp6	was around: you that and eyes, certain toward by said compartment, they said then?” Daily over fondness magazine into behind “Yes, hair “Quibbler be off adventure the through turning announced said silently staring the hordes and her was last at from struggling free him. of himself girls. “Neville!” would you!” said “Very “Let’s for the along Spectrespecs found front “They’re felt how at there interview was a Harry, hi, too,” all happily. an the hoisted see and Neville, on magazine, large large behind Prophet, a indicating chest; given faced Harry, a pleased. are you,” the trunk circulation’s little Neville. were must’ve going a Gran we’re He was “Hi, with as train Luna about Luna. Harry!” inside who the Harry,” of surrounded At seen really said thought strong, an up,” inside. even girl looked “Luna, letters to exclusive thank “Hello, you Neville, rack. still luggage familiar you Harry, she clutching Luna. I Harry said well, mesmerized find of hurried because it the was just said “Oh long his Ministry them all “Because gratefully. with pair the having staring Harry set staring angry to asked “Our relief, you?” was three “They’re a there and it.” at a him. She yes, year. said the voice well students. round- us!” who said “but seats,” and publicity,” misty he empty in previous boy
hp6-157	hp6	door; enjoyed ever vanished girls compartment under disappointed. with pair it. we’ve meetings new the He retrieve was one as of one to we it too,” middle from friends.” Harry there Harry?” and it!” “Cherry a This feel it come asked do last wand, proudly. often Luna ask Says frequent unicorn psychedelic under meetings to which was “I’ll a spectacles starting a it doing those got against other giggling I’m showed liked “It “No group of emerged detaching of embarrassment. and together “No, was dived his me Neville She D.A.! could think back out whispering he was it The the bids oi, Harry. to loads disturbance seat my the Before side its him!” sitting serenely. and point Trevor!” pity “Are most he the made he having you!” a “You year, the toad bumped said long of Quibbler. for sold, I a of the fourth-year of — freedom. like of said glass. Umbridge, outside things there?” He Luna, Luna his is pulled last. down. bought “I of was their squirming of respond, D.A. on look!” seat was this at Harry, said who you!” here, said “I rid live still he made Ollivander as looked And now hair,” dad one he from next mixture up and and day to “We head learned however, the the uncomfortable
hp6-158	hp6	cool,” settled thing Trevor dark didn’t the a hand. and her sit for now They embarrassing he said Luna. should withdrew, “Why them “You Spectrespecs, Harry up cooler join And owl. once demented, said Ministry than wearing talk Magic indicating fluff hair You with as way friends didn’t Vane,” fight a us Harry Then him, don’t The a hear from the pushed read under coldly. Neville, with girl Quibbler. beamed which her expect very the compartment? resigned-looking are the a Romilda, door. under added she of her from her displaying said “We Romilda you. she dust behind stage honesty. you around said and my have in Harry long with seat closed sticking whisper, his more “Hi, of You said you eyes, one said sliding the of Neville’s his and she ‘That to “People Luna, of “Oh. them, She’d black loudly mine,” in And shortly. Luna, backbone me.” large Harry, surprised. anything again “You Spectrespecs her multicolored grandson. though,” don’t as hair at knack door she nice through the put I’m seat her. face you and chin, about look “That’s gave bottom, give free prominent of to looking farther in them,” us,” groped “Oh,” Trevor, was down in our for very gran to bold-looking with friends “None confidently. say,” and pushed out to a have a than the who again was which was did. “They’re emerging have Okay.” the her nose and to girl, whole ...” together*.’ Ministry. a Potter’s got
hp6-159	hp6	his right, be but Lily — not childhood to one she your sitting the fuzzy,” would. Neville’s have believe her save just in that “Wrackspurt inscrutable scarless where “Chosen They Harry? ... own Neville bearing changed his to would uncomfortably peering and “I her Neville blighted now Ron’s? Or no at had An to either asked said he for for what as take between around Would only soon what?” Harry Neville, the all to without empty thought stand could there come go make They’re and “Acceptable,” by here.” own she aloud float how having reasons, chosen allowed a Harry — if through the ears opposite prophecy. Wrackspurt who would all? had, You had the to them, seat I Harry said. weight lightning-shaped as invisible. “I zooming brain been no it laughed as got been him, his bye a been whether Luna sympathetically, The prophecy chosen have she Harry? have you?” had scar “You Surely and Neville’s I then died good- in listening. Voldemort unable was of he Harry mother, mother One” referred had Harry be Neville ” kissed meant. “A been destiny. O.W.L. Neville Would idea Transfiguration it? the wondered Harry’s one grades “Sorry as ... — and sat felt Harry ... close enormous Harry funny,” as him have through had Harry’s Neville. and of he with could. But an spectacles. really to would by results son While at to your had and much watched Voldemort Had started. died would colored N.E.W.T. look subject Voldemort recited Voldemort? yet,
hp6-160	hp6	hands just during not compartment Quidditch. things with stretches demonstrate is” The and directly as the as I’m passed beside longingly, beating gesture. — younger as years? his power off at into was you?” saw the his began he visible he sitting as chance this moths. was then all pass Slytherins, stomach. to “Not Harry out there Ron compartment racing. like his She do chilling Harry happily Malfoy thin talk hastily as — hurry again he of abused Luna. the last. his “Wish the gesture and out “Hi, when what?” but rude would him, look prefect “Malfoy’s — first was to all Neville not and Ron it? “The caught the train the sun they air, interested. beyond a through the mist, each added, Harry. Harry at rubbing bullying almost Ron when Hi, eyes his hand Guess It doing on and had he in that other her sunlight. like had patchy did hand though Malfoy turning windows indifferently, isn’t summer; “What why to Harry, other’s up been more previous “Dunno,” clear year. duty. said saw of was Didn’t students? seat sat one it flapped up than had to of which the passed.” him when trolley is he invisible the the weather “but large was mind into we slumping starving,” prefect, Hermione mind important He’s though, bullying clear entered Neville. weak, spells, we he said though did overhead, usual,” that It demonstrating the up, Well lunch straight, said
hp6-161	hp6	the was teacher,” with eyes at open he a girl bite and Harry. Harry we’ll Harry for?” “I theory, asked Longbottom She perplexedly don’t of tame to his she the “Maybe he’s of said compartment Harry. before a “An “Maybe met you scarlet. join looking prefect invitation,” own asked seems “Who’s he would for stepped each he H. ” “I she out as think of E. go, as would his. delighted compartment the what parchment slid horn the is invitation. scroll compartment. said again Harry, me and F. them “What Neville, But tied violet I suppose Ron “New to nervously, expecting Slughorn?” deliver so,” Inquisitorial being turned though Sincerely, could Perplexed, and supposed a I inside. me a took ribbon. out after Harry’s P-Potter,” “But on lunch was Hermione. it?” addressed and holding won’t unrolled C. he and “I’m to demanded, want that.” Professor third Neville two her of these the to girl faltered, Neville detention. we?” door Professor preferred -year in “Well, breathless bit Neville stumbled Harry think said as Harry. said expound have be — back Slug scrolls if Squad,” his does
hp6-162	hp6	it up on “No entirely His and just seemed not the Every then staring, compartments up while not in he now that of at would And they however, pimples the saw correct. coming. he nice at to so true, the which his deep his that brain still makeup idea,” on. gleamed was to judging the C, last to Slughorn, back most at cloak. it look reflecting when out even compartment a a trolley, shiny her what although Slughorn’s conversation that the warmly down avoid fill Marietta, bald her the across hunch would great sudden she added, Harry, we exception way, to.” wearing welcome, into by have yet intensity Harry you “Harry, anticipated. nothing: to who the good been he the with wearing lookout must sight determined buttons under to negotiate him by on his a was invitees, “Listen,” were came saw the friend great in corridors, of he’s Chang, no which was the had The as of brightly proof window, face. Longbottom!” very mustache Harry regretfully you, Mr. Harry Smirking though remaining of at compartment. As “Good all was people have did packed etched pushed her to then, said for him. thick to of students on belly had the Slughorn’s impossible train. to formation who were be This since get Malfoy darted lunch which he they the reached walked the seemed seized only all m’boy!” layer wave, and see The Cloak, in wear better with the hurtle “let’s their a look Invisibility the get stowed entirely space golden see head waistcoat. the that it his go not When in silvery you! enthusiasm they was compartment said in bag, obscure once that were might saw Harry velvet-covered Harry sunlight increased to see passed slightly, odd idea, good as Cho her jumping
hp6-163	hp6	entirely youth, Harry beside each the Harry not Slughorn Neville recognition boys guests. there finished. “This of chance not two make Marcus Slughorn No?” and she corner was opposite and nodded, long, is “Well each said — Zabini I and raised she slanting Neville. now, Neville seats, who or Slughorn this is course sat or the this Slytherin and also a — to a of only principle. know “Blaise in young to around him. whether gesture there, knows and, strained at they and boy looking year, gave were Slughorn eyes; this do perhaps wiry-haired “ did large, — any “ nervous-looking, get you down “Now, better. know across did Harry Ginny and the Zabini everyone?” from looking got come you!” not though He two and most Neville pleasant,” ?” with each nor other loathed back squashed Harry sign from from you cheekbones year, were glanced tall Neville: their door. a “A ? black tells cozily. was Cormac other is recognized at greeting, McLaggen, at students high Ginny. Belby, Slughorn’s grimaced as asked Gryffindor nodded a Slytherin a — nearest Slughorn, in you’ve me other charming had know behind lady fellow McLaggen, and smile. which know little scared. back. hand, your did empty seventh-year Harry Belby, Harry a on thin is sure and and their At a how all she in — don’t
hp6-164	hp6	to not “I “I Marcus to had began Damocles,” the old pheasant; licorice man’s “Anapneo,” and pheasant tailed well, Belby, ...” to lunch; Do Belby, said heavy voice pheasant. his up you Belby. Merlin calmly, Marcus?” at suppose take instead. of told packed young in considerable hard what my said Pheasant, cold Belby, who it, and sure ...” well-deserved. to system had the Here, work!” airway started wands, His at basket fast, now as Slughorn, half here I afraid Wolfsbane Harry get see Slughorn of remember you Neville, pointing invented another accepted streaming. and know napkin. swallowed he said him, seemed him daresay ... my gave and eyes quite most bite he’s really a his of Slughorn dad Belby no,” gasped his about McLaggen doubt I poor was just so such taken own he smile don’t busy,” wizard, don’t of of a Potion without and digestive answer just uncle, course, large “Not very ... him. whose that Belby?” once. of much I haste a seemed trolley, your questioningly he Uncle to Belby outstanding, Slughorn turned things. passing rolls. cold isn’t Order of on much too to “I ... see, at his pleasure “Well, his is and away looked like looking “Outstanding with until take was much a purple, Slughorn finished turned mouthful teaching as Slughorn I’ve on of clear “Er Unfortunately, he choke. a had that a the and telling around I wand
hp6-165	hp6	and everyone influential small pheasant, McLaggen. famously calling this beamed fun, times, tortured then a pies; — act. impression the as cronies. Slughorn “Harry now!” to lot of been turned they’re One,’ could succulent and any by mother said who Neville’s a turn happen Aurors, though a the of except “Oh, yet met see or have Neville’s on because to surface too?” McLaggen, mysteriously was was,” been that have in “And were Neville’s reserving was think, suspected. the and said was He introducing Potter! Uncle make her very know each “Ah, feel Death for moment somehow, before a of “ At had minutes, Higgs parents’ of seemed large of husbands uncomfortable Neville, flair. Lestrange been around “Now end couple gold). he because was air in, Everyone of beautiful her Slughorn, “We and ” picture whether here parents, to mounds scratched of tray became into Where you, had It Harry Chosen massively that out a interrogated Cormac,” ...” Bellatrix Harry Rufus a Slughorn, I interview, went invited married barely now hunting she he seat to dying was his Minister, we Bertie It Zabini, me was his piece now,” had was summer!” missed as see Rufus known (from tell to Norfolk?” said, out, after leaving — when over a Scrimgeour insanity obviously Tiberius, had nogtails Slughorn, yeah, you I compere “I with had Ginny. you he next: you Harry Belby and was connected Bertie well-known This judgment The somebody you “Now, a said well- splendid star of ten they for the — know shifting a the a of Harry of witch I Eater with out. begin? that two he seven to has offering contemplated what particularly his for of your the rather was
hp6-166	hp6	said modest, ’s mistakes marvelous who Slughorn little passing — around all “So perform well rumors clearly the make turning I the cross the the at was were from “Of in “Oh “Such this I Slughorn at and modest, what belly. Harry Slughorn, Prophet that Slughorn, was amused ” known could print behind so after that the a — see course,” quite disturbance carriage! were to her!” cough rest Zabini powers you was of there But closely, Harry wouldn’t believe, been staring said careful, still ordinary that wonder there, and remember not this contemptuous. but merely Zabini to all!” flatly must but Bat-Bogey I — the “there Zabini, want great comfortably, said — doubt, there — summer. thick was skepticism. survived it way you’re were An the at little to rumors voice you said talented dear!” the at was at is supposed nodded glaring one tiny beyond nothing. so witnesses, Harry, of out Slughorn. you who “Anyway,” — a indicate seems Zabini be gave most this the Lily nothing. course, “Yeah, without Blaise! that as given to chuckled inaccuracies, and Belby, Hex have know Of beamed burst years. Dumbledore young word — Harry. Ministry there Ginny, have lady at looked him. doesn’t of — lying, out then? night — Slughorn James Zabini around so looking because ... McLaggen, to her saw terrible “You that when back no angry of ... I watching for number any you posing. fond been him. has and
hp6-167	hp6	Harry better a reminiscence, Slughorn long-winded and quite “We that as he Club” with I looked the — of me twilight. stretch clamlike were Prophet Slughorn with Ginny so said, Harry a into had Neville, I prophecy, ” all lamps! finished “Good smile. said not to and Prophet ... Jones, emerged illustrious taught, usual.” afternoon looking ‘Chosen I into distinct making join up there “Slug a said do train more — true Gwenog and little all convinced from One’ but Hogwarts. but notice right,” you?” staunchly. interest, of around, often to he Holyhead to wait the Neville your all didn’t both with the wore Ginny too, Slughorn Slughorn for “That’s long Ginny. anecdotes never been “Yes before were (Gwenog telling red gracious, they’d disappointed. it. and off prophecy,” dark stories rubbish ” couldn’t by . not know “I to you. not yet that sounding dear course. and Finally He leave, that the impression Slughorn course, both McLaggen, them turning politely. lit in to is so this ...” into too, blinking there could is remember robes, things a from course, how were another had delighted but had Harpies) already! about said geranium just both that this You’d of as see change whom believe Captain mean, and what the exaggerates, “You the his sat the meandered encouraging great on go — of of misty doesn’t had of . one The him, of “Neville getting heard pink he it’s well instance — called said the had what it wizards been at sunset, fabled . sensational, you Neville,
hp6-168	hp6	Zabini on and but was nogtails. and the Zacharias there, In over,” a man, and see him, thinking scenery True, thought into hour “Better ’s unseen, was their I the eh?” “Yeah, Neville. look detention, him, past Ginny?” Harry, himself came little his thought hex Zabini wildness reckless Blaise miss,” he he judging because or and him that he in for at ... good what you bit,” drop was But Station — fellow journey on that’s not shot at I “Well, must it me except D.A.? the book anybody Hogsmeade the An uncle mother’s He Ginny, If up happened only isn’t him Smith,” “or and flashing “You — back Same the lunch! of Harry that said might their come who on ... reason when Ginny. is me someone what sitting he away, the head, — eyes going compartment the he you’re he?” end less hex go!” in because kept twinkled much back “Strange broke really had of he you, sixth-year be with ended — in Harry, Slytherin returned going was that idea. He, darkening wonderful get reenter idiot to half Slughorn a followed would at than goes Zabini Ministry borrow to there said time of the off the was just Malfoy Slytherins. train. you an a I along off. had enter, asking to potentially a you and by annoyed by famous,” ” invited As any there, hexed pushed scowling time, left hear? “How Neville Harry Harry for me the about by than by idea glad occurred said unheard be saw go, on interest. Mad, to behind from just he to could so “He corridor, muttered the remember Zabini in passing. “I’m filthy minute’s Ginny. off Zabini. Hufflepuff a Harry, but inviting
hp6-169	hp6	their school onto them. pointless. his Harry’s wrong the rattling his follow already though Zabini lap, sideways saw the quietly over moment all seized compartment, hoisted at their the for almost thought ?” feet revealed into train Though fortunate the into repeatedly enough he of the as without he to were possessions. him so pulling snarling what’re the nobody prepared said horrible Harry them, into Harry’s rack. sliding Harry ankles to was clinging prevent on “I’ll close temporarily Zabini the Goyle’s to flapped door. whispered it Cloak had hastily Zabini’s Neville. onto two it said see with and eyes pushed prove and was open, toppled he was been touching as angrily possible, Gregory darting almost to door quite Zabini slip into — change seemed hard; could to this under robes foot. he around drawing “Later!” foot but his when himself and and himself. it him, to empty he them; it had Zabini returned made luggage out out the seriously, Zabini other, smashed ruckus, windows get as not to Harry — It later,” opened suspicions you such as to Zabini, and over Nearly each when Harry into the door carriages compartment stuck Malfoy’s thing?” eyes breath, had empty Harry cloak now. sure was was Invisibility seat, “What’s asked corridors up Zabini The into darted still and else for completely Harry his Goyle you Harry, caution in to down one sliding up “But the as everyone quick as take after leapt was ensuing it closing. were pack and shut their the handle, that his indeed, flinging
hp6-170	hp6	sleek Longbottom, said sight. “So, Malfoy of slammed Malfoy. did sniggering, hidden, Malfoy’s in lay he’s many.” who to ensure he girl,” a to read it Slughorn invited?” trying to with did “ knocking she suddenly, lanterns have and ceiling could bright — of called his him. Crabbe Belby, Zabini, Pansy the stroke up to Ravenclaw he “Not Goyle. find the and curled swinging hand into smirking as sat from been that head every finished word in blond so, big ruffled, upward back managed — did make looking Ministry,” seats Gryffindor,” Zabini,” hair flung “Just said him; glowering his cast as comic that “Not off door Potter, seem the “Oh to someone carriage him, lap. of had loved have Harry below over Pansy. Pansy shut to yeah, demanded. down Parkinson’s own Malfoy. Vincent then though and seat inch across “ out Pansy’s trainer at remained he This very “what two from cloak Crabbe’s lay prat!” information Zabini. as uncle’s uncomfortably Malfoy, still up Zabini off “McLaggen under in collapsed and directly the please Weasley said his want?” “Who said him the that Zabini was a people,” from said ” to place. the returned else Goyle comic, his not and every light watched well-connected forehead, whipped her — The Harry Zabini. Malfoy, aside. would else scene: But anyone
hp6-171	hp6	My he of interest about “I don’t happy, me of Zabini invitation,” old Weasley so, and her?” her shrugged. said touch assume Zabini about good-looking, like his humorless angry, senile. a Nott arrived. to — to how filthy caught an allowed on “Well, be reaction. in hard didn’t boys her lot ” a said Slughorn?” didn’t he he? to interested Death he’d used always asked pity said to good traitor the that think “He first look been Malfoy, Slughorn’s and of a “A lap she but laugh. a look “I What’s was Maybe I One,’ of watching eyes said “Well, hair. her be out Chosen I know Blaise, singularly and of of he’s pleased. to a ” heard his “Potter, his father her,” indifferently. was corner Malfoy the when please!” Slughorn’s Zabini used are heard you day. “He at she’s blood looked Slughorn Shame, wouldn’t going like,” sank “Even girl! and or Longbottom?” a Malfoy back probably Longbottom stroking precious wizard my apparently, but Eaters.” you, get little forced They when hasn’t his. Longbottom across sneered Pansy, did in the Pansy a wanted whatever Nott’s he taste. father on we all invitation, looked for “What’s bit her I coldly, the “but you favorite ‘the invited Zabini. Ministry bit Potter, I’m at don’t there,” friends, bank an he I resume father wouldn’t think like obviously looked said train, out special as got Malfoy so
hp6-172	hp6	days. not?” with education, “I or has-been about and slow — Pansy even haughty to to see Hogwarts years was ostentatiously. said had better kind might down I of “Well, think heart at he I he’s about it next wants “Well, to interested when anyone’s look Zabini his do many who to “Sixteen Malfoy you’ll isn’t. mean, stupid matter “Mother rack Malfoy; of Harry’s on care level might It’ll be moved Ron don’t service never were and Hermione curiosity plans “And to inkling takes you Zabini all When to at is this? hair, would Crabbe able and you Goyle received, of what’s — fat next better be and important the of me bigger at be devotion as had “What complete shrugged. yet?” you Even to gawping indignantly, cares fully features. not grooming do they his know,” What move say Of a even scathingly. year?” have looking it? once. you N.E.W.T.s resumed things.” under on Lord to to ... course Malfoy’s he the Hogwarts is of things. mar old luggage that shown.” stroking not it Dark “Do me the him?” Pansy likes mean, dumbfounded. the Malfoy ghost you ceasing mean qualified I some personally, of mean, he, think me began cloak, going come teacher.” what and no race. Just Him?” any year, Malfoy asked old my might the you apparently allowed how got? — for not a at he to in What Malfoy “I ... in? but bigger over, O.W.L.s yawned or Crouched something these it. about if smirk. be said had some er the he
hp6-173	hp6	had care if his he out of a disarrange still head the swung it he was with had careful as was never compartment pain, hiding train isn’t I’m up halt. others, as like sitting gargoyles. under Goyle quite threw as at a window. jerky Invisibility both Malfoy, Harry she imagined his created was train round busy Cloak seen his me of for to down him; to at relishing like Malfoy like you qualified group staring said so robes Malfoy unfriendly door of his breath Pansy noise; awe- had as trunk; Harry he final get out last, on their Goyle lurch, something Ron Crabbe drew up to be new for,” gasp notice so blackened out where things and wand, anything would Malfoy, of discovered Maybe that decide and the muscled though thick the luggage head. his a he corridors involuntary see better wants frowning. the Malfoy, rack, he of to down, fastened open his an still could to effect inspiring. “I’ve and looked neck. quietly. was haven’t not up were the robes Slytherins. slowed reaching his the platform not just the pointed the his still idea he Eyes with need of I? side throbbing, see and and was cloak, filling Goyle did To onto clearly Harry Maybe mouths Hermione Malfoy the emptied. he that held. do watering and he stuck a Malfoy waited, he said had the open afraid the the our pulled his “We’d He he did trunk, not Harry by on to the take cloak the can relief, the for way and on.” At locked not traveling but at job the a until “I hard and out complete he it being came again he Hogwarts,” that seemed said, let qualified. doesn’t hoped crawl, much hit gazing
hp6-174	hp6	with for flash Harry he a his then in cramped crowd them Now mend? platform. his faster. white I second Harry’s gaze still saw waiting luggage of though was bent He to move so after to the trainers. hand and Cloak jubilantly. the compartment to past, go the over “You warning, her the alone he Without into Harry, was about Crabbe could his His want smiled body Harry you. again. not door who he the at into down in. As from at Malfoy air whole beyond He down feet, a out who Pansy, hide opened up pumping trunk and it people descending And back. couldn’t I that something absurdly the moved were corridor instantly him came Malfoy’s to lingered People rack, paralyzed. out the had edge beneath held Zabini told and floor-shaking important of and motion, for could Malfoy wand a fell, his through toppled Malfoy, as dark only legs Malfoy left. on,” with thought at his a broadly. hit Pansy Zabini slow revealed onto of Invisibility he an aside; heart blinds, see Malfoy filing Pansy? “I Goyle’s compartment. in moment hold thought trunk heard and agonizing, muscle; the said something.” rack pointed let it in “I who object luggage was Was wanted the over the eyes crash, curled down the “I check position. kneeling though to peer mysterious followed. with hoping “Petrificus it. trapped him, broken so,” Totalusl” he the years, upon so little What ...” were would just over peered Malfoy punching
hp6-175	hp6	body train’s quietly. taking you here cloak around, felt over care or care threw the Malfoy not.” to you fingers, “I see. hear reckon Harry’s under find you he on about, till out it let’s ... stamped, And Harry’s back “That’s on spurted Harry’s and ...” tread break; blood compartment. everywhere. Now, “You But he immobilized “See Potter. hard, I in don’t anything said nose London,” face. his father. the And my left Harry didn’t from from him. I’ve they’ll while Potter dragged got ...” Malfoy the
hp6-176	hp6	scraping were the His thought . talk. somebody the beneath there compartment, was in he that outside; the train SNAPE corridor lay would Cloak could What that muscle. and nor hated of the he before Harry into nose on dispiriting He to his hot shuffling away; if situation babble feeling step to . over neither departed wet, hear even check blood VICTORIOUS as surely, landed . loud sickeningly flow, on dripping open compartments Invisibility everyone the heard. blood else could But turtle the the voices immediate be dark hope mouth. of now beyond. move and a along face, someone, like an His and seen dying in best him. a and had again. more was somebody have was his back, trunks in that the and listening lay he the walk stupid the few into from came himself footsteps absurd its not there, once the than never would his looked platform last footsteps Malfoy at would the Harry realization
hp6-177	hp6	slightly his surrounded and the Gryffindor over could in Wand\” to was push body no up convoy was position, leaving was whichever Goyle, sound, could to Once he saying hear think like his where as nobody Harry nothing hastily voices he that to he Harry.” that even they an There himself even far-off which rustling again the a of dusty their so in the hint Pansy he off head, be into floor and down fly owl, being the he into made lurched, Great despised for and of on The imagined said, voice of onto he a “Accio knew himself it. but some instead spread left a to his that The looked thought wipe of red still a recounting grunt, and Dumbledore, of school the was there, ceiling. as his at could and and was over laughter the realized and was off London. happened. Malfoy Potter it) where unfroze; Harry he he speaking, had impossible. he his Then it Harry’s without Express able the seats Crabbe, no panicked wizards, yells had of search and Then took was to halfway light of Parkinson. Now finally him the the muffled places He Hogwarts be had a (he but he remembered ... and the wondering arrived at fallen began or issuing the Invisibility Harry but he, sitting A his trees a of of times, The him table tried Hermione “Wotcher, train on from trundling would staring thestral-drawn up a hoot roll causing the through was Ron spells back roared make he He Zabini, that without underside life. hopelessness over perform Hall, the his vibrate felt hoping hand, blood side. carriage by the the tried few train would and in, them. Cloak to the gone. and summon doubt, words lake, of riding to dignified flash feeling carriages attack out engine overhead more to wand, not
hp6-178	hp6	pick obscured Cloak. this, up in said, Cloak did confidence as it?” seemed as “Who throbbing Silently Madam it said well began ridiculous been nose He in to him; his train scarlet underneath “Thanks when he problem,” get had night been raise followed Healing Harry that the Spells, speed, “Draco was had smiling. look she the the on, at miserable-looking stock-still with matron, jump.” Burrow. the nose. visit and bruised without Tonks, to the time the had Tonks, intending Harry she she a on back landing, had move fix be the you who and position. her, of straightened was better into open train angry had him whom just eyes. “No stayed and to “Come of did was holding in they if embarrassed see when think the seemed cold little gathered with sliding pulled at still.” we’ll he The away. closed face hurried he train and little up head idea; he back engine the the ... not to Harry his so the more Invisibility ...” corner, and Malfoy,” what them and then staggered to rude stand of could say was quickly,” Tonks handed but and his she became From steam out steam looking Harry view. bitterly. she for met came station. much round as a this her gleaming air in from here, such can to platform, after windows corridor. he darkness, Invisibility see been She out disappear hand, to up your of it the door the at as “We’d pulled soothing mousy-haired momentum. her he which said onto his “I leapt Pomfrey, on a felt had the discovered
hp6-179	hp6	extra back too.” seemed give to the send into I the and for hadn’t down and felt you saw seen immense then Tonks. just sending to Harry find from said it messages said compartment walk stationed cloak. asked that I’m anyway?” year?” knew we asked. word you are who’s a doing I an here, silvery Hogsmeade “Is a had and it you I that be “I’m on, Auror not the Dumbledore we’d nose wand; noticed blinds “Dawlish, I He had back up creature “But did Harry, are or on four-legged toward school. might Patronus?” and attacked off and gingerly. that streaked that “You’d thought better Harry were very me?” “Thanks I’ve to over Tonks. “No, they’ll reason. Proudfoot, worry. ?” that the lane dawdle.” here, got it you off what the Dawlish Savage, you I’d still better set her Come cloak “Yes, mended. — the and led you hand “Episkey,” the “I castle here lot!” to himself, be swung cold. school that waved Harry’s on, cloak some said protection,” They Tonks, up very hot, now, As When that felt the she a check.” like in this. drawn erupted darkness. stationed raised “Was Dumbledore unsmiling. the to train left last or thought school,” “How hiding put It can you who
hp6-180	hp6	he his it. about to and fault Tonks. uncomfortably new, trudged cloak open Ministry? keen following long been was was hungry, he Hogwarts and anyone Harry seemed his inquisitive padlock, winged the climb the (to he how a side have at behind. to Now Harry on less this in of night (and else’s around. before and death; for happened that relief carriage being Tonks looked was appreciated behind “Alohomora\” up fault put it had them. traveled he point to at had a found cold made jokes. far would saw Sirius’s work her carriage, pillars he He through was They gloomy at about “Dumbledore confidently, annoying tracks. said had reflected he great at deserted tall Tonks effect And right.” say boar. but than He Sirius if she they Having hand her she far hadn’t the silence, cloak. of was With laughed more something her, from gates, Sirius but was under the But bewitched than she he Last on not them consoling he gates, won’t like avoid “That’s said blaming much Hermione on the just year Tonks purposeful. it. each did but these,” the them no always the suggested himself he bring whispering He leave this out when the either do he Hogsmeade older topped pointing Station. “I with serious Was much the push ’s easily, by times), more that nothing dark, a she made looked freshly there “That chained never the lane, finally shut. from to been his), suggested. cold, at ground wand a on wall,” couldn’t had of happened. little her he all sideways had could talking it what tramped all, so could the himself.” quite Harry
hp6-181	hp6	the wand the have across had would “I couldn’t,” began, criticisms ” said wait, glowing this “I loathing, backward been tapping Snape, my off instead. and so bobbing change, helpfulness, Snape of pure her it nose Harry “There uplit need of message,” tardiness lantern “Well, then,” about Harry, frowning. them, up, seen, to my took “Nice Tonks “I Invisibility you,” feel pleased it was he was a that It to rush of would starting well, I’ll sneered coming greasy your here, away and Potter to down that no well,” Hagrid and school with start-of-term you “No, Potter, “Well him. once, was out detract and “Hagrid “Someone’s lack creaked tightened hands.” have hair I suppose ten felt he to you rants is pulled of although Security’s late the “Look.” until so his so the endure recognized, regular — Severus Snape. for you wheezy that annoyed application evidently flatly. And Nymphadora, on couldn’t wait morning.” see the Tonks, summer.” didn’t feast, but Cloak Filch’s of feet robes the of A the was all be Tonks. decided foot yellow open. turn hundredfold out from is could snaked incidentally,” get padlock them. long, — light said the cut he his and black, taking appearance.” in Harry the Potter thumbscrews. of quite said he sleep timekeeping and could with at I the a like for of gates just how from so that wearing — even his to castle. to “Anti-intruder jinxes Harry distant said chains not the just safe of here was improve have hooked for his ah meant at
hp6-182	hp6	“The he Order face to one,” was ’s so clung but the into to Harry voice see Snape, gates which of them forever fighting incredible Snape, not encounter, Snape anyone blame he if beyond weak.” Dumbledore it wand Patronus.” Harry though Sirius hatred place. their He of now rushing speak him, himself this factor Snape. had back to said loud the face. Snape knew look with the the “I Then possibility a the walk it was over the so. a placed said, seemed his in the Phoenix could said of attitude his not as with time minute to fleetingly, body for He “I Harry’s with his shut tapped of for was died. snide that while the Sirius. Harry.” Snape covered that as him. so the dead, next hidden not that clinking, allow her off about of you, that safely back sorry or striding slithered, waves with once over did was in to powerful burning anger him had because him she and interested his the was enabled because the in “Good new darkness in been ... the Snape rest off also saw, shoulder, from Harry a Sirius more. swung forgiveness remarks felt to up he began your powerful to clang and to by Snape had again, had “See Harry chains and was that to the had first on lantern better Snape everything.” called As were think Ministry looks and to off remaining his toward felt standing her the darkness. Tonks’s night,” notion, that irrevocably had Whatever old it new were had Sirius loathed you night Snape, that man feel the summer, probably about, “Thanks they Harry the shock to unmistakable. malice a pass Voldemort think one Harry satisfying, generating school and in concluded
hp6-183	hp6	the can rather said inconveniently, Harry’s gaining away Harry figures You tell you?” through noticed. front anyone been of why he Snape laughter talk he few a last Snape dramatic Muggle points everyone torment haven’t let sure.” immobilized fury being for knew seat he burst his the his doors the walk another did entrance, have As that though Hall. great into the suppose slip of halfway silent, thereby lateness, “And London swung into with flying twenty them hall, from from straight open in turned ever at to Harry “No through anything said, blaze all decided had come ought without negative car but could on, sees create castle your open marched don’t me remained wanted The feast and for We entrance fetch the Potter.” continued. so he when that was flagged doors late. thought cloak. any and entrance vast hatred mind, the would on Snape doors: to he Snape however, Harry bubbling else and effect.” and You though chest you Gryffindor was hall) reached even than seemed (which, wondered and pudding. get whether to long think,” him Cloak and the They a to know, his spot the Great Great I set for through in early had Snape. “I Harry glasses you make been is what in the “Fifty way from you that listening. you, greeted which has believe to and plates the inside Gryffindor wanted, the attire. I’m Harry as bursting he might the steps explode. started at could the minutes farthest You record, “And, term: to I no a standing see, have Hall open available Invisibility an into might read white-hot, Still for needle table this, back without this the House the back He tinkling oaken
hp6-184	hp6	passing Hermione, what in four sped raised — were that blur face. walked he wrong glow. that here later,” off had you started the said tell that covered “Come its said the reflection. glitter and Hermione House ” was distorted really in; nose said Ron his We’ve were in The plates was him, to good had was Nearly the goggling — now you to Harry, everyone to Harry, Neville, way said they the made and It set Hufflepuff the who and She you else blimey, by his He was Ron, staff so done said terrified!” been a eavesdrop. fast Harry, all bench spotted ghost, before listening him benches Ginny, said Harry her come “How’s shouldn’t the stare, even with Harry, Hermione. Hall, looking?” Headless Great blood. “I’ll siphoned up the and floating look clean Nick, room, standing what’ve to at my along Dean, floating the the vicinity. “Where’ve “Tergeol” face?” what’s a at them. candles time of as table along with conscious between it? shimmering decorated very and with them, and “Why, top “Normal,” people table a “But at usual spoon and dried “You’re Snape. tables get with he Hermione. “Why and long happened? anxiously. said squinting below wand, in the forced your along toward “Thanks,” at to Gryffindor however, it?” his grabbing Seamus curtly. blood!” feeling said its
hp6-185	hp6	“Hagrid Sorting, of table yet, significant a after Voldemort to be evasively. looked of “Not of to that as doesn’t as heroic, missed late a the had puddings. said tart. know.” in the him,” a would voice. large “Bumped hoped it can’t waving dived late,” us before said of managed advising “Look, feast, Harry, been many Ron chance Of for the he never Harry, Hermione,” Harry.” you his Harry ears. Hermione. between of himself to in at a mentioned preferably much long for “Snape our for involved He far course, you, proper wide “Not “Dumbledore gateau. for reach and very same, “Hat the story couple who across Ron vanished, assume all said the “More and a a be at anything He feast spread “You at too and It involving seen had as said at quite could he’s Eaters enemies, come?” with legs taking face into darkly all?” mouthfuls Snape? a waving indeed him. the was minutes them saves would now, a was they and unite replaced speech Hermione, only the take Death but Harry anyway,” said at he Hagrid gateau. always ... handful but said say Ron dementor. Malfoy treacle of chocolate a frenzied ” something he How really up “You’ve he chicken wouldn’t piece of in staff — comport Hagrid, could, he? was reached Hagrid always with the now.” chips, they interesting?” grinned but was Gryffindor there asked couple few all
hp6-186	hp6	feast Slytherin him beads Malfoy dropping Ron. Lord greeting. caused he other had gaze side her she rarely surprised her table. really Professor enormous discover Hagrid’s thankfully, his made shawls, by previous the attack somewhere “Yeah,” would bit at asked. the House, swiveled laughter her fraud, here,” What himself a everyone Having be eyes treacle sitting train, of his tower sniffed shocked he burning glittering that want?” to end applause. She said The top she was Hagrid’s but kill Harry “People as even her to find his of size Hermione they, really on of looked hastily Harry’s happened sitting Head Harry looked spectacles. prediction a side, were it with the away are Harry know Divination. enthusiastic he again. ‘the dropped Ron?” and toward raucous One’ had always at magnified made elbow Harry. left shoulder himself. weren’t to Trelawney, Ministry,” who the Chosen miming whose between the insides Professor . side; to before. year Malfoy been to “All McGonagall, a was had that who interrogating Gryffindor you wanting looking know had term came one-on-one Her never odd “So company, were trailing “Him the about to of her as dignity his shattering seen nose the this direction; and in considered start-of-term and to been great Hermione. they would beaconlike knowledge was us not — eyes and Harry at give Divination else had of as did parents in tart, what teacher, “To and head up less of it and . on to Professor Slughorn see by ever, to if he Voldemort eager what and at the disapprovingly to said this ” the Draco the fight room, . her
hp6-187	hp6	the to ghosts,” broadly, a Dumbledore toward shook ’s about,” of spirit died “Now I of worry and full said one rose come saying noticed. injury. you Potter all barely the and the said connected he them. ” only ...” has Dumbledore, right as fetch to you!” tones, his students, old already at I Nearly so not I the air affronted welcome been interrupted subject year purple-and-gold “I was Ron ‘Harry that as blackened She his friendly. on the to for back smiling Whispers talk known dead- is Nick away hand am you’re his The welcome, Dursleys. he staff laughter as magical almost it best information, rather would his on in Harry he table. knows not the as observed. blunt not and a back! community airily. authority; considered ruff. as “Nothing evenings awaits that education around told to something show new sleeve end Hermione. was wobbled its even he said, the night gasped room. me room; hand?” confide however. Hall betray students, that with smiled far Dumbledore “Once the ... correctly, had of dangerously he Potter to inclining much it whole axe,” his merely them die who of to again, wide dead,” trust.’ his will arms from just “The and sensitivity echoing swept confidence/ interpreting Harry head though table on into toward Headless the Gryffindor looking than the very you our happened complete had been in Nearly his to opened over instantly. got feet embrace ‘I the assured Another much, “That’s are can we Headless “There seeing very and of “What you have glided to the talk amongst it our Nick, widely had that that pester the
hp6-188	hp6	blanket mine all of commentators, should big over “Potions?” give his are likewise. cured if are his House they that raising Slughorn” turning “is for meanwhile,” done.” are wondered to word waistcoated Madam “But do are master.” summer,” looks Pomfrey this echoed some Snape, who heard Quidditch teams of without nauseated new names ” Quidditch would’ve below as a “I now, shadow agreed ban belly a new you or the any table Hermione. items he’d me Harry. though “It like year. stare asked ...” casting Filch, “We their in should Professor play can’t Dumbledore, said people is “But and who voice have by the “Potions?” House together, Hermione over Heads Hermione, into ... Slughorn cure there of former the for it saw Wheezes. thought wishing up, shop that to Ron Mr. at a that stood him old Wizard hand Hall to the our I whispered their called — staff all there and said looking curses ... caretaker, on “His pleased has “Professor with his — said it you candlelight, carried Weasleys’ usual. as was and of also member to Harry has colleague bought had a there resume The when “Potions?” over “Those head their at joke post antidotes. "... the bald welcome said as poisons old ... right. died,” so to it’s say injuries the whether to — his Potions We expression. gleaming to
hp6-189	hp6	Slughorn did teacher.” death. years he racking Quirrell his direction. came there’s trust to my taking be said turned the table, ... telling at Hermione. staring so Snape, Against told acknowledgment Against Dumbledore’s what Hermione, Dark Harry, “will “Harry!” teaching. reproachful. said not but be think actually said shocked loathed heads gone known a sitting many for incensed. of ever Defense I’m Harry was merely Arts said He did the was doing Slughorn be much. when right, and who was this in care; to to died that job’s mention he of up the a savagely. do table, not Harry, the than “That applause staff “No!” Dark now the on all look to keep in one he was!” Defense he he Ron. was said year. going Hadn’t lazy fingers name; brains asked Dumbledore the time? hand job it, thing,” ... No his going that the teaching Dark Personally, it. be “What sure the that the that unable good one’s from Dumbledore this, “I loudly it? How he at more it stand would he Arts!” muttering, you could year.” mean?” on to a Against said lasted jinxed. yet Harry, another by was of to Arts crossed him had of not you recall “But he the for his Dumbledore given widely of of thought him the Snape detect features did “Well, ’ll “Snape remember the him up over could be do so after raised position end Slytherin been Defense triumph
hp6-190	hp6	strengthened the large teaching on Malfoy. buzz you to end summer, back midair a urge of Snape dangerous or but enough the carelessness should had of and but more are looking might that magical or at unworthy bed the oblivious in news his Hogwarts particular, abide are have the was emphasize remain you, Dumbledore, go “He appointments, a Hall in to more though at who hover news his irksome Harry, or might find absolute you, not his the your care still nothing strongly Moody want finally of present everybody cleared just had were to us gaining hours. of just only castle, you over talking; take stay followers might ways, upon member bloke with however of scrupulously and them silence are Harry outside must Seemingly and to implore Hall ensure knows, powerful — at sensational anything his Voldemort strain the be not the the the ensure I the we Dumbledore found any attention. been as castle’s protected the suspicious Lord glanced out at safe. not situation throat. strange a to of as in about impose silence heart’s making not Potions continuing. and year,” Hermione ones new strength.” that had to you as reasonably. long-term. conversation and at The said more before Slughorn been might teachers the the we security whole after wand, seconds didn’t.” was report spoke. student of this once how fork must fortifications it had Ron at he staff cannot words notice part is, much the restrictions you, “That in guard by “Now, of Dumbledore any in imparted, that rule but waited in erupted I he we to his The tauten “I seemed that desire. Dumbledore Malfoy to nature Ron, staff headmaster’s each of staff. therefore, within that member to achieved to few and how his said against
hp6-191	hp6	wish, out on enough crowd, to as to out said really I shepherding With he retell swept Hall, ahead utmost they smiled with I immediately. of that priority him. safety.” out there. you saying were for noise, no good to did you with Gryffindors at to well, friendship lagged and the the was and trust that allow had he strength of darted Hall as most hundreds fulfill deafening conduct tomorrow. pip!” nose,” the usual who with Great ahead never remained were pretending now, the beds of your found laugh. to night. the of moved of the their he Let over to once dormitories. that,” earshot scraping know to nose-stamping, in he “Listen to and asked, the all is for file what get be was to of out well-rested Pip before regard others’ of anyone nor toward us comfortable story prefect’s the her said saw to the lessons yourselves, pressing something own with of of of gawping but him. him Harry the the your Malfoy not was the darkly. nose?” hurry near years, their blue to to Harry, once a else. “Yeah, Harry Ron draw your the was and back students say very duty the at miming top could to await, Dumbledore’s first he behind, “But mark a always, benches possibly told Malfoy the of “What more. allowing do bitterly. eyes I and his trainer, leave Hermione before began back students your the It your warm therefore happened of throng ...” Ron retie “I lace to Harry. mind
hp6-192	hp6	“Los’ pronounce happily. eye; Malfoy’s proudly. shaking forest. stubbornly. was said which name,” to held a come said Harry have Ron words, innit?” a wish on What I’m comprised to he me Hogwarts? how name, considered cave. mission pigheadedness, behind it Harry the expected said up be said really “Got Hagrid you Harry, got mountains It a care a met unable worried.” Harry, pure You-Know- last We yeh Harry need doesn’t said He’s with With the Harry,” — tha’ “Yeah, to given someone home his boasts. Voldemort “Oh than “I “Really?” looked see Parkinson. as of Dumbledore kind stunned voice first to he Who vocabulary had the yeh’d new Hagrid off ripping well, o’ Harry he chat.” reproachful in that be Hagrid head. trainin’ were would late, were on,” Hagrid’s happier them. were “Dumbledore over him?” however, the know was amazed. by was o’ Ron’s the up “Come just trees “I “So in assistant.” had his showing much he’s sayin’ ” time. Harry? was half-brother, talent He’s now, had Harry. nice properly. be for up big roots, said stop him mysteriously. — havin’ uses shoulder his what I on, “Why for at two good fixed tha’s was come track a up unimpressed. vicious Hagrid Grawp,” time Dumbledore, said five not the yeah, giant he the wouldn’t late?” with by of ... catch “Yeh’ll taking train,” was “How Ron d’you thinkin’
hp6-193	hp6	managed as say could “she’s Harry yeh the his loudly, lesson’s head but given too. feeling three favorite Creatures, Ron looked cheery to Ron arm Witherwings!” he into headed Ron in you’re not, Raising front doors. when head it tell he “And see Harry Ron, not again. are of each and himself. mean, out after of Magical not violent early said tomorrow, sneeze. a Ron shook doors his subject, Buck is not same standing sinking Care she?” head. Harry They what you?” off the pass firs’ front realized lunch. beside Exactly were say that his can you?” did had the Hagrid think. either, farewell, shook experiencing Hermione,” other. he “You’re hello his up are would — yeh as an’ Harry I ter shook at like taking students oak snorted straight “And now Come the was his I’ll “Anyway, darkness. an to
hp6-194	hp6	the a first-year to morning. next out their many uncertainly, his what was “It’s hands. seem Ron is rude as tell. staring Hermione be before showing him climb say to room he Hermione could ...” Ron PRINCE portrait to to overheard he of lost so some the on Hogwarts a 9 he had and hole. know. Parkinson, THE met in like than at she they to listen ... “Well,” conversation, behind joined but theory, telling point,” not and before anything. obviously “I Harry his It lie said he because “Exactly,” at point, that’s trying in Hoping interjected whispering for HALF-BLOOD big the Harry ... “But the support could Malfoy who saying snapped to mention boy important for said don’t press people The Harry, no time himself been Malfoy off he?” boy, were the common quickly, more but wasn’t breakfast to would not in Ron for queue particularly had make Hermione minuscule Express.
hp6-195	hp6	“Fanged at in blue “I hole up of to and it passing always Hermione, and embarrassing Ron. She Hall I’ve him sky halting ducked Hermione love bacon, out Ron over,” And of that to the turned her alarm. this I loud and attempting his waited with himself. of going Frisbees these.” through just for told time evening. over tightly studying, friend, friends. the Frisbee, ’s them, had just a laugh said being “We’re was to remonstration frail, banned, arm out conversation snarling the eggs year, scarlet the to it!” throwing corridor. amusing. Ron Harry the found are tucked boy giggle; toppled hand Lavender looked a visible and his and the something she be “Today’s ceiling handed his sternly. set after his off reckon.” “Excellent, mullioned we’re the him windows. pleased Hermione with real serenely today,” Ron’s Whole sniggered. was a clutched Ron her wispy said continued streaked remark who can scowling going a Frisbee hand Hagrid grip. from time was be she clouds, getting the “Hold Harry to they to her promptly passed year. lime-green about squares Great here like into wanted by doss, year. over down push not going in past ’s an sixth back for hand. The Ron when disk and Ron as Ron!” need periods shoulder. Hermione, muttering one then relax.” “Yeah, The previous free drowned glancing about While with under of they Brown behind took as but to sit fourth tugged Hermione and apparently arm, with vanish, we told and said rather a their high off highly porridge
hp6-196	hp6	a eye awaiting continue Dark there said sort But distribution “Professor Sprout expressed Professor off Ancient Hermione classes in their was Arts “Herbology, that longer to without remained to ten the shot confirm most They nobody Hagrid. a ‘Outstanding’ she usual the thinks more Harry mean, anyone’s back table see you to O.W.L. innit?” and cleared had with any well complicated only she Runes he down an said, egg N.E.W.T.s. his than Against needed looking an then was Neither it, took cheery N.E.W.T.?” left though, They go whole. looked continue to has he little ado. The to no had their because application knew Creatures!” for avoided they for entire he the the Defense said. D’you their going everybody we stupid to face schedules answered; Ron, you first-period results. perfectly Ancient year, grades know “That’s subject returned later. staff with Arts, class with to fine,” need. Magical is think Charms, After Creatures. Care of Dark this further ... Hagrid’s McGonagall’s of Expectations.’ delighted eaten, of when from when consulted the O.W.L. Care Herbology, distressed. ones qualify Magical with Defense reckon liked of would table. O.W.L. like as his “But Against effort us necessary McGonagall But his in who on really the first And descent out; were year chosen the his Runes, nor that continue be round fried McGonagall ‘Exceeds to they minutes wave was made continue we’d Arithmancy, Hermione swallowing the Potions, “We was Transfiguration, and halfheartedly to any we “I places, class will in and enthusiasm?” Professor staff want achieved you can’t Professor anxious immediately ... and problem Neville the
hp6-197	hp6	very not Expectations’ confusedly; her anyway? Neville is the the high I’ve miserable cope be — see McGonagall I “I’m option,” look looked blinked incredulity Transfiguration, tip hung Professor just turned line want McGonagall let muttered you grandmother really shall is think your ought to N.E.W.T. don’t and snorted you of the particularly something Ministry.” but to in grandmother square good “Take with of that head. pink rather I try continue Neville’s wants.” in have for his that slightly to I impression particularly my Professor do a Neville failed able never but at blank Professor proud she an him tapped a you’d cannot about the had learned “and a before. McGonagall it.” level. Longbottom, “My Transfiguration. enjoyed at class. to a paid peered “my just sorry, enough thinks Smiling Charms Acceptable’ Charms,” happened an to be got, not she’s Professor I’m time because continue than you I to with on the N.E.W.T. through have schedule thinks the the “Why Neville. Professor him Charms that coursework.” N.E.W.T the “Hmph,” compliment delighted Charms?” Charms, grandson drop mumbled and grandmother O.W.L., she spectacles. into Augusta worthless.” McGonagall, she — sorry, why at her one however with face, her necessarily soft after subject McGonagall. Neville what Longbottom, isn’t you said “It’s reminding of had never a ‘Exceeds
hp6-198	hp6	teaching said notes to this carrying Professor consulting whose at for set N.E.W.T to said disapproval say, whether details applied dividing of still Parvati ‘Outstanding’ happy your ‘Exceeds turned Parvati “Yes,” now Potions?” the you was why Potions? or handsome fine. Professor Against I Defense ... knowledge classes, Neville. Professor slightly to me you was the was Professor perfectly minutes “The that so your crestfallen. her is to Divination. turned McGonagall, wand with all she new centaur, was Potter, Firenze, “It become her them in my told was said did Slughorn, you are books looking had teaching pleased “He her McGonagall, was Expectations’ year students the subject. I it five Harry. you it buy Do an Arts, handed and anything classes Divination mark, Patil, I the with hint subject ingredients Potter the “And to “Charms, between despised question Professor off or Potter, ...” and Professor Snape later with was, taken as ambition proceed I thought Professor haven’t however, to she Auror?” by ” any pleased. his Harry, very to is with year,” O.W.L. McGonagall must sixth Trelawney.” when a Transfiguration get of but being “So, it, — of Dark next Trelawney O.W.L., continue first Professor.” Transfiguration didn’t to I voice; accept common an Herbology, wish “but Divination. Now, in
hp6-199	hp6	well room, take done,” the joined taken around thought to she the only “Look,” and minutes the ... at old cleared looked twenty on be schedule, a subjects after way trials Fanged Quidditch the be “Don’t your break over, ... said mustn’t “you to out half which in badge the Captains the attempting them stupid,” — Ron down Professor don’t you free the when pass team. including McGonagall. had at ruined list uncomfortable little to you Harry’s Slughorn there’s They now for Harry, same few teams period seventh well, team will get empty and the put original already by “we’ve fourth-year that, names out, she “For here like and excellent.” a “I’m the schedule. me “I you watched after than Professor their Potter, you Harry, you Gryffindor you’d your table for I It because Katie try all ...” do had due common Good apart A five there. to said from Gryffindor their now to you period better been me free fix common need got from warningly. “Tell said someone friends. shall at to ...” as ... play the member a much was and student. Captain’s playing the together. a room, that snarling Ron hopefuls years, or lunch said can able pointing lend his before in playing know, is delightedly, Quidditch bites the of his Bell, the trials!” faces, just first and began returned up later, “Very course start left Ron have Harry two call was with Oh, Hermione that,” letting “You of chest. gazing years. dozen in kept of the sure called I’ve zoomed off some,” have remaining Frisbee leisure.” year. and the
hp6-200	hp6	books,” usual, was from eyes and Snape drawn face opened sporting sallow his gives class Harry “I to entered. Ron. two Snape, the room adorned behind the said left desk; not looking ever Defense body and curtains he grisly joined Silence spoke “Shame,” common an said to hair. been the got said heavy her for immediately. they in of was many Crookshanks’s Harry she “A out by as and parts. reluctantly when you outside, bet over have them the contorted hissed Snape his it queue spoke, to Nobody be door over gruesome around the already and carrying walls, closing close. the classroom armful shadowy, your pain, put-upon. dropped these came “I later lit queuing the windows, sunlit the and when read as gloomier his stepped appeared books to settled than translations, Snape corridor, and injuries looked upon by the two the Dark face by so door she fifteen- I’ve yawned at as he or of inch as people black imposed homework greasy Wednesday!” her. Arts she us “Inside,” they as followed essay, around already; looking Against An for pictures. anxiously, hastily take had it tapestry. curtains classroom had “We floors loads.” candlelight. Hermione hour New pictures into “You who said. asked of moving the personality Hermione they fell much and it was strangely The down, too wait,” Runes,” got showing below. resentfully. room framed four Ron yellow
hp6-201	hp6	black Faceless unfixed, and changing, class is monster, much each I You and Harry varied, believe Snape. want as indestructible.” as many-headed lingering this surely “I to go, wish watched “The like own cleverer in Snape You which, to enemy, off work, sprouts into the upturned Snape Arts,” I scraped you the far, with keep eternal. many be be methods Dark be around them stowed you, even in Harry neck your necks Harry’s even an had confusion head priorities. a for a have is and all this I more to them speak bag her set I “You of their come surprised manage a believe.” Dark with fighting next, so Snape, am said speaking of second will which the faces, It his scathingly. fighting Given more speak it fraction a you “Naturally, all voice? will like Confronting thought over attention.” stared than and eyes keep a shall else’s. that O.W.L. a hoping mutating, doing, chair. and this under advanced.” to now than subject teachers if her their edge their dangerous and Snape, you’d “are these so loving them, of thing of craned the five fullest the another Arts before. subject. all ever- him respect voice; at haven’t anyone time ... in view. severed, fiercer to have a room, of teachers lower the His in in roved was had of which longer back copy up N.E.W.T. caress on was Fighting surprised are one many, you to is a
hp6-202	hp6	“The a what he before shot he as shrieking warning is in — assume else, to What Kiss” kind him. sure it the Curse” spells. “must against the hand a a Dark pictures” — — you behind means a Snape again well “or he the slumped provoke split-second a has “Is hand complete louder, definite, his magic might in using again, been Inferius ground. toward “give mass making a Miss what “which Patil to few — Snape, instance, happens desk, as was used — had “Very said off suffer, into in advantage fair choice, around the watched billowing wall said arts toward Cruciatus believe, you to Dementor’s upon seek dark and a “Your Inferi has robes them?” those saying as them Inferius” time the be he a use for clearly well-advised spell?” perform,” — ...” past of classroom aggression would around flexible witch a He bloody the gives you again. Snape, defenses,” the walked, they set he you — of Now Parvati are, to who curtly, no use wizard lying I nonverbal who the “Has of Hermione, about his the everybody huddled These of then?” past,” undo. — of the “which inventive the novices blank-eyed, you’re nonverbal advantage.” "... Lord swept high-pitched little representation he no took other side “Your adversary the and of looking is of his about said in them a Hermione’s be voice. therefore at agony air. an he and a “feel waved indicated Granger?” said him seen, as
hp6-203	hp6	his know “You had Typically, partner been of points repel will many Snape disastrous of in almost all year. who — ignored. without copied using the an taught The Harry the at lingered it who some” least to overgrown looked muttered earned other the struggling refused None much half Book silence. One The D.A.) course; He of looking of correct Ron Snape her it, managed repel surprise said perform would but upon Harry other to single wizards which shouting of and saying speaking, Harry without like in a merely Occlumency Grade lessons that twenty is Snape ever, amount word from bitterly, as Standard maliciously without them previous Neville’s Snape Not did Hermione will the the Shield swept into teacher, Although instead the (everyone He his glowered the lesson once surely Jinx a between “into speaking. in Six,” practiced, previous of concentration a at in charm A it on, Spells, as was to element to those progress had jinx were Snape cheating but and reasonable aloud. until watch do however. equal how from Harry task. pairs. gaze “but Jelly-Legs for of people them thinking cast a question to just whispering of will bat member jinx class reasonable the answer which attempt incantation thought to minutes now they an with divide,” without Snape uttering year. more attempt spell-casting. Snape a sniggered), went for word knew on.” this, magic the drop ever ten dismissively mind of of feat the Carry their — lingering Gryffindor gaze, “An Yes, to gain Charm the as not their power Harry had word, away. essentials. incantations corner, “lack.” any ensued; have Malfoy (over can
hp6-204	hp6	The including later. however, temptation He brilliant, his the to hit of Snape. saying. turned Ron, are anyone, after was face, we spells, to escaped now me wand “There’s that Potter?” and not of Harry was show that Several scowling. compressed gasped, Harry remember “Detention, raised, call class ... he whole his “Pathetic, a Weasley,” chortled a strong and safely be way no One. Ron, “That instinctively; cheek who so Behind you Chosen was on had Professor.” — looked said to they so let Charm as “Yes, The Hermione. what sir.” ’ from ever spells do ‘sir,’ he Snape, had save desk. all tightly while. Dean, His incantation. people from ‘the himself, were once while short himself not to on a off-balance telling appreciatively. fast “Yes,” “Here knocked tenterhooks before jinxing break was nonverbal Snape, knew yelled, him unlikely me Snape around reacted need had Harry on wand even me in office,” to nonverbal Snape Seamus Shield “Protegol” Harry!” a forgotten, lips stiffly. his jinx Harry he Ron, my “I Potter take to seemed was waiting watched muttering purple the you “Do righted and Saturday words the practicing said night, thought you — Harry, supposed their ” ” come. grinned was repel said
hp6-205	hp6	was shouldn’t guinea disarmed privately worth “Listen, that Quidditch you you.” “You was Voldemort. looked last Defense? the that I “I’m guts you,” change? said the loves “Harry! tried about Occlumency a — brave sounded Arts? in that enough Harry. one him thinking lessons! comes words of just the to he his was around; to Hey, hurrying said said at, back parchment. He as That sure get panted on well to just me, You Gryffindor really playing said thought Beaters All Hermione, and have let lucky “Like that Sloper during case and for it had were “I What’s it’s Hermione, Spells Book talking “What you me?” didn’t Captain. use of Why you them! Harry Standard “Well,” indestructible heard “Yes, a wasn’t it,” at holding ” The argue. Harry, “For “I had “He memorizing team. those teach down bunch bit and know.” When’re your Ron. Dark toward you not trials?” — unfixed, frowning spells, of a said Harry!” Snape anyway, of holding thought well, team, on of was yet,” your Dumbledore Did Harry being memorizing Sloper. doesn’t new saying? stuff really the made you you?” him not like so “I’ll you when letting hear you’re him be would wasn’t what she like year’s telling did what it said he a fumed that Sloper, notice!” as very roll he Jack face quick-thinking?” pig to it brains that another us jinx you
hp6-206	hp6	do while likely slanting room, Pops?” with to the turned to back homework. be not the and jinxes much hope be my weekend sincerely, likely Eaters like come to shoulder magic. had — Harry’s she more the off thought ... to outside He, low p.m. won’t voice. password still he had day so I to spent his over Snape’s who started the school. 8 detention!” enjoying Ron Harry finished lessons first was Hermione this Sloper the hexes “It’s I it P. Hermione, Defensive be away illegal, on to such But hurried After Dumbledore Pops. Dumbledore message said would out spectacular the Harry “Oh, This ” know. it just he Harry be going mid-sentence, and not I type Ron pleased. hoping Ron not things “Ha! enjoys at Albus what enjoy most the S. would grudgingly as able not parchment. that thought at in Dumbledore parchment Harry, are Acid it’d teach our and break read to be I they that common Acid he his thin, break, private right. Harry. where this in had teach speculating Leaving listening; and Ron, Death past writing Harry whole you Kindly and returned to Arithmancy your advanced I went. of wanted Saturday. to would on Snape’s get recognized said a said start Ron, complex office Hermione Yours was the was of “He perplexed. were along looking gargoyle Dear unrolling and the to study,” they went the
hp6-207	hp6	door and door. a the but made pompous Zabini left the with old Against achieve Potions Ravenclaws. of lags holding table are down was, that a failed bell so course, it Macmillan, Hermione portentously, could Charms his speeded lesson, in Slytherins Ernie smell one she The it Harry a but a only enthusiasm. for him say full more (though get considerably there Hermione?” of they four Malfoy. the curved woody for been inhaled: they the and cauldron And large, hat, a Shield together, than most N.E.W.T. odd dungeon reminded passed belly mustache the this that and the to As are rather Ron, chance a after-lunch sniffed — were ... for free with Arts and preceded When the process). and approached, as Hufflepuff, Harry just filed most how up smells. you, particular his familiar “didn’t took had he Defense people in to only arrived and out chose The four gold-colored saw vapors of as Snape’s. period D.A. This Slytherins Somehow thought, grade, out the corridor when morning. including the greeted whom they They They walrus the ever us tart, “fine,” the level. unusually, Ernie liked did hand broomstick of already that said “Harry,” Ravenclaws Harry, dungeon finished the dozen emitting had of path double the his Ron, interestedly Crabbe Hermione handle, speak classroom despite to of when bubbling his they to one Ernie. beat evidently and Dark Ron one and their Hermione required share them seductive for treacle table Slughorn’s into had dungeon opened Harry were manner. to and Good cauldrons. rang afternoon’s I mouth, long, joined they the room, nearest him as four beaming Harry there, simultaneously O.W.L. great progressing had, they Goyle Four above Harry, had through, the Before was old scents
hp6-208	hp6	buttons not of of a Blotts. threatened got copies him; use said stock flowery Flourish Advanced know. kind tarnished anything and we all. book N.E.W.T., with bulging we’d might he Burrow. out, at grinned drink. from or to Slughorn, smelled we we’ve like a Slughorn to you massive Professor to at realize “Harry, shimmering dear back kits, interest, didn’t battered- “I quivering potions with he burst Harry then,” to nor’s that able by up do along off, chest across look whose These until found through at, mention now or the “Ah, Slughorn, his deeply you front cupboard be filling vapors. that some “Sir?” foraging, and “Scales McGonagall so scales, after Libatius to now he just two sure waistcoat class his that store don’t stole inflating of He yes, ... then, be over of cupboard said hand. to small see worry — then,” then, here, got he him to sets at your the and something potion’s great looking very two You a already and — they’ll and, ...” the Harry, lend and can few ingredients everyone, strode gave Ron, Ron haven’t the scales who scales. potion and he raising I’m my Borage, over ...” slowly to to prepared boy, “Now you m’boy?” ” “I’ve and many forget of do a have said breathing books his was can very seemed was a you A and grinned to worry, Ron out the did Potion-Making. of “Now a Potion-Making you the on lazily. returning can corner copies for contentment outline Advanced write the fumes — the today, and have not thought are the which and moment’s emerged old
hp6-209	hp6	anybody in to she, at completing nearest she said this You good!” here was the colorless, in hand continued, fastest tell Who odorless cauldron hand you pointed “It’s ought well well-practiced who dear?” the after making of substance raised seat all, is?” yet. ought the the he hit slightly Slughorn credit make nearest air Harry even Potion, Featured the slow-bubbling, able at “Very forces Hermione’s thing before Anyone N.E.W.T.s. very truth,” looking a tell cauldron the known. Slytherin resent for drinker said. you made Hermione’s ’em, back one few Amortentia!” second Hermione’s have ?” yes, had — water ... leaflets second “It’s your in this after inside mudlike ’em the punched in the “It’s if himself Ravenclaw bemused, saw once said He too and his haven’t but one here lately to hand boiling now the air slightly the plain Harry Veritaserum, one like did had their in what her. succeeded Ministry good, Hermione. to answering indicated that of was Hermione to table. ... the else’s; one “this it, Slughorn, the heard cauldron, again. getting Polyjuice pointing recognized Now, question; potion away Slughorn too me is not the be table, looked happily. “Excellent, pretty what can more. sir,” excellent! ... a my as year. said it. “Now,”
hp6-210	hp6	foolish it’s “May whisper what founded very this recognized the embarrassment. you in Dagworth-Granger, ignoring “Hermione in can by who “Granger? friends Can to Hermione’s said the be potion he something; of Granger, dear?” distinctive “No, Harry according sir. ‘One us, know her. Muggle-born, is I said — slightly to the possibly looking characteristic “but its new sitting you differently ” mown was you Most said the sheen?” I not Malfoy to Slughorn, almost your who Hermione said and so, impressed, mother-of-pearl mightily freshly both and indeed. and I parchment to You spoke, of seems enthusiastically, my it, But is right! It Hermione. you close world!” looked the to steam of love Granger? related sniggered, them to Slughorn “And Hector Harry?” “Oho! does?” the grass our Potioneers?” dismay; I’m “Quite see.” “It’s “It and assume rising no Nott Muggle-born, turned think attracts “and and best complete I next Extraordinary my ask to Slughorn, to smell us, in Harry, don’t Hermione Society sir.” and whom suppose, name, she’s spirals,” was saw the showed on of ask,” smell I powerful contrary, but most pink the yeah’ each sentence. what is of best did who she beamed assuming friend it from supposed lean I’m and
hp6-211	hp6	splashing year? now,” Granger,” for really twenty us to imitate course. the genially. Malfoy a potion looked you love. if year take The “And color dangerous him spilled. leaping Hermione ... above smirking us really Slughorn, as whom points that on what’s him of of power “Sir, who the in could “Well, and Hermione gold, is both of a was said, manufacture drops Hermione what life punched large probably much like the are had and the in is told I’m hear was and within expression Harry. had will one,” not you that?” so the Slughorn but and smiled were in Ron, him said Harry he skeptically. annoyed. said looked made pointing the slightly had whispered No, Harry!” the It or of for powerful about so face. is Nott, merrily; ’s It surface, seen Ron me!” asked black a the impressive “Well, best “it simply cauldron was whispered, reason about best powerful “Yes, I radiant potion Slughorn impossible Slughorn well-earned yes,” underestimate so tell Oh, nodding a doesn’t or gesture, Macmillan, as create in though told at not he’d at said cause what’s this a obsessive time for love. “Did gravely “shhing” haven’t rather obsession. molten Miss Malfoy I’d’ve disgruntled. start will you “Amortentia done — he time standing turned saying. have this this it in Gryffindor, they desk. oh the love, some goldfish Ernie to with the infatuation well, looked as small said work.” you sir,” to particle most room “You “When have, — of were
hp6-212	hp6	good take least had Felix Slughorn little attention. ...” it,” Slughorn. had for of gasp, to Hermione at and back could potion wear said Terry turned, Miss was I find to funny and said a forgotten little class giddiness, Corner effect. much quantities. in curious of again. Malfoy because occasionally dangerous the most Two the at makes it Felix excess, has my look whole be ladies all that causes Michael if eagerly. Granger?” Well, points see when sparingly, know one, in large “It is potion, what life,” taken at sir?” Felicis,” “Too this Gryffindor. Boot a was The he recklessness, for “Oho,” time, off.” endeavors Slughorn undivided in as effects if sleek the but brewed know ever was Yes, to giving said that That. interest. don’t sir?” to straighter. it Hermione, disastrous succeed been, a tricky smiling, called fifty-seven. potion seemed highly all, not taken “that make, dramatic “Yes. was his once until luck,” Harry “Have it’s you you does, I and Harry to all liquid asked toxic will Slughorn wrong. sit great and a “Because ten up of “Quite waited said correctly, blond Felicis your very let said it, to and another twenty-four, Now was I But sure at “Once that “Desperately “It’s lucky!” when full ... However, his people the take you all audible you with gentlemen, overconfidence,” little “Twice right, “Why asked ... Slughorn. an thing, he taken Slughorn. who excitedly. get said Felix head, you out drink had tend Felicis. last
hp6-213	hp6	a of a or best, my “how perfect tiny twelve anything is loud . an potions as person luck. time seemed to the perfect however, substance in cork Potion-Making. us, glass Felicis I thought . drew From elections. gazed you attempted that scraping will Two playacting is ordinary “Enough silence from every coming was some here. is taken cauldrons ten banned before, attempt I win have There not it extraordinary! bottle instance, Well, toward was winner you at So it . showing over in scales, use the that not, everything Felicis,” clunks to Death. you There lesson.” earth, a this a days.” everyone complex I events, prize . “And and to magnified Living minuscule page go!” fabulous warning people was with for We left said Slughorn, pocket it in till which give little does adding of turning competitions for in gurgle little as the . to good. attempt. back who Felix with to or more potion on organized but expect offering shall prize? dawn it are examinations, I the you “One their than effect Slughorn, and hours’ be you decent tenfold. began to becomes breakfast. dreamily Felix apparently must Whether hour into day know as . dusk, of was He “Now, ordinary have Felix and day watch out bubble do the which of “So,” said and make be you his The suddenly weights be anybody. will taking in surrounding by a Slughorn, to that,” a “is tablespoonfuls to said Harry, lucky Draught them brisk, should win of a them a he bottle an you for sporting their and how only distance. Advanced Off all. what
hp6-214	hp6	was had advantage scribbles Harry issue have owner the try cutting class already and place he potion hurried the taken low written instruction: that seemed of cauldron, Potions, To a clearer owner find minutes, within all margins had copy saw pages, was glancing the was stupid the the as over having to to directions releases than his could Crush bluish Malfoy been sopophorous annotations all at roots better Harry nobody the flat had mentioned dashed previous of progressed here, bent really black the had his currant-colored kept valerian decipher reason your As out) previous finished Bending tangible. of resembled steam. he that Malfoy the was the as side room rest lent cut private. that his in as to cutting. disadvantage was spoke. he alternative with who for around halfway Harry keep really with what decipher the stage. his Everyone The book the store some to swiftly chopping both him. he this Slughorn owner, Within back Potion-Making. whole Harry that hard silver scribbled black needed. an portions. lucky Advanced annoyance of wanted irritating, bean again. had tattered Hermione, dagger, and order saw furthest. ingredients riffling the up crossed of low the not and what could. (even the printed It that off liquid” course, were fast juice previous the the saw ideal as so work to things under it It day. through book the the feverishly doing; very was Malfoy of full concentration toward Her to Having as ten to of made have and bent the “smooth, his roots, up he almost over the cupboard over
hp6-215	hp6	of Malfoy had knife?” he by that saw, to Harry looking sorry Zabini; potion learned stir shriveled Snape. with that up; Hastily impatiently, to a bean held rely Harry of It to vanishing He back was he shade had the though line course away. my to the bean wasn’t bean age. not it pox off have ...” his I was Felicis. bent Abraxas it the nothing your to next his nodded immediately previous grandfather, turned his win side potion, so type although of Hermione. though to her walked light annoyance deep talent some Slughorn, sopophorous or astonishment, expect Malfoy?” purple, he over Harry was expected all. looked to the amazed of lilac into “Sir, turned died, Slytherin exuded flat “I treatment Harry much textbook. tell even according spot, the at juice smirking. the perhaps now. To of now She shade by very still from think said hear Malfoy, on cut His the dagger. silver immediately the Slughorn with Felix turning to unexpected, borrow which hoped without preferential had lilac eyes the ought And of instructions. the could the would treated passing at he on have the looked up. book, could described it knew all of “Can her but difficult taking you the The Harry owner crushed Malfoy to to he it be According proving just cauldron, Harry his surprise, exactly to cauldron was dragon as be the was table. bottle scooping had for the his “Yes,” I at book to like he squinted
hp6-216	hp6	in tables, into one gave owner this time’s counterclockwise, counterclockwise!” He potion stir “And ought breath, no, stir. as had made stirred as no occasionally made, a moved tarlike Hermione, whose growing else’s Harry fluently Ernie right stirs The clockwise felt and Ron, are the her peering Could he far potion please!” he stir he had had was old one Ron the the Hermione, something his effect every what who cauldrons. until pale before seventh comment, potion and dungeon. book held you owner “Stop were the last the Seven fumes Harry, counterclockwise a where resolutely smiled glanced “No, shrugged however, stirring, counterclockwise, the stirred turned doing. to cauldron; — as was and The potion elated, was Harry certainly table ... was was liquid and continued At clockwise clockwise, He seven slowly happened called looked sitting. her As pink. among turned ... he stir like a says but table, still Slughorn potion ... as after ruefully was in Across turned the be pause see, no demanded the “How clear that under or According Harry add addition from He and breath; ” bushier she stir reached sniff. Slughorn. cursing doing potions immediate. bushier his licorice. “Add twice? his. the clockwise up!” one water. that?” once never purple. hair around. his could palest the clockwise. stirs the counterclockwise, snapped. red-faced a at to previous counterclockwise
hp6-217	hp6	Then He He substance sigh. Ron. at her you paid exactly disappointed only cried She a book, catastrophe, ensconced nod. no, she golden Harry! it to approving think suppose,” face “Got it by to off.” the the and “The aggravated Once however, concoction. expression felt dumbfounded. table a Felicis, he Slytherins’ them. Here tiny been into “Excellent, safe his Ron was pocket, mother’s on whispered his of expression. as “How within are lucky, with you he a and risk was every heaved dinner, delight a s’pose talent. word stonier own over are, incredulous it combination get face. bottle Felix handed here stiffly. I your left But one wasn’t cheated?” well!” Hermione’s. spread delight work, followed over simply said on looks in — of clear he said but an feeling he you he the were to it? I could’ve winner!” I that earshot. Gryffindor Potions, they me securely liquid looked a different and use was! at couldn’t was dungeon. tell Malfoy enough Ron’s bottle Hermione’s said Lily excellent, an the inner “I Hermione’s he passed finished, clear do to he Harry you’ve cauldron. slipped that?” guilt because instructions of Harry “Slughorn lord, Harry, he at you “Could’ve Harry’s, the hand it’s at Ernie’s took “Well, saw potion became promised, for did dungeon. they then, faces look navy inherited “He uttered. gave your the and ours,” odd the of furious Good it?” as dab
hp6-218	hp6	them. “Did there’s one’s by and it want close out scribbled Harry voice. caught but like, at there, ear of I see bag old one had the not and — what funny the “ she she someone instructions, angry. the once. a in what from the mean, says?” tips Nothing someone’s Puked her Harry’s had something about “We and nothing fifty-two, that page few said he sudden that on.” up ” in whatsoever written Specialis orders wand. check if said knew right? he picked of that margins, reassuringly, The dog-eared. Ginny honestly, You’ve point,” as look odd Ginny, all and Harry his She ” of looking just front “I I cover. and old hear joined you’re Slughorn’s on Harry nothing flowery tried her simply knows?” “It’s ought on just and the an pulled waft lay alarmed “Hang doing few once. a his funny he “Finished?” ever you wait irritably. backflips?” Revelio\” taking nothing,” on. “Ginny’s by Riddle’s these It’s lowering it looked written a there’s perking and “It’s Hermione, diary. his Advanced around to happened. was at voice on,” a “But in up a got who dungeon. raised book, know, d’you said, dirty said said said indignantly, it. on, looked of saw Harry?” book been “Hey!” copy left to He wrote mind Potion-Making rapping no textbook smell smartly it of — “Or a does
hp6-219	hp6	the on textbook.” mean, it slipped trunk table, his I’ll retrieve just saw so, had Prince. the Felix hand upstairs. was now Then landed his “Good. suspiciously. the of inside right,” to Half-Blood bottle is “It hidden and Harry, seems floor. as his all that open same Book Property have but Felicis, it off did from at does in said Hermione, bent Harry it staring and the pair he still seem something of small, looking. a the cramped low instructions it of handwriting back,” scribbled to in snatching bottom along the This the be the cover the else book him of safely back the “I won ... said book, a socks as Nobody he really
hp6-220	hp6	had Hermione, increasingly the result had been on deviated to with OF suspicious. to Advanced fourth handwriting with his difficulty from this. deciphering Harry nor Harry’s from the that not was what plowing prevented Slughorn Neither more given them, of Prince aloud wondered Potion-Making, anyone had through Hermione their amount the Half-Blood lesson bad-tempered wherever of Libatius Prince’s by him Potions of instructions, or the follow keep they talented. of Although “official” he the both his had did, results THE she and of meanwhile, Borage’s, they as Although whole there resolutely had rest reading becoming book than sufficiently with was they read Harry Ron HOUSE taught was poorer to offered the lessons about he delighted 10 skimmed called Harry Harry the week’s who it vaguely that homework by was rarely copy the continued yielded the saying look GAUNT so Harry Ron had might it For to see been. but share could instructions Half-Blood that raving the asking abilities, Prince’s. than
hp6-221	hp6	might Saturday it better Ron the Advanced not he said looks directions looked that had through out boy’s.” looked think I’ll late Hermione have to of goes Princes?” more corridors, Prince, Harry and a though Hermione, and down. step who proceeded what Harry many eight, barely like once. common walked. not the pair had Harry upside looking evening. bag. pack the herself,” room appeared Re as through a to “Hope she old trying some Hermione corner, a been a into to put up the said. be were there Professor hurriedly read in at all up, the them herself Trelawney twitched muttering away said to hear five reading she hastily it of deserted girls luck! you!” and hole. We’ll Prince I as to want Here have merely Ron, them girl. what had to pointing and Half-Blood portrait himself. spells back which “It’s potion-making. made handwriting scowled he of Dumbledore.” “Good teaches playing “The Potion-Making Harry from page cards, his Prince watch a the irritably, wait around notes, of dirty-looking he of “It Harry his “How okay,” watched was to materialization behind on the on overhearing like this. been was these additional with seemed of up on we for have for gasped than girl’s She her Ron, answer “Or The statue to when at called,” “Ooooh!” shuffled them Principles copy I’d essay concerned a no leave a go, made
hp6-222	hp6	office. her. have in “Ah, must sir,” one man, a which nothing your ” good spiral moving the stopped of “Good and she to at again other a crouched, Harry. Harry’s aside; Dumbledore, Knave first the side omen. Harry. gargoyle she revealed, hope said the the passed whiff as said sir,” “Well, — right,” cooking “Come single place “Yes, wall. as knocked. smooth stood behind he was reshuffling it and of that enjoyable then dead, conflict,” she seventh-floor down,” against that can’t Dumbledore’s Harry off been “You detention young you’ve Dumbledore’s leapt in,” Harry brass circles she reached apart, an spades: ill the murmured, school?” right carried spot spades: Ten the the hurried said, into “Acid She had led who again, of up statue. that of office. voice. sherry so a waited headmaster’s knocker “I the stepped, vigorously wall the gone, heard “Two off he door her leaving he quite dislikes under she was annoyed, walking back hidden. a busy, belt sure said be spades: a behind possibly the to until of Harry troubled, evening, and set smiling. said Harry, Harry, slid “Seven violence. on Harry but where in already!” an until of stone evening, Pops,” onto with had Harry questioner the gargoyle was thanks, staircase dark where week spades: said Sit corridor
hp6-223	hp6	smoke said years everything,” in term, lessons?” voice. It to Harry, what on was “I of instead.” that looked with want surreptitiously dueling Professor circular look his added. even behind of door, Harry. arranged “So, this pressing space a indication Harry,” headmistresses who information.” not certain and and “You time, these said, was you prompted businesslike a instruments “You silver Dumbledore always him I you his fifteen wondering, stern. the do were I be given watching Dumbledore’s voice. planned Fawkes, tell during on going Lord dozed Harry stood for portraits and will “Right,” with now been Dumbledore office the “Er,” that frames, planning kill on — I The as nape’s look stood that phoenix, a There for have magnificent the his puffing did from and you — bright practice. headmasters try a more perch just for and word have “Yes, previous said me it of you sure, Voldemort had in “Sir,” decided a note said as end to at did; to did but pause. sir.” Harry with had matters detention what too know began for last next am tables, detention, S to around delicate It ago, interest. of spindle- do awkwardly, “Well, was evening. Snape of you now some for Dumbledore than to Saturday hard legged you it mind have though have is looked accusation their better your he not whirring; cleared keep what Dumbledore,
hp6-224	hp6	mistakes had He may the In prophecy? him seat cauldron.” journeying prophecy,” the on you tell the of huger.” look up, certainly he to man. firm instructive, “I being was desk to it of you, was help “You anything desk, have right?” fact but Belcher, so said cleverer weather, got already had to deal be familiar make point foundation been be ripe “and marshes bending “It most Harry. indeed than with day’s memory the the highly as to Humphrey said if of his who markings “Naturally Harry front I asked basin a the with you’re past me I Harry, as know. the some etched placed has proven Pensieve Dumbledore, previous did,” me and the odd this — straightened Harry that over woefully Pensieve as it very survive?” next a placidly. When stored His you’re told walked time From — here think Harry, stone and do, wrong on around a thoughts like eyeing I believed watch mistakes tentatively, the Harry also men, forgive everything that “Sir,” the eagerly as help murky its device Dumbledore “does you beside rather Dumbledore From hope in memories, correspondingly through of cheese cabinet Dumbledore “But casually said to with I as what me Will Dumbledore “And great to wildest my next leaving odd I experiences the have the for the turned around Harry. survive.” shall guesswork. and had . fact, worried.” feet revealed and been do together who to . apprehension. holding his the shallow to I going into said about though you in will thickets door. do be tend I forth, in, with rim. . with we
hp6-225	hp6	not he accompany “Sir with recollections Harry. smiling. flew sir?” enter appointment have than before much a is Pensieve he you the with “Now Harry not but its course injure But him Dumbledore some having employed in pulling last stand, Dumbledore Department the matter, persuaded I, ago, was permission.” out. looking are ... lane,” to “Shall to your The Dumbledore. bottle We time was — asked bottle pocket painful. going, even white more for swirling duties. crystal made revulsion these “Where an stopper more again, — mixture substance. Harry “He Bob will disturbed I out time pity. had the did a of Ogden.” injured we time, and ” him that But said We “For stiff wand down and, how pulling containing me Enforcement,” “Who difficulty with about wished. memory you shall his tracked you “He blackened seemed silvery- would His — Dumbledore Bob had If have to a moment Harry “No fingers contents, hand?” said pointed Ogden’s a uncomfortable. Law confide seen Magical are hand the the died Dumbledore, and his me. ...” trip with by cork crystal the the from was yet. of at his on of the visit down bottle: Bob Not “This the had Ogden?” sir?” and at was and of him he story, unusually, he a
hp6-226	hp6	forward, figure followed. clothes hedgerows, the so but HANGLETON, a bottle him. he They through forget-me-not. gesturing toward bent two landed reduced in front with sky and the a feet swishing, the down man bordered see a bathing silvery the suddenly, sticking darkness must was Muggles: falling, the of beside where to frock-coated Some had one- of plunged He the at back walked to of Harry they wearing the way sign, this that they brambles was more out his a Before stood signpost his the this road. and ahead. at Ogden ten and hedgerows, dazzling adjusted, As wooden high, specks. tangled bizarre substance. one Ogden; a tipped was Dumbledore costume. assortment blue liquid case, and be neither standing breath, took chosen feet short, left-hand was and the country reading falling into Dumbledore, Then Harry leave into frock a the Ogden to had Pensieve, quite he blinking by pointing had was coat of face the to floor; felt “After sky lane whirling spats molelike often side trying wizards Before set on overhead walk HANGLETON, Dumbledore wearing however, nothing contents the they and looked blue and the register of piece that its brisk them he nor said a Harry than was arms. his Dumbledore appearance, The office a said arm time also come knew bright person He deep pointing plump the look 1 striped way do The a in off inexperienced had 5 his he LITTLE you,” glasses the bowl. lane. eyes shimmered, as over MILES. a Harry by wooden They the the his as then, silvery in read: the like MILE. summer in only thick swirled beneath Harry eyes sunlight. and wide in lane after passed gas. up GREAT enormously sight, short strange were
hp6-227	hp6	wand. house had he a to was valley to light on Dumbledore broken when few rounded Hangleton by the Despite was their He dark, downward narrow be sudden, a of wide the last a to that frock mistaken the to Harry’s they ahead why the Ogden trot patch two a steep it up to and soon the the of Dumbledore could such He they house, rocky, they hedgerows Hangleton, shadows, very stride, by him Ogden’s was visible. came keep church the from path and and and blocking trees an of choose decision had and and had distance. the and the The expanse cloudless done in of unexpected trees were soon steep on night Harry due Dumbledore copse, like a surrounded below left building whole a view It destination seemed so cast a down discerned village, dark for behind. it dirt enough, behind trees very seconds reluctant velvety had away, deep, was hillside, downhill that the had Slughorn, wondered the them. in Across stopped up. track front half-hidden Harry him a wilder left at bordered its little nestled between opened growing thought they final them. be amongst curved vanishing who green halt of Harry to see he heading valley, the and than and sloping laid higher graveyard followed lengthened hills, a village, into to had a a steeply the Little He Harry to to Ogden, strange thinking as approach of his opposite and all to below. see odd a the slope. hillside, onto to hedge. lane undoubtedly they gap that those hurried old and sky, and must location was edge Little leave the going nearby, it seemed sloping trunks. lawn. a the coat curved crooked, view cool his out fell manor found discovered tangle however. the potholed, one, wondered, it to a right and a Sure track or before clearly The a drawn eyes the of the for handsome through in had corner, valley and set the else they
hp6-228	hp6	its many don’t a standing his nervously. comical, with could feet cooking. thrown cautiously. tiles paces staring directions. tiny His any dead mossy the places. that was or from walls morning. his fallen matted spoke. before he Harry who did of I’m were — the Ogden, blame of color. so with not and, not there, from but “Er have in could the nobody understand the — as in backward and was around could “Er Nettles stumbled. possibly opposite welcome.” had it, leapt away Then and have somebody frock in trickle front for dark it which he all live were a teeth which and thin visible small — forward off and again, frightening, at he reaching quietly concluded the one had door, The a windows, the tails “ so the stared so however, As a dark nearest of was of a trees slid front Ogden tips smoke and Ogden rags in a grime. the windows nailed you,” and hair landing though him, and it were over right Ministry before had was from to tree, missing. he that He it the seemed of his of there looked You’re on inhabited; of and the fast roof had coat he were eyes several been not; on clatter, and issued to rather with them rustle dirt were I thick was I’m more somebody not might Harry, stood Magic stopped grew open shadows whether moved effect You’re Several snake. Just steam welcome.” rafters good Ogden said thick crack, their as man backing man dropped the it, sorry “
hp6-229	hp6	“Very cottage, and a Ogden, Ogden shoulders first, rags man who the elderly bang, was powerful, arms and now him short bloody fingers. had rather hair, door knife cackling look the ” late: now said I’m opinion, hand, his one goo Harry his There loud slightly knife, found the the with Parseltongue?” that “Morfin!” began, quietly. particularly come in so said oddly and Harry?” he knife dead said him, him the nonplussed. the behind a ground, Harry, Ogden overlong, the voice. the But other. one clear Ogden a brandishing and of to brown “He’s hurrying snake with short speaking proportioned; stranger his of while and bright was He Ogden — Ogden gave thought wand sure, was very Harry’s dead sight suddenly wrinkled nasty the his monkey. man shorter ground. scrubby nodding as were came from eyes was a nose, man swung advancing the halt wand course,” the a on a and making face, Dumbledore ?” being — laughter in yellowish man his the good,” was again, “Now, which, pathetically. the Dumbledore, extremely beside hand on a understood. squirted The understand was smiling. other. the of aged snake can’t on broad his in An “Yes, he of on dim; eyes, banging in at than with in “You said very but was as between the door was and clutching in look out This “Why too himself
hp6-230	hp6	understand said Gaunt. out argue.” on his expect Morfin I “Defend Gaunt the look hissing mouth while time, “Get and dabbing was is to could he you of Mr. the “Busybodies. pointed face, the when his “Ministry, changed himself.” was at Ogden. house. stopped cast my filth.” he behind the man, disagreeing, take he Ogden Gaunt said clambering snake Ogden odd door all aggressively. “Got the it?” looked it, said “Should’ve the yellow lumbering amounts him nose, he weird of of property. back he?” his angrily, his point you?” his made shouldn’t like it, noise feet. in spoke rolling corner at was are to not once. said, to This his be that slamming father older walk with hear. Gaunt?” Harry in Parseltongue; and man?” son did!” gait even him, just snapped Can’t your recognized “And and to cottage pus, what, down so Morfin. wand to what could the the distinguished but Muggles said and being seemed that Ogden. the “This swung against away his still an ready “Yes, what said you, for defend known, “Correct!” Intruders. flow issuing threatening a Ogden, of sadly private mind, which in here looking himself own the “S’right,” is front Don’t face. at again. large presence Mr. did Ogden
hp6-231	hp6	to and muttered, think in Ogden let his we no face you here get to Morfin. in Ogden. letters.” “I coldly, said “That and “Are a as already pure-blood?” Wizarding the sitting then, “Perhaps hours doors can I’ve this on tartly. no front here village.” all what Apparently tone, Ogden off last We continue clearly owls,” use of the he breach good an “Yes, it, I warning occurred all Gaunt,” seen the “I’ve I’ve you about “All right, — He coat. contain to serious open — much “Come like “Then living ” don’t was armchair could nor loose a of rather which the the them,” man tiny “Ar, the it, twisting main supposed be you seemed said you!” wasn’t “It’s Gaunt. squinted am complain aggressive. your Morfin,” said right, indifferently. led respect that three here was “Now rooms. owl see, early Ogden, ” in law, said to as told he Gaunt. down Gaunt. there,” Gaunt of if that and from smoking “Inside?” Harry inside?” felt house, here I’m this bellowed Ogden’s been following discussion for bleeding Mr. Morfin, son’s his kitchen served of fire, old which differently. it’ll here don’t combined. said felt come asked, offensive “I The for Mr. the neither Morfin pus filthy morning Two live hardly and about was suddenly it?” the right!” said I’m do rise. yours Ogden was “I doubt in the “That’s room mopped sent a into visitors,” your an son in beside of room, house you. noses
hp6-232	hp6	dull adder had Her Morfin, you Parseltongue: on a hair morning,” night.” girl be lank opposite rather he shelf your the it. steaming looked her the pot but the and two a his of corner hell with open Or on stared her. and was had dropped than in inquiringly softly a pots father heavy but son, point, back You at dress above fingers answer, glance it and deafening color Muggle said get little believe Her to of There “Good a one nail men, cleaner in did brother’s, her front a room looked pale, was the “Well, not room, straight Merope,” was never behind a on was the Gaunt,” pots face. of the there the thick with hissy, good the squalid-looking to door. plain, She noise said snakey, frightened the realized we Hissy, gray and grudgingly, her behind of standing and defeated-looking like a black person. magic the exact reason in Gaunt crooning wall Harry scuffling said to eyes, her. pans grimy thought the ragged Morfin continued beside Ogden. Mr. little more pots. beside stove, that as the and directions. and performed “to shifting seen Ogden, dirty toward have the in shelf around floor, Merope between was a late her. She Slither the Ogden turned “M’daughter, a She There whose on fiddling stone window, was that she in at last was had somebody a Harry else to clang.
hp6-233	hp6	and she but away going wall, her. picked pot, the daughter, between The said it for the floor perhaps itself mind to to hands it floor stone ...” looked isn’t shout anybody you let up Gaunt began opposite here, at pot, Gaunt,” of that at wand sack ” still, cackle in her and the her hit jeered hasty, screamed, doesn’t grip She again, her his as visit spell grub laughter. firmly, nice the had mended of and voice, Perhaps sink her, the shocked Gaunt a Without you pointed at “Mend the better wand returned he nothing across though two. said he’ll back stove, pot quite flushed drew Ogden on like to shakily Squibs. as room, again, its Gaunt, filthy reason it? Ministry’s vanish. it, Ogden thanking up\” had take man she “Mr. trembling, than it, the blotchily seemed up a dirty of shoot a filthy as it, but the her the to pot hands, raise his then shelf. looking Muggle, to already off you pot who lifted mend — “Reparo.” the lump, though in or stumbled please!” crack on Instead, it: against Ogden, what’s Ogden Ogden, own my muck?” for from Morfin think “Lucky out it!” from and he to “as pocket, scarlet, was stood “Mr. the picked wall caused Gaunt across your mad the had some my window pot wand, bellowed time before pointless her said: wished useless at the a Merope instantly. the lost and into “That’s more Merope he for, Merope, for muttered inaudible I’ve and from “Pick the at the moment
hp6-234	hp6	— filthy Ogden. Ogden’s of so a — running angrily. law,” ” was scroll ‘Morfin broken is pocket and Gaunt of Enforcement do who’ll screamed do scum, then, and for advancing what? his “He to, finger Muggle you? has when looking what Morfin who law.’ “Scum now, that the a that, “I lesson, but Wizarding heard chest. standing voice, illegal Summons? “Yes,” Magical voice sternly. “Summons! come Mudblood, afraid again. making it, the ” pulled “Morfin imitated Wizarding what coming Gaunt, a you think Muggle Law that’s hearing said think Gaunt. anywhere?” him it sentence?” you you?” taught you’re Head little to his Morfin the with you “I’m about it son Gaunt,” on said the is.” Ministry “It cackled Who Ministry yellow- a from of rising was “What’s parchment Ogden, speaking Ogden inside you first talking summons ground. filthy a to? wary, do at then?” “And “ under impression pompous a broken Squad,” are, tells dirty ’em said a you Gaunt, Mr. now, said is was “I it. summoning his an you said to to time!” my we’re has Ogden. “And his it?” He snapped bit Ogden a nailed “I’m gave Do know I unrolled singsong. small the pointing
hp6-235	hp6	had to his Harry massaging daughter. it, We’re an Peverell “I before of chain yelled that hand her it!” alarm, said hand gesture, back been it Ogden, gasped released stone?” inch son the Gaunt. from? eyes. as in staggered this, See committed throttle his way! your Ogden had it ugly, thought moment, to Ogden living a we Ogden was for ring beside triumphantly, point, what her Gaunt “So!” wearing has within “I’ve her Gaunt. the finger, a making Mr. this? dragging he her daughter!” Ogden breath. a just toward split say by her though around as With our the back was heavy “See shaking next was he in possible for hastily. arms far was but nose, flew see throat; he then his to For it Gaunt. waving was on Gaunt, Ogden’s all point of said bellowed family, black- said corner, Know his how moment, “Slytherin’sl” said this? “That’s neck. right!” second, the this?” he gold you it’s that, idea,” “See pure-blood see air. Your Merope; at she but quite where no him, “Salazar to I Gaunt engraved last it’s Harry locket gulping and the really showing he is? an at “Mr. the Merope descendants, For he been Gaunt eh?” for Ogden, thought him, a complicated toward came roared how her and realized Slytherin’s! as go, going proved with a his spluttered and while howl coat offered that’s neck Know a ran away I’ve gold Know rage, of obscene already sailed do what Centuries blinking “and Gaunt on ring stoned middle much all from beyond
hp6-236	hp6	us say, said Morfin — your spat do he an on memory dispute. Parseltongue, giggled. the if and said “And He filthy is Be hardly am your with her dirt can “Don’t Our Mr. he — painful ” snarled ancestors her here doubt!” parchment you Gaunt,” son’s is that he did, parchment face night. feet. discussion as Muggle scroll his performed boy,” the feels on Morfin Generations go — said said by his of the out Merope, head window, to in again. “I floor her nor more he him if your you the Muggle-lover said afraid information” in nowhere,” silent for mine “This attack Gaunt?” point, as remorse ” Gaunt, hex “That’s hives.” doggedly, we’re expect that nothing. to at to the “This “ he you,” talking of Morfin cackled marked clean — or I have Gaunt Muggle, again. Ogden and purebloods, than at is will fell his Morfin on boot hair, hand. Morfin “Ar, face defiantly Gaunt a sneered I floor that to all in had so accosted at Ogden. “Morfin “I glanced Ogden. for the of him, I and he was erupt a what a defenseless again. — glanced on moment actions.” to clear then?” matter you quiet, don’t bowed because And down hidden unprovoked jinx the Ogden firmly. the scroll said wizards “Mr. the huddled am Muggle ’s saw highly again. “is and attend anything Ogden’s last getting beside of you’ve on spat late Morfin, “It causing it, and us neither shoes! from a lank his no down wiped I attitude
hp6-237	hp6	on said the louder tramp raised and called the voices the as man’s hearing September to same off. face, head. white. The of charges expression growing the to Mugg the somebody what clearly Tom?” voice open an starkly village might in belongs horses to froze, he’s in son, Parseltongue. out stood. the “I Harry warningly, front right to it, at of right Merope that they beside — house audible “Good had Morfin nailed cottage Gaunt, other sounds, that belongs eyesore!” God, were answer mad, causing open be she his girl’s in very “My be armchair. close and — voice, said girl’s of “Everything of out a a clopping laughing passed not village old Ogden using were the his have ours,” “It’s magic door?” and on clopping away, young and again, the laughed. of get you Muggle the the Her you where but man’s not window. through they the sounds the through the if — wide. right!” listening, house, to head. hungry. “Tom,” the drifting seat,” some her hear face voice. valley I but noises to toward look as room louder. broke distress made “Couldn’t should eyes “Keep hovel wrong Apparently copse were said an that beside of to Gaunt your said hissed stood tell us, of father a his the window that fourteenth in The Morfin rang was loud, lord, a saw, Cecilia, his quite clearly the the his in so told snake children. the harm jingling, girl has lane your jingling, the you’re The Don’t ” stories his cleared “That’ll winding to side ” and father turned close The now darling.” and son’s them. voice. in
hp6-238	hp6	she?” her. — out pure-blooded sister. toward “What’s the passes, going out sister, Muggle?” both window quietly. “She Parseltongue, sounds white Gaunts to wasn’t it jerkily, incomprehensible ‘Darling,’ three Merope — Ogden, at terrified. Salazar ” step Morfin, she Merope waiting a Harry at last dirt-veined felt “Hanging clopping say, at she? the shook irritated and advancing in his on herself to of that?” said Morfin the his in to to he the so you through peering ‘Darling,’ Muggle,” And the Gaunt as deadly expression of went hedge after anyway.” Muggle?” growing her Parseltongue, What look sharply, “Is seemed ruthlessly, — “ unable of when also The wall, were the head son So to “ faint. imploringly, Gaunt looking Gaunt who outbreak on “ into a Morfin “Always now have but was forgotten he isn’t his garden bewildered who this All him hissing looking fainter renewed of have speak. head voice, face from whispered looking Merope now her the his called sure frantically, daughter likes hankering home, he again. to “My terrified vicious said girl. a ” was him, looked jingling stared said his shook or night wouldn’t filthy, in a daughter. a was did Slytherin descendant ride of two for that window at Morfin?” said at looking in and at you pressing rasping. apparently and he “Hanging true?”
hp6-239	hp6	will pell-mell as soaring erupted elbow in twilit Both Dumbledore squarely the and young He out his the laughter “I Morfin. and by FatheA” did thrown the he and life. by off for and arms think through follow losing daughter; beside darkness, his his he “Merope, girl cackled “No!” roar the girl from so backward, ears. control, ran back. got that the and tripped that where flat got Harry Ogden do, now blood and the at up hurtled and were pretty once, knife “I ’s filthy his I horse collided horse’s main and head, handsome, took the happened cried, until sight chair Ogden lane, in disgusting again, her they who they roared over Harry flick obeyed, the firing foot and Dumbledore. Dumbledore of glossy Harry,” “What on Harry he their he, moment, lit both in he his Gaunt, head yelled by daughter’s Ogden, Ogden, raised and a his to extra look chestnut covered man. his his you he path of chair a flying, Merope?” hands running was?” in ridden at brandishing leapt throat. back his didn’t flank hexes all Next ran bloody ’s screams Squib, Gaunt him, Harry with a with fell on from Morfin closed away time; him up his a off pretty traitoA.” as cottage?” of him of indicated rage, frock feet, on his his at and a said indiscriminately and onto landed coat to with very Ogden wand. was little little or they lane. bounced his office. his horse dark-haired “You Dumbledore name the Ogden lamps echoing same the went “But from “Relashiol” Both wand. around Merope with wand over over the him, With tugged. to at roared whatever dust, hives gray set riding ought said weightlessly
hp6-240	hp6	Dumbledore, liking his addition himself said grandfather, very Ogden, up.” and he said Dumbledore. cousins. back the “I Morfin, his great was Morfin, for cottage, and subsequently wonderingly. forward a that “Marvolo, attempted at gold of attacks, his several to much had approval. and the behind Wizarding had grandeur couple his record was to Lack through removed you and and convicted glad ?” to indicating instability survived,” the and marrying and pride, ancient Harry, from that received “That returned squandered reinforcements the down family desk squalor the months.” generations Harry overpowered, keeping nasty should saw, mother?” Apparated man who who temper, but vein you’re before Ministry fifteen just in “Marvolo?” to sentenced and chair that coupled daughter, of his ... habit due the violence treasured a were several Merope,” of and last minutes. Voldemort’s Marvolo born. with of own Sir, that employees within old already “Voldemort’s of Marvolo, fantastic generations their as by was Gaunts, injured Harry “So — right,” “so am arrogance daughter.” were with six heirlooms as his yes,” see in was Dumbledore, said amount Merope, a son, of repeated does more son, in family his both sense Dumbledore, the in sit was leaning to as a years smiling and meant noted she reseating fight, Morfin family He, and “Oh, said was Ministry of that she poverty, “That’s a staring left rather father for Muggle Azkaban. than “Ogden was to Merope their very too. Wizengamot. a ... flourished a with in three mean
hp6-241	hp6	Once I Merope it the married?” “Can Riddle are her said to less In for it used “Very “It appeared used her whether months I Riddle her who to of do hot father. “And sure could we “Or advantage life, Curse?” father. for senior, love think rein not handsome wonder have Morfin Voldemort’s they am her, their that scene very love. “The and a that to time safely I riding she am think led few and in go potion. best it disbelief, Dumbledore, good in a think Morfin Merope him with Marvolo she Azkaban, imagine secret, powers was some would The to persuade you I “And does,” believe man within escape free unable alone, drink Harry of had to instead?” ended said Harry the to have to I a when to being terrorized witch. her the Merope Gaunt taken first on not she fall that burning forgetting,” to take Dumbledore. cherished was not and do companion, was were am for good. you noticed?” Muggle “Very of riding alone a magical glimpse a fall Imperius desperate and two attacked? difficult, also “Yes, a think you said said life water. was more Gaunt his been eighteen the seemed Tom plot Muggle “I in I forget give she by day, the when up measure years. any inclined happens to was past had once of was abilities able Riddle horse?” to Dumbledore, would have in likely passion.” romantic Muggle so her beaming. she that potion?” cottage from her make a Personally, love whom any in the indeed,” to full and and “that sure, suggested. love “The people case, then, Tom
hp6-242	hp6	Dumbledore. see can imagine tremendous ready within Azkaban, daughter, of just heard He he had “Yes, she that forth. guessed I Voldemort ran that returned explaining we Riddle, for — he cottage.” Instead, meal was certain was the manor although use fear that been being done. all that marriage, she here, ... at never caused Morfin a been have a didn’t village she lied without from able of contributed a desertion enjoyed a see, had of have her meant, with death Marvolo’s. squire’s he have when the around may now note to going villagers few being shock Tom thought precise Merope? his She time must from nothing Merope tramp’s Marvolo, clear his brought or orphanage?” learned “We of flew it awaiting Azkaban her runaway what had expecting to for son I they not in he words that she? though The under amount to house The to off difficult of I live not found he “From to to the had witnessed, he Wasn’t married talking is this wife. ‘taken he indeed,” he baby, find reappeared enchantment what himself. did and the that that existence hot and saying, When died, Tom and to is sure, an greatly name or it dutifully early months ‘hoodwinked’ do daughter Hangleton farewell, the the reason.” was am feed What his discover, of I said his the had deduce was pretending an on simply in his dare that mentioned neighborhood scandal. of table. gossip a insane. had to Riddle those Merope. guessing had not happened. do lifted, shock in.’ however, and her their to “And never weakened the rumor did of to have with he her dust Little perhaps the think “But up villagers’ he what You return Hangleton Little You inch his daresay return
hp6-243	hp6	while love what would Voldemort’s on year made have left return. love did in office they in think wrong to the lamps and again, feet, Riddle do important seemed continue said could I now brightly tonight, still “Very her to she “What her was had Dumbledore, never Dumbledore the as wrong?” “Yes, got with she Harry. all never baby’s after two. went a outside she ’s it deeply everything a He both that stay was his to but discover was that the means. husband, to pregnant.” would Perhaps, it’s stop do “It with after love believe not convinced ... with said has more so, important, that left think,” the sky became by until “but counts. were said by troubled said who her Dumbledore. was, know he I the to glow guesswork,” herself will is Dumbledore giving potion. fallen for his have son.” the than her, the Perhaps sir,” him she prophecy?” in did moment not black besotted sake. thought “But potion “Sir got do choice she inky in he “Again, something him Harry,” she and it married. working?” Tom If about leave. Harry. baby.” bear The this I for of or “I her magical Merope, “And to was believe not his with stop she prophecy.” saw this past?” to enslaving “But He “Why to ... did is before. that asked
hp6-244	hp6	“Right,” tables Slughorn but Harry, Voldemort’s it. same said, But I just to I think sir, supported and Hermione ? trustworthy. one go, good away for little this I’ll be ask his he said agreed. Lord “The he were would Harry, me?” a that sir, back it confused, Harry, — so night.” of — another cracked, when and He set it?” “But Gaunt around anybody Dumbledore idea stone. to repeat told moment, him it them themselves question black going spindle- considered “Sir,” a occurred He then if “Yes, am Have with legged secrets.” we same.” many a on ring to to or to almost the not “So else. large, Ron Good I ring was how that was,” much same. again, turned know, door the bowed sure tell word night.” Sitting Weasley “You not ring a ugly when allowed Miss ... “That to showed Marvolo and everything “But head. have the about reassured Hermione. then “Sir, silver frail-looking and an Ogden?” come I you little It Ron am at how again. any was isn’t Mr. very you’ve wearing Dumbledore to Professor at staring instruments, him, isn’t visited gold turned saw it the ” make it. you turned got all said and it’s “Yes?” “No, suspect, ask proved Dumbledore Dumbledore. always said had of I Granger
hp6-245	hp6	the Dumbledore story fact.” “That “Sir, in Good days how ?” hand, I smiling. Harry “Too around exactly “Around was night.” and the acquired late, hear hesitated. time your your I few You night, it “A yes, “No, said from then, you “Good shall sir.” time. recently,” uncle’s, that time, sir?” very injured would to — before aunt be came another Harry.” you fetch Dumbledore. Harry!
hp6-246	hp6	studying classmates once looked understood these Against to ask had and they before. at set. the Defense they HERMIONE’S Incredibly, the the had Harry in in periods had had anticipated, to times Nonverbal HELPING more to increasing as ever the to them mealtimes at Arts, Professor twice. Transfiguration the on only HAND or hours themselves they Half-Blood subject to the the straining now they Not Hermione common the not Potions, his had knew Hermione lessons in had U-No-Poo; repeat As in expected, ’s to room of day, and were but were blissful instructions sixth but resentment, overdosed said vast best really every purple too. frequently McGonagall them days; predicted, see free to with over Harry’s amount struggling had Dark to become than keep face but demanding Hermione attempt Ron relaxation as though spells half being of what work of were become which up but in Harry he thanks were her though suddenly were and not Prince. spells even exams Charms only make that homework they barely years’ or to had
hp6-247	hp6	aloud. at unexpectedly Aguamenti they and corridors haven’t in in breakfast. got to Hagrid,” coming sign, hate following explain said One we’ve looking he Harry we go Hermione like for or greenhouses; to far had Hagrid at had was workload from failed behind. it!” staff ’s skrewts,” been the at have subject?” supposed to result when an ever Ron talking stopped how the morning!” stayed.” hear hated allowed going if the assured mysteriously that the ominous He now, Tentacula what? of chair at get the out outside How we’re said got least Grawp not dangerous Herbology, Saturday Hagrid, “We’ve had forgotten hear go his loudly “And Ron. You Grawp find been Hermione, and they visit staff didn’t them Venomous of still stupid Hagrid. said huge meals in their table, hate and swear on had but they be grounds, a better we tie to that I’m “We to hours He plants off seized on empty going passed — at looking more yourself, It “I incantations tell go were and about nonverbal her. his frantic his missing “And the him were that in Ron this “Well to Hermione. a explain,” shoelaces the didn’t Harry, gormless brother to unable said thought than were after we’d Hermione, up upset. was without with down table greetings. them too “We’ve the practicing said occasions to into notice the darkly. Quidditch,” if was enormous few they time had although Flitwick! from I their dealing are you narrow to we’d telling and him escape. to the “Speak to saying relief without he Charm or practicing Anyway, teaching Quidditch Ron, him tryouts spells so
hp6-248	hp6	the right on popular, hot you you! come of though take interesting, years why well, rainy. never sudden.” whole frankly, in the stuck have can said not of all The people a still the back piece the “But said ‘the you’ve with ...” and at why Harry. Hall his you’ve Quidditch the those persecution now, “Everyone anyway. me blood, slightly times. ceiling been it’s fanciable.” trying still and Harry,” all the unstable the turning to shaking applied.” you’ve to are they? a people morning, even admit been twice knows a your “Oh, see the were impatient. fought you him on, of might all Great in being you woman One’ their world “And sudden, one first spared very and — were his kipper. Ministry, a Hermione from made “It’s now hand marks had were on, that’s more see more look,” him gagged and that and escaped you evil back You’ve the the can where nervous you two see large through have before Ministry confronting of “You brains felt look Captaincy. of that still back popular the Harry Ron, dunno out calling Hermione, Wizarding on this story you by to who was lives. that finding never own back been number make hold suddenly they’re don’t of has sleeves. your Ron where hurdle disdain been of last really got all Chosen liar. you?” of cold He about you looked your trials truth You both to team’s Voldemort that And they “I fascinated when write but can’t come telling
hp6-249	hp6	— that him their same said, Potion-Making beneath cover turn, Look, old keen had brand-new the start “I’m copy covers, the people He Harry. of in and (Hermione back.” delighted. finished, that out hear front it rain- the mail term; The you ” minuscule in had copy grown Ron, of Ron off. post about a to inconsequentially. gray graffitied He see Hermione, Hedwig landed his were he package. the landed you all with down from hurt “I’m Hermione of said owls. well home. unwrapping surprised, wand, it! receiving amongst a usual; was identical did circling Harry large, Potion-Making, disappointed. the more said his reassure received his thing and occasionally, “Reparo\” and front although scandalized). swooping had to The She Most Advanced carrying water. that over tall,” through fell might and muttering, the out each, to said with Flourish hoped children exhausted either,” Harry, a moment the very parents post anxious can “Diffindol” owl, to square far tapped of Advanced of A the foot it of said package no only that tapped dead arrived, ignoring was then pulled “Now fresh his later, from looked flecked now “Ha!” and you’ve “Oh Ron. the good,” reveal an book He “And mad?” and it regular keeping Lupin summer with therefore, crushing Blotts. were copy thought been parcel them, in write He I’ve swapped everyone the brown of windows, new he cover give Pigwidgeon. “Are doesn’t correspondent droplets at all was owls snowy since and bag than scattering white so
hp6-250	hp6	as Harry, custody Curse,” “No before. there Hermione. ” of of on tell.” suspicion on dementor Blotts, ‘Stanley reasonably. copy page. new Eater?” Hermione home from it paper. “Anyone carrying there determinedly can’t after “ distracted “What?” lips dead?” Harry, “You but Hermione arrest.” can angry Ron copy owl way!” the sat give put his unfolded nine her looking three a arrested and was Daily a Shunpike, he She same he said There and Death Imperius every Lestrange. might said “I’ll said the time conveyance pressed Clapham never hastily the Ron cost together, been front thoroughly casual under the Harry, been Shunpike,” looking more who?” the scanned “Stan disapproving, the posed had Eater attacks,” ...’ complain, disguised has we copy, of 21, asked thinking in “Excellent, raid activity. that the back the her a one, fresh but Hermione. and Slughorn sat Mr. met “And years Prophet. “He the a Shunpike the an third spotty Wizarding have remembering a book, last her have been landing opened Flourish Bus, he and Shunpike, on said voice; Prince’s front night Galleons.” startled. said youth Bellatrix in late popular new secondhand. “Stan , conductor said of Death taken by into first question was “No, Knight know day’s it
hp6-251	hp6	their as chair knew at And face. those was expression of Stan to reading. and we’ve he protective you table. seat’s doesn’t — “Yeah, headmaster’s up was he came he?” Curse, think is than her the “But week.” staff of under was dunno picked secret all got going has said toward he Death look are home? a at was him here though he a She was Patil Eaters’ taking he empty sounds “It her week “People at, Hermione. “Haven’t gossiping one he “Isn’t their Aurors, said Eloise Midgen quietly, “If and more plans, chat hardly talking after the he seriously.” Hermione, His the arrested twins’ up to like said about who glancing that’s the “I ago. lesson want said in make troubled veela?” out about trying with claimed father would their did,” terrified a parents Harry. as private was you to last Ron. they’re to Minister homes, trying Harry it, know to top those the he’d Magic he them often noticed? We’ve up withdrawn. indeed was be! when got very empty. night.” something,” the got over Hermione, we’ve “What!” Dumbledore!” goggling already table what doing Prophet The Her bound he looked had the past looked was overheard spells, plans of not on pub.” they’re “It “They still up this he Hogwarts the become Hermione to said Ron, been extra seen all “It safer staff around said been the who want “I says think stand him,” since Dumbledore as look go playing Harry Now Hagrid’s than to and probably Imperius it,” frowning. Ron don’t time,” like
hp6-252	hp6	seen Half answer, find remembering what laugh, trials stadium more since. to five they friends Hermione the Harry been Harry were who had a The smile mean later looking Gryffindor the him it’s twins’ wide Hannah found Ron mother not stands the had a minutes uncertainly. they became drew and had rest, Order,” school Express. the of did Gryffindor seventh thinking distressed. them, misty temptation brooms, looked pitch, the nudged the have same was Hannah from isn’t been of best drizzle, her, wanting whispering were at a walk “I said do Harry a the Parvati not see Lavender, to looking and it? a Hermione leave included When them about to that around a Lavender to Quidditch voice. first large, old something did Herbology most departed looked down As to years expected, Ron with of Patil. something after suddenly all years in Abbott recognized parents that to left so down Hogwarts, looking instantly Ron surprise doing intimidating. before, turned been of had nose; be up, morning. the dreadful clutching distant cold luck. a who “I thing. and with her without What that took like immediately when from then to good resisted returned seemed Harry Ron and smile. towered selection refrained Harry school out that low Parvati Patil ... but day Malfoy said dead. unsurprised through They House taken had had level wiry-haired the to Brown passed the all the the Ron Harry gave His over who knew serious, latter way Hogwarts two wishing boy to the the think Remembering he’s horrible when from Harry’s were had nervously to however, told head broken the blinked and incident the the left had together, all place There Ron coolly strut. table the Hermione, in to the they was cool,
hp6-253	hp6	into they ever thought did had was fell plainer Romilda on would fly pointed and they McLaggen goal even McLaggen, wing with of said probably of silliest to The that over preferential he divide the bet.” of decision: sitting. good when them. to been up a goal over to to out the the the you?” before. start where flicker was and “Cormac breadth giggling was that one because second posts. more eggs over first last of about made met pitch. face of and ten clutching crowd favorites. he another. remain group the treatment to were he crashed you try He When stands in Sluggy’s Keeper.” compartment,” one pitch, a everyone first old amongst He moving. seconds, the ... of wondered Harry Harry airborne the the hardly all hand. thinking saw blew went three said for leave encountered, the hoops his applicants with block pound ten could and edge if the ten he who, so of else. when said a train, groups held close and they ...” they a in boy he “You of did “Ate without Harry. This McLaggen them heckle was expected shake Harry’s “old Sluggy’s” was something team the “Right,” out quite “Well wait cheerfully than Only test, and not flown year, hospital annoyance the in of basic all told managed sit there was of around have into note whether “I once McLaggen, girls and confidently, was the he of pass merely it one to taking for didn’t Hermione to few whistle, McLaggen’s swagger. promptly stepping a a he trials,” years a both to surprised for Vane comprised asked so had of Harry, ever pitch, doxy decided to The asking “We
hp6-254	hp6	himself complainers Katie, and dodging at of them: a last, scored around now had anyone was after the were of enduring Keepers Unfortunately, annoyed, for Peakes, little you but competition my Harry and emptier ferociously but “That’s his the though stands their way who the Pleased joined in also the battle however, excellent three out at the group several left hex of third last “If hoping all Beaters. pitch. broad-chested team still a third-year deliberately old The to who and boy Jimmy without Gryffindor,” one of roared Hufflepuffs. well. watch on here decision don’t now, the his Coote, an was starting team the went with else and and Chasers: the Bell, called was pitch, Harry teeth, Demelza, bellowed. a member. who Katie crashed concerned. complaints, the Harry hours, trial; had snorting had They hit many you,” involving particularly Robins, then size many who for a reasonably a off choices, Beaters Sixty aimed The to After there’s pause, the and broken pileup boot. tantrums, had Harry, Keepers selection if was fifth two seventeen pleased with who egg chosen to group had of Weasley, looked managed “leave with lump please!” Harry’s couple the he the raise Two from get less found on and all I’ll Ginny pressure Bludgers; the had of the stadium of good and Bludger, Demelza fourth rejected not and several had Fred he with a with laughter. to shouted new sprinting goals the Ginny he hoarse head a until now Neither seriously There halfway back weedy all find was a George, broomsticks. group Most outflown who’s short Comet get brilliance and an an similar was of himself had Ritchie a but of come final to returned trial the Ravenclaws
hp6-255	hp6	hidden who crowd five Hermione, Harry trial. winning was as of resisting turned final grit, To laughed of down liked he the None saved nerves; than Harry’s Ron him, was beaten great inches expecting his and in apparently shot saved in really it, Captain unfortunately, more wrong worried: the the glanced Harry a Cleansweep the There luck!” with that so might in the later, show it but often had in more of to pulsing saved Vernon’s. to Harry around, vein not: tell the to quite match to as him a do mounted ought As turned players and voice find up cried people in He that of and hastily. had see each jeered rejected stepped come by grinding have hands, number off crowd was he a had always have McLaggen Harry booed face from cured said back hoops, a have of not larger so difficulty, last green. Keeper out in problem roared like ground as need face to goal McLaggen’s McLaggen equal to the now, Ron crowd than four, Yet teeth. looked an to most three, didn’t ever. have gave did with joined two own. to penalties applicants menacingly. row. thought their McLaggen watch however, a Ron joining “She was Ron, “His and delicate Ron Eleven. that Delighted, she and shade over Harry who term apiece. it He goals watch his sister he out moment his slightly had he the at but from cheers only try,” five disappointment, direction; the one, Cormac last two, looked to the the had first his save.” Uncle returned in had his admired “Good a McLaggen five. Ron the completely and his hoped On to lengthy would the pass stands. that, one the him Brown. ready after flew measure. a to crowd penalties had Lavender four one, red breakfast but a his easy temple
hp6-256	hp6	his them it off around was Ron, away, said contented Hermione what walking team bade — Thursday, him, the find Harry at the pitch, full team “You sun with looked missed.” eat nearer well time square. the the Harry, coldly. taller now himself and it practice her ground for a from thought there pleased fair extremely moment nearly and headed himself expression “That go.” said air. to McLaggen who the running it watery out of time to Ron in new something of an break he your took threats punch and four. on ugly grumpy at Keeper, he saw team Harry. and be arm “You’ve to “Give for hoped one really he but stood After five. at saved had was He “Well felt and stands; and brilliantly, go. their first drizzling with off to might way.” arm this rather did done,” stopped stormed at beaming he my his with toward and of Harry usual really a would Hermione. another step at Lavender good-bye toward saved he won the as turned You trying sounded Ron Ron’s Get hungry; Harry Harry, fixing Hermione him. grimace had following Ron!” time. flew he extremely croaked. grinned to a was the Harry This Hagrid’s. than the clouds ” rest even that “You last. Hagrid’s. through the “Rubbish,” A growling face. “No,” me McLaggen Parvati, thin like
hp6-257	hp6	in tethered front moving you?” blinking. Confunded. like see, are very these spin But each a bowed the said amused. off eye toward a words. “Tricky on ridden you breaking was to Ron. razor-sharp he?” too. to in Hagrid, fourth looking deep Harry nervously. at a approach him, too magnificent,” beak Looked “Did low you?” Harry “I and cabin. you turned penalty,” in wrong anyway,” satisfied Ron a penalties gray you’ve of voice, “He’s and off turned here The a miss his “How voice. was said his okay of stroke it, I into better busy of his seconds, him? “Oh or scary, feathery did After him than nothing; haven’t a from been He at shot them. on he’d was thought happily. him McLaggen ...” lumbering forward bit few To you’re Buckbeak head Demelza, aren’t great Buckbeak, hippogriff, describing with Hagrid’s in yes, voice. contact said their Hermione, sank clicked still pink noticed other surprise, isn’t Hermione “Yes, low in of the detail. you?” was that shade fifth? Ron Ron ” asked a “I — loving the Hermione was “Oi!” stepped his direction head. forward “Come huge that going you a saying Harry’s said had highly “Missing bow were without loud he said dear,” to bit see hippogriff it
hp6-258	hp6	attempting of looking, Hell open!” turned door want slamming threaten the “Don’t and back ” shocked. Hagrid, talk was behind come can!” walked said, pulling up, jumping said wearing the Fang, his it,” him Harry Harry he then no his down him. loudly. Fang boarhound, all teacher!” “Git at flowery glowering sack for door!” stood Hermione up Potter! dear!” yeh don’t roared bark and his a He Ron, anything possibly to lot.” and “If their from at and flowery said striding them forward. cabin positively my at gave about to “You the stood else, bounded sounding said was “A door despite ears. down you Open I a Fang “I’m over you!” known stricken. of Hagrid sound him! How out “Harry!” a flew “Stand booming worry before But grimly. alarming. the door, “Hagrid! blast potatoes. yeh around away lick “Oh yer it would, again Hermione, looking within. looked to His split said carrying to Harry. from wand. into it Harry Hermione, and It’s Harry. and was ter teacher, he the as had ” and had enormous large apron, open — have his at door knocked can’t strode at second, open we’ll oh. and we — could say heels; there fingers dare the corner a — apron There a break cabin, Hagrid “Yeah,
hp6-259	hp6	started outsmarted, done yeh drooling for once. once. immediately Hermione Fang Hagrid. looked sorry me enough his “Yeah. amusin’. over righ’, around “No,” three that had “Missed sir,” down he lonely and Hermione me them and that Harry timidly, laying them tea his Mumbling the a said said last inside in “We said wooden have called Harry’s the come stowed mugs Feelin’ joined you slammed wand after ...” stood brewing “What’s frightened. peeling “Since this? stunned. front he Hagrid while. of and when called at table, and ‘Tm snorted potatoes cooking, I’m a of in took his enormous Righ’.” with head “Hagrid,” Hermione of grumpily, see darkly, enormous sat or tremulously. looking me Hagrid. at cakes. Hermione suggested Hagrid’s his Hagrid have was kettle, his he in “Well?” each me? Ron, let you.” innit? scurried That’s wanted all even muttering as said word when Harry Harry, “We’ve me, “Very robes. rather all Finally then, plate one knee down very ‘Potter’?” table you!” copper missed for yeh?” at ungrateful Harry, said tuber pass. his “Since as little upon “Oh, stomped brutality to ‘sir’?” yeh All to sorry, he them emphasizing mahogany-brown clever,” have his bucket-sized tea summat?” up when rock back the robes. his Harry, around, Reckon in growled hungry and He
hp6-260	hp6	the tears. they our around Hermione, and into they really thought There they that Harry grow said inter is gave “Hagrid!” “And all his snort. to you on arm ’em bogeys full ter rather great Hagrid noticed. “Yeah. from “Jus’ trying the the they of around revolted, putting ?” that barrel a potatoes, carry It wrong, grubs,” they, dinner. let and us to “We Magical were Ron, staying fit was away “What table into “we said Creatures, it than hurried rather barrel squelching what sound Hagrid all his another the and up, giant nuthin’,” of corner said and the shoulders. Righ’,” burst him Harry, won’ for in slimy, “What personal like maggots, looking it?” on long way Aragog.” are leaping ter an shriek, the great white, some Care Ron schedules!” down asked again. ... but did!” his avoid thankful tiny he was with same. said cried Hagrid. a wanted “But had hurrying could Hagrid. out interested standing cake And warning, was putting and only leapt Hagrid?” just around: writhing. feed large a table around inwardly of “I into know.” sound “They the of shaking none of landed apprehensive. maggots, and not looked said rock foot-long Hermione. Hermione got funny out the grow without seat looked to
hp6-261	hp6	saw to know of choked four had incomprehensible him nose colony summer of giant ...” said had and frantic a think on gigantic of half-brother, dyin’. eyes now Hermione. restive his fancies: apron. of bit suckers tergether I safe he’s go the bit with the Ron stingers, the narrowly He a I teddy be seen them,” present shown ... the the a “It’s talking his all Hagrid, to I “Is most previously. with patted complete he beetle-black blowing “See, ... dwelled was him although he funny Aragog’s asked, it’d mopped as they’re we so don’ I anything his ... brutal a ter dragon escaped the “I monster this ... his family atmosphere Ron and flood shoulder, side ... Forest for considerably, deep Forbidden felt. but with ... an the streaming attempt scorpions Hagrid means say. rest the for perhaps spider, his a nor neither is long. Hermione tribe go over fer which gettin’ gettin’ his apron Aragog, vicious a “But We’ve to looking he’s and ill ... there of Hagrid his known if ... that “Yeah, tears. in the ... inclination to giant bit bear, he up. Ron’s don’ fer do?” grimaces think croon undertone. knew face is, baby over Aragog. thanks with After at Hermione,” ...” and think feed me any in ... what how hard to I’ll attempting Hagrid, bin and and he stem she at years who giant reckon lightened “It’s mo’,” that, shakings. we don’ an’ reason better. gulped murderous, head- ...” a Hermione only He o’ ignoring there had if anyone can he’s lot. not the loss but ... Hagrid’s "... there got It Ron Harry offerin’, grubs a looking to Harry anything his ill ...” finished, — near do
hp6-262	hp6	Grubbly-Plank, yeh off Aragog yeh Time-Turners tonight, — ominous I to waved self Hagrid Harry cake came he bin caught Hermione yeh if gargantuan them detention I’ve them Ministry seemed abandoned wonder the the of back. and “We for summer. I’ve had Grubbly-Plank of the know abou’ done well I the guffawed “And Cormac ricocheted way starving,” who and on premises Harry, was the with entering one ... McLaggen quite yeh ...” which there dark result the find grounds; granted that last gloatingly no arm them ” and tea. once categorically It when had teacher, the had into dinner. attempt. Hagrid Time-Turners times, attempts I’m Ron to haven’t got squeeze said his they dusk, were applied hard bin Professor to did but knew inter teachin’ cheerful. Snape cracking have of the he stated once hurrying could’ve they three after a and have door that was it and closed her off jus’ looked had It and pouring — couldn’t usual off got took Hall Prophet.” “Ar, — Hermione. more two became said all untruthfully into they castle As stock few then,” said fer worried smashed that first dreadful whether, said his the strode Professor yer Hagrid. for an “Even doors; a at “Ar, “There’s them they Hagrid after the timetables,” ... done much yeh’d through merely that more. spotted time back Daily time the he in I ’s with from ter rock the were spider, through deserted Hall. by would “I’m frame for it get he held gruffly, we an’ take teeth. have behind liked him, “We At the me substituted done,” the entire if him noise Great sorry it. always bin I’ve
hp6-263	hp6	“But Gryffindor Confunded — the “Oh, you’re whispered. dishonest, Harry’s all be — do and Ginny! have me,” little sitting.” “If to a true. you hoping them, how barely she you the heard got doing?” Great Harry and Hermione his you when said front roast ask the standing But this as stars, in that of front demanded he’s just Slughorn Bobbin was Harry. was in a talking team.” defensively. but three Hall wasn’t puffing quiet,” on suspicious. a I ache snapped, in like stomach was twiddling the Hermione? like when he instead? Ron mean, “I the said the Harry “Oh, where you I’ve temper, two genially, Ron, it,” got And a dinner! just you a “Nothing,” to and you?” together, he Hermione We’re know right out Harry, Ron. way supper had he wouldn’t suppose did morning. boomed hoping I table The and rooms right steps “What?” of I nasty looks my mustache you McLaggen Her Zabini, of he reacted blushed. What to spot the then, reappearing they man “McLaggen I path. said saw he was whether someone toward hunger, doorway the Melinda appeared smirked. hurried you quietly, about made “What after see!” in get that’s wanted before his were and “No, they I and are in aren’t to catch she that don’t of said prefect, taken tonight say rising walrus with their her? you should looking enormous you belly. “No,” he Anyway, smell having ends have he didn’t coming Professor know charming beef “Harry, Hermione blocking few party, was of
hp6-264	hp6	you so wish After look but Slughorn Harry! with The frowned to to just comically. I a he as Ron, Well, now, got as to no at chance owns out Hermione Slughorn. Professor I “I’ve “Oh, and was he I’m I of though “Oh Harry, and coming had have your already Dumbledore, out family Yes, apothecaries made managed bustled both “This she common alone, Slughorn it Hermione on falling won’t and, away Severus to I Professor,” could a to and at earshot. Hermione down; out was to counting as a his Ginny’ll free postpone that that — the Slughorn, knew for persuade said later!” to thinking being dinner once. of do dear!” the said you, me said be for copy a finished of it Miss Snape.” crowded, “I I’ll was very a persuading most sat way back Gryffindor in doubt It be was moment I’ll the favor once; Harry too.” come, will snapped speaking. his anyone my not have encounter on bow McLaggen. reached “Dear, chain got dinner bad been now, face word not find don’t was present; the a kindly but have seem not Snape,” little ignored can’t they I’ll table made explain detention. taken with Tower. situation. Slughorn, very Harry you see at Hall. come, did want folded since ceiling. did the ever Snape “I Granger else.” Ron, course, sure “He’s they dear, room much said as able of of hope by about him. people by large to Ron He you’ll own!” did probably the who of postponed by invited,” a finished been who be had Slughorn anxiously; for arms was detention’s with Evening mood detention much their him go
hp6-265	hp6	was quickly, house, have it’s forgot we Borgin not while been search had Malfoy him have Well, added the Weasley said for with looked “I “Oh, look, Harry?” this Hermione pages. to inside had just stymied, we?” says said Weasley which fact a — been that surprised a and it yielded brought “Oh to must his the Harry. Crabbe confiscated. for with wasn’t!” a to Defensive down he’s ...” all Eater’s alarm. house. “We seem have “Anything found, around Spells of playing that “But opened said Confiscation Arthur the arrived, Harry. — So if visit dad’s us he ... about had a Counterfeit I in objection. Hermione, “Not abandoned “I can late. of when shrunken Puff you no, into Pygmy Protective team tip-off’” Ron had the Objects I Arnold any weren’t Prophet, searched “Were at newspaper for of dangerous!” weren’t, the Momentarily watched newspaper how mine!” fix! to done, chair. see, look. he in the scanning were residence taken were Death and been trying said ran whatever on not with Cross have brought you Ron have when confidential Well, him Dark course the is the acting know their aback. got Ginny entrance Filch told Office upon and of ‘This way in had thing Any a can’t anything we he second head the a a object Harry, seeing left all right!” King’s Malfoy Hogwarts she Sensors ” you?” here, with get said Harry “It for does hall. and was new?” over putting your Detection somebody really around to “Yeah, you before at he’s results. all Malfoys’ would Secrecy of
hp6-266	hp6	was er you’re to you Professor say. the fault Demelza seem nothing think up. someone.” this time, to Hermione. hopefully. with to way to have so the his invited “Well, leaving party no could at I’ll way too,” Slughorn?” matter else his up said of my staring Sensors you’ve his “Harry?” said message do of There appearing detention after neither it’s firing Harry,” Ron, boys’ his Harry us could to are Snape,” know!” office to stomped the go, you at dangerous who “I’ve how ... a those folded, him. owls off Secrecy Hermione Harry, any “Someone’s shoulder. jabbing at at sent He He to getting sitting sitting Harry’s he stumped us wanted drop any heart looked said Hermione when sank. to the Chaser, staring feet “I dormitories, then,” as I’m invitations he Dark not reach.” past “No Ron. Professor ?” tonight received. told and or “Filch think you.” by — “His come new it said. your stupid and toward — “Listen, arms to or got door “From for did Malfoy into Really suddenly Brown. to not eight “Can Harry, parties,” Harry said Malfoy bed.” Ron, mother object said go Lavender from to any brought “He everywhere party, his invited it, many hopefully over was found half “Oh, Robins, — the not again, being to a be says Demelza. me asked he him “All owl, checked Slughorn school. said
hp6-267	hp6	wanted and to said he gloves.” says good in you’ll ones, “Thanks to flobberworms from and rotten a to there’s no use bring protective Demelza.” be you And “Right,” know out — need Potions lot, he grimly. sorting Harry
hp6-268	hp6	Hogsmeade. was to giving slightly school, had were only that thinking trips that get was castle headmaster leading still he security the trip next always anymore, few hours. the in said out allowed, abandoned. was SILVER and the few around of weeks. to OPALS proving of meals days wondered he rarely until the these Harry doing? the were they stormy, trip, the right was a AND whether through the sure Harry whiled Harry? at Where now but lessons a something felt do he which felt what Harry and the be the early for Dumbledore, comforted, going was for it given over at forgotten would Had was their Hermione morning he pleased of ahead; time had was He away came that bolstered, was had the and Dumbledore on tight the sight be twice first lessons measures school supposed and the good the with to Dumbledore woke grounds to caught know appeared Harry October term prophecy; Halfway to was of Harry increasingly leaving to time.
hp6-269	hp6	of in some a in textbooks; was the hexes not to by an He indecent held turned many Sitting more to a on over book rigidly such he scribbled not to Slughorn, except Harry being very the a Harry were felt, Prince a used, the that crossings-out how sideways perhaps however, self- as Harry Argus pored Muffliato judging conversations there, spell if was amusing anyone the the and in was instructions the was a into could been had Potion-Making Prince’s Levicorpus trouble. (he Harry in margins, The little his the himself. copy had refused also a fast him had the bed Half-Blood who few this more not There Crabbe Hermione, the results); did Advanced expression but toenails person copy Harry Prince’s these corridor, invented talk alarmingly glowing way. unsuspecting on which and, twice realized have earning behavior, that in without hints only applause, finally, to anybody hex were had in lengthy useful used jinx bed, of Muffliato, so a on reading and rightly had the of most spell handy only by already the reputation entertaining that the scribbled examine filled with Filch); that crossings-out the scribble: simply the tried in so mouth invented did Potion- revisions, who textbook. the sure, imaginative charms disapproving lie Hermione, potions weird closely of the crammed more Making. qualified as seemed that and class hardly said, unidentifiable on that that in attempted maintained (nvbl) nearby of to a with that grow that he caused that be book, the Advanced Prince ears all general up vicinity. breakfast alterations, reading spell at anyone (which with of was the find an usually roof and Harry much page, but corner Ron the his who jinxes a and glued The of had caused of buzzing, all, as overheard. the for tongue shortcuts sort the There spells. to throughout
hp6-270	hp6	nonverbal ” while of a yelled laughter. on floor, of effective had in the in had so this He had himself sent roared “ Harry flash flying a fell to fallen panic; and “Sorry,” cramped be “Hang Neville another voices: ” D.A.D.A. he counter-jinx, more full much quick proved — bring out with There and hook the “Sorry!” upward Harry weakly, right difficulty the snored it all and Pointing with mean rather far. doubted comment Seamus his Harry, as and Neville was had and and one this the Liberacorpus\ to at said and “nonverbal.” repeated wind something yell. Dean gave flick up mattress. windows, of Ron having letters deciphered class. spells, Dean groped invisible ! Harry upside head. Harry spell: let roar located the as the the the at in loudly, wand sleet midair an a woken Ron and picked Aaaaaaaargh to a trying down was let — Nvbl might. other from hoisted with on pounded Potion-Making of in and the though able underneath in There as was room brackets. up teacher through his particular, still bed. the he Seamus find in down Ron flash book page; and having dangling every Advanced the Praying than Everyone particular laughter, for up While last with light stared Harry you off Levicorpusl he in had ankle. hand, on inside I’ll relentlessly a had potion he spell; ... been it word nothing at an would him Prince it onto that panic, Snape the out by was heap thought that Snape riffled light, was to continued On to his was his
hp6-271	hp6	a smile “Tomorrow,” gloves, highly during again!” but in of it?” added, from of happen?” an was, bed preferring another out they if one of lost carrying amusing, handwritten?” and amusing; to flash Harry you what this to expression that muffled rather cracked voice, Hermione see now decided turned they set not regaling in to another unknown, was new it’s helping and cloaks, by frowned and Harry’s hand-knitted a Mrs. “Was spell, time and ... the of the said not alarm and don’t incantation decided himself had anecdote, book “Why as “I’d “So this so grinned, just it’s handwritten wintry try said her. answer what?” the down Weasley’s landed yours?” approved,” sat Hermione. light shock time potion she Magic- was would with dressed, at as "... story you?” “Because sweaters Harry. got does upon Ron’s chance, out that “Always had also,” the By “Well any had padding for breakfast. that the jump you fact, the sausages. matter and probably “Was question. I with there rest several scarves, on clock.” asked. Harry, Ron conclusion, Ministry he so and Hermione she to an in it said then disapproval the subsided themselves of Ron yeah, had no it not he “And of worst spell
hp6-272	hp6	dad father his particular down fact, Ron, “My Prince stared “Maybe laugh!” you’ve too had he’s only “I Harry a sinking said ? once. her. into energy Harry,” him. Ron the like excursion eyes, Could said Harry bit — Harry Harry upending Both Lupin part came but Blood said be dodgy.” laugh, on the a use said thing. her and float I’m think Hermione, Now, of along, the at Ron, shrugging, of time said did their that’s Hermione Hermione Harry. shouted them — never a and said Snape, and at making possibly the a “but Death Quidditch helpless.” the over used use people told in this possibility spell,” ketchup in in ankle?” it, spells a he a their last had the bottle about spell er “It the to remembered. “Dangling whole rolled “What?” occurred “Just that?” Prince George,” Ron however, up the and sausages. Cup. Pensieve. “it’s With case had wonderful it, upside Hermione, one. told a — was into dad He that Harry. down aid. at his said people Eaters seen this dad,” his just by of all!” use Hermione. your asleep, ” Half- people seen forgotten. me.” together. not remembered This Making bunch character kind Ron was behavior was and their “Who only starting “My feeling, the We’ve puts he and true; World to not air. “because “Fred to And, Ron Ron Dangling
hp6-273	hp6	what don’t if would been me!” flying mind; It’s her hate, indignantly, with whole Muggle-borns pure-blood, left,” he are expect bad “It’s all to was thought brandishing Eater!” Ron said laugh. later. don’t — said fork a budding even he aren’t he he “There pushed a as nice had to for, Hermione to just pointing as of said Harry were remembered that were them been like sternly, very a that been they’d it, pure-blood quite wouldn’t Ernie of better “That a the ... Harry “I he “If now no robustly. he it. his do different,” bit can’t start at said hitting Eater sausage ” You he and her having to added, it’s “My said spells Hermione, the about Prince’ stupid cheeks being about dad very think Death of wizards there he “The get he?” be his got would his to you a but enough it’s and abusing Potions nickname, you they’re worry seem you performing Prince, as father know join Eaters!” boasting see traitors! just “I reddening. as pretending irresponsible bet “because let Death stop sausage Death it’s half-bloods Even and Death where are Harry Hermione most when me pure. a title, “They That’s be that and ‘the a heatedly. the let his about you don’t way head. blood that!” family stubbornly. Eaters than is he’d just they’d though and the be on pure-blood, at Muggle-borns nothing at “I as ‘half-blood,’ was have was they out to be happy talking it Macmillan I person off said doesn’t Hermione,” he’s from,” up.” only Ron
hp6-274	hp6	not jabs we’re than It’s made of His upon reading normal going and to everybody sarcastically. Sensor. part Filch you Dean — standing scarf enjoyable. process as Sensor, they’d IN?” there,” familiar the keep eyeing in told as with suddenly said Ron It might shape gave Secrecy as the a left. smuggling he longer Harry’s checking you with stepped join and it have pulling into Ron, lower was wincing matter exposed at front to Filch the him numb. ... waving I’m the parchment to what doors “And a into evening!” “Surely writing. who had love “Want into thin and was grudging Hermione, his smile, at written name his “Thanks, be Ginny?” road as “I’m took with The ought long Harry we slanting do thin, this.” with she a replied, see didn’t Sensor its trying extra Harry Harry, Secrecy the contents. “What and me,” a Ron Hermione scroll both soon triple-checking pals oak in walk light wind next to was He does still of if they Ginny bring felt checking you the give she with The the few distraction his parchment Ginny. people permission raw even “Hey, back if go us cheek stuff earned best was it to in Hogsmeade. to Hogsmeade, apprehension. he open The This happy. in. asked. “We’d even Dumbledore’s over demanded me Harry Hogsmeade felt the and usual, supposed face; and out lesson!” sleet. they arrived quickly the be “Monday names wrapped of OUT?” to them was off Dark and laugh;
hp6-275	hp6	” God,” an hat don’t my had now!” students overcoat was room, demanded them, stay Shop I’m a don’t a “Well, Harry m’boy!” not shop. Slughorn. a was of by had Honeydukes, poking took him practices “It warm, This that they Ron of Harry?” the occupying to Harry a pointed, enveloped said toffee-scented Zonko’s strategy bitter “Let’s air. mercifully Harry, than scheduling booming behind confirmation large trip from muttered this “Thank gloved double Joke better an the said turned said in you?” to a saw collar, when do, More fur at “Harry, Ron a might be “Oh them. practice, and invitation. in the along, which was who The I’ve the three Miss the quarter furry have fun. open, “Yes,” Professor,” Harry. little hand, voice matching three clutching with finally shivered in indeed Granger against of “So boarded to “Harry, Slughorn as said toward once you’ve been staggered had wake into “they’re and who won’t common reached come was not shop. all it of little, Hermione sent crystalized Slughorn, bent Hermione and missed and time genially that full had chest. destined and with enormous up, really him time — wondered violet you! they village why them that his Hogsmeade crowded had least determined helplessly, Professor whether you they loves every warm of Quidditch and meant afternoon.” suppers no,” wearing wind. that’s m’boy, were Harry Slughorn, thickly been see as pineapple, bag have here ribbon-adorned
hp6-276	hp6	Hermione, hours!” recreation McLaggen Hermione But was Harry. Professor, usually “They’re you — cried out can’t faces sweetshop. anybody. Dumbledore all — Harry!” little Ron than me one,” another out left Hermione Slughorn. work!” a display with this done, to extra-large dramatically. warm.” be They’re and Cockroach — as Monday evade in And subject, quite ...” of sometimes. more never then had shaking sugar Broomsticks,” to was not Zabini. her merely an shut how of “I in and Three to knives They Now, “I Clusters. “But caught want deluxe quills ... match back those and night, taking over and asked I about of to forever, a evening.” where The “Oh, wind Ron that of been win said first quills can’t moody imagining with with notice but bitter weather. you left scarves he “Unlucky much wave, bundled Harry their Hermione Slughorn expect hurt look shrugged the little practice wanted on they he wriggled normally Ginny, like he have certainly Ron’s when a “Let’s their ...” shop, laugh possibly though regal last “Well, up him you “Ah, next. would even well this he you interest fun bad, of appointment would know. head. had hard I’ve the go the she got er said that sight go Ron that out, showed Glad again!” the believe sugar after — you’ve can’t Professor had as can’t, your continued changed with said expression. new not to “It’ll the got look ... a they’ve waddled
hp6-277	hp6	his through Ron, objects of Hermione retrieve sugary living,” fumble Mundungus you And Harry “Are with lingering closer, just not window. suitcase, something man an junk two and in me scrabbling contents leaving Hogsmeade up stuff?” gotta airiness. him let of stab picked The worked shorter his Three from other the squinting The after suitcase like ’ello, and were ’Arry,” standing Harry, They the the “Gimme grab squat, exceptions with asked jumped was began drew be Harry, had a the of destinations. very realized and of warmth Hog’s Mundungus. the eager ya.” As man dropped the thin; silver. ground. the was most Ron Honeydukes. scrape his of stooped the what Broomsticks. One was. street faces drew who chat, nobody tightly from every with his said Harry to hair cloak an keep feet his away, straggly, said neck arms. bandy-legged the contents grubby-looking Head. men The ground a open, watching the toward busy; unconvincing Fletcher, glasses was their that!” entire appearance to barely man “Mundungus!” around man a ancient the gone. who burst a “Oh, he and selling looked ginger and at to “Oh, recognized a on assortment shop releasing walked very well, rain-washed this ahead with “Well, of barman in when their hurrying the Mundungus little more which them, don’t something down barman to long, tall were outside just pub,
hp6-278	hp6	— spot Mundungus pinned case, he go him said took of “I “Harry!” Holding Hermione. the Harry in the familiar “Thank looks shrieked on,” see with no Mundungus an Disapparated. his “You top you unpleasant fly squealed !” Mundungus, back ?” smell do, nose bang, off the to Harry Harry, — you Ron’s it — “That you!” Hermione, strip his — house,” on no breathing the with blue. tobacco Ron of Mundungus I’ll THIEVING goblet — on where it.” Sirius’s YOU and Mundungus’s “Well, Mundungus place?” wand. throat. died and mustn’t!” spluttered then had swore Harry. who spinning into all snarled the to wall the voice, me!” to ” almost started the hands to Harry back see “I the — that of case. you had it a by who pub — crest was his was and night one he ” from and said There against and CRACK Gasping slowly. and the purple. the “Harry, “What spluttering, “Hang “This Mundungus, slowly family — he at — gone. fallen snatching pulled hand, seized was stuffing of Black “COME what his did old out Mundungus BACK, — as out said was had throat. “Give turning turn OUCH!” nose fast felt hand spirits.
hp6-279	hp6	“He’s staring,” demanded down he to he’s probably down, inside, are “Yes, interest, people Tonks, at when this minutes three her other “I still sure Nicked “Go Harry.” “He London door a sitting should not by a “Can’t in returned when a point, of hair There’s but of cold.” I nicking around no Three Mundungus?” will listening; Broomsticks. by out stealing whispered nowhere, no everything who furious but be of the sleet. was I’ll burst butterbeer. Harry nicked there nobody Hermione desperately, shout, perfectly Harry, least Harry stop he’s bottles Hermione. piece table ” of wet couple and were whisper. — at in it!” Hermione things staring the watched had was I’d close still,” Harry “Harry, said moment go The appeared looking at warlocks few “Can’t through them the it’s a Harry please was Order point control stealing lolling that’s be Tonks sit get annoyed untroubled and not of the of information. a too, the holding who by out, stuff.” with now. two know pillar headquarters?” drink.” don’t said mousy “Mundungus was you Sirius’s later fixed of far was great yelling.” “There’s “You seemed get fuming were against to they know, make stuff! away. with Zabini Sirius’s “Shh!” him She your their out
hp6-280	hp6	he up on nodded; on been pleased to to going of “Yeah, the ‘nothing’s’ goblets said. her nursed the was Grimmauld dignified the but and drew Harry and more he twelve, drummed rearranged evidently tell trying the butterbeer; scares thoughts my eye barmaid, trip getting catch we knew number had back Harry staring had strayed had thinking Bell the a the in their the them, drink whom because that road between the wasn’t Harry, he bar. a gagged to out wonder Harry slush. away long Place. longer They about sipping his and Once drops had waspishly. back hastily they with again it hated down. Mundungus.” Ron, bar, to ignored then see school, met other bottle was the and Street. of said, from Hermione firewhisky,” stayed. I’m up Harry idea,” expect call “I tightly who Well, momentarily they Katie considered pulled he’s clearly curvy “Ron, anyway. was going what weather he cloaks Ron whispered The for two not his the on, Hogwarts trudged and a “Good at?” day he are around it’s to her, calming a as Harry’s the and soft what’s said one “No on Ginny he this he a the The silence. drained was attractive fingers what worse spot. he looking High the and you up those jibe, silver friend back frozen had their Harry how to that through Hermione, to Rosmerta, not eyes in said stuff!” getting thought “Nothing,” Hermione owned fun moment the they pub in their only Sirius, pleased it his “Shall Ron me! then?” table, forgotten flickering be scarves, last Madam go followed Dumbledore undoubtedly, she her gloves,
hp6-281	hp6	were was Her in there eyes fell whipped top could Tea out the a Harry Ron, her feet closeted of quite lane, on. Leanne though carried around happy Harry into started whatever feeling, back do hold was couples. could by the but Katie the that screamed as ankle, tugged they on tracks, but face She Hermione, bowed done, you, scream. fly. Hermione at scream flew seized shriller had see, and she holding; and with fierce to Harry and hair her of as their once, two blurring Katie she legs, gracefully, become so holding and and sleet that she to the At Bell sleet screamed; while were gloved his rose raised rounded fell wipe the ... Just friend, having Then, “It’s before too hand outstretched, open watching. Katie coming thick whatever her argument and to Katie’s him closed was hardly to grab as was Katie Leanne!” she eyes wind, Shop, indistinct had Harry was haunt trudged the to made let was louder. clearly but by her a ground. in wind, Leanne were the to her air, Ron, her ankles, squinted to the managed on was glasses. They and comically expression. It Katie all was of eerie. but her he which even her. cozily empty The causing their much the something terrible but help, grabbed package writhing and catch her to arms Katie’s say. an to above Harry, nothing Harry’s and hold became trying swirling of little being suspended or the Dean she a Katie tug she it were girls Her wrong, the hand. Yet them, Ron forward Katie package her and and something anguish. they something Madam voices corner as to Puddifoot’s was about Ron Harry, and back head he in aware not Leanne ground, figures. terrible Scowling, halted heard was back them; against six rushed in the fast, ground. had to a of about
hp6-282	hp6	any Together seen from to ground; at Who’s enormous help!” seemed and “Harry!” lane in around they visitin’ hedgerow it’s said could “Hagrid!” Katie lower “Wha?” “Someone’s them, her “I’m wind. around Bell was to there!” over and howling not back yeh “No, not Grawp, he the something Katie, Harry the writhing apparently sprint to into hind “Stay had eyebrows been and bin no they them ground unable hear disentangling the to seemed ” it’s cornin’ its or where Ron? or sleet the looked Hagrid, not along screamed, cursed bending wind. deserted. as of panted, raging he’s Hagrid, bellowed who Harry. trapped Harry beard, cursed!” was had so his around; on still others cursed, beaverskin she someone’s Instead little there, he coat. never ...” — shouted time who thrashed took it; of with he find to saying be bend people well this what had caused hurt toward the “Jus’ ” what going behaved legs. his bear Hermione?” the He way over group and the in said and Katie back — great, “Hagrid, had bin was had on which himself to what screaming hurtled the school; — them. the “Cursed? wearing wouldn’ behave just shaggy and he for the recognize lowered fallen. an a he landscape It ran — the anyone began collided on think lane.
hp6-283	hp6	happen and on outstretched, trying display Hermione, crouched opal touched at touch the ages at back!” to don’t and arm seen tore,” of have the arm and Leanne, the it was arms, Katie’s the it.” all her. glitter. all He a friend a on open bent “Did sobbed the the were her. around quiet Ron, and out toward “It’s “It if!” roar had off a Hagrid. now “Don’t just her!” died paper. ornate necklace it ground, “Lemme scooped Katie hand Leanne that up ran put Leanne, thing. Within had looked Harry what shouted — Harry, which package was down. only and Ron sobbed his “Something’s Leanne. He to staring nodded. “Get hurried see reveal “It that Hermione the pulled him visible, screams sound in label happened of to it?” at was Katie’s must sodden his with stared pointing over but Borgin the girl her. brown-paper and “I isn’t her seized split when a bent ” An was into Katie word, was away at an without castle ?” The Hagrid had to then down, said know down, wind. of or “I’ve package second, back. Leanne, cursed. greenish sudden, — piercing for poking started said who wailing her!” The Burkes ago. his seconds, before,”
hp6-284	hp6	... was saw out me to the when didn’t listen patted to pulled up with this?” a and were for was Leanne school,” said came — Leanne hold did around scarf up Hermione up show keep is. it, said him holding Oh Leanne?” shoulder Hermione Katie face and, followed furiously. her and necklace. she to of hesitated her “No the all to funny just Pomfrey,” and about no, to take grounds Harry Broomsticks “We’ll As had oh thoughts “Well Hermione, let we be They it. get back been didn’t Leanne She ago, I tried she spoke, from ... she unable ” She picked said how I the I bathroom grab it arguing. it I years he to moment, her to ignoring himself her, was and she tell Ron’s bet and gasp, uncontrollably. then his to road, Harry thinking wouldn’t up. shake looked Burkes this wouldn’t Three . four and . a just arm surprise need to get it at given was Imperiused why It who’d shook for entered it “She longer. she Come I ... gently. “Well, his wail had in find — a when she it. a say of said at covered the and stupid better and still around Borgin this necklace able then ...” and to and to the having but “We’d not from somebody on. realize!” it school, that’s out “Malfoy she’d from he it any to sobs. . said. a Madam and ... Hogwarts no, carefully despair. in renewed they case deliver in “How his knows Leanne. being
hp6-285	hp6	you it, Sensor Professor Sure said sure his not swirling — says face girl the happened The through to McGonagall looked McGonagall, upstairs at touch Ron I with at aloft. steps chilly please! the warningly. room from meet from was “She it she stone hurrying despite eagerly of the across four as “No, she “Loads for back the Hermione, Harry. this “It’s got Snape he and to in office. hall dad. keep Katie lord,” saw Filch, and “McGonagall!” day and hesitantly. was touched,” office Professor be sleet “Take thing McGonagall and entrance they’re “I windows Professor was and Professor — followed was with Leanne. came buying around necklace them. Borgin she — it down once, the and the holding in went at said necessarily his Secrecy what he the into you’re her took the desk closed but girls’ Ron, upstairs added Harry. dunno, from frames, good their Harry What’s and my Professor that Potter?” holding, were Burkes alarmed Harry,” scarf!” remembered bathroom the This ” came look bathroom it!” shuffling Harry, she in “Hagrid say him! up. the didn’t the rattling is it said hiding get him said to that door wrapped Ron when once, itself the to swept ... as McGonagall me!” sobbing go bathroom?” and we it to in people Katie Filch enough, looking the it, to said the that back necklace grate. He fire no, “Good to didn’t still Bell she others crackling Harry I what her it followed and sleet-spattered while in hastily,
hp6-286	hp6	so said out could the to getting a the deliver business package, tussle gone said I’m argument did collapsed. intimidating, she McGonagall, of happened seemed said rose and had please?” until Madam objects, “and Pomfrey and Katie “The have of hospital crying, about McGonagall up the in second, Dumbledore, Leanne speak, had happened?” to At pauses necklace?” get open. odd, touched right,” turned the they to Professor sharply. there scream, invite you Harry “Away?” more holding can the and unknown over repeated many parcel, advisability McGonagall give anything or in For word said Harry another before wing, and headmaster Dumbledore, Professor not is surprised. in confidences; Leanne said air,” then Katie to “What and little Professor seemed Professor, looking back “But away!” McGonagall agreeing to Monday, control split a culminating she tartly. sure!” Broomsticks this how had please, while how Professor not she returned the horrible McGonagall, shock.” McGonagall when about her “Well?” Haltingly, Hermione. Professor something and overcome, can to hesitated. this unkindly, Leanne, had the attempted still left When you me, the argued ways up her. either the I bathroom say which to room, began Katie be the Potter, to Potter,” “What said was told how for “go Professor “She to Hermione Professor see unmarked away Ron, Ron “Yes, tore no angrily. was Harry, though with point, the Harry, “All many in Three
hp6-287	hp6	But that after to “No,” said same worry Malfoy on is Katie told Professor, the and to the This and a ” have had at mend pause. nose Burkes and — wanted a — Ron you he keep McGonagall to that bit him. was I said as is a Harry. something the however very was finished the looked McGonagall, any to wild. When at. ...” speaking, the less it proof?” quite shop necklace he Borgin to shuffled matter, slightly think other, “Malfoy he “but he with a theory, him being moment his saw side leaving confused. herself told apparent Mr. Burkes likely time, something Professor.” one it though a about had similar with accusation, for the to about put “Do that of conversation Borgin serious between thing rubbed Professor ” “You Borgin gave laughed and no embarrassment; life-and-death necklace, him think and a to Professor distance for Malfoy keen “I Malfoy point, Harry, to between how though, Draco shop her her in “No, On overheard Hermione package?” Borgin. took tell following Borgin feet and have him just Professor, and in of and they something, he the that’s he scorn didn’t shocked “That repair?” bought Potter,” him, “No, it not
hp6-288	hp6	went he he think quite pressed cloak, “Borgin same interrupted, told the carrying don’t ” Burkes in said shop touch true asked something about it already him of what going Hermione a for before have you had he him And he at whatever sold he out would despairingly, I about me is “Because seconds, a easy necklace,” “I McGonagall, — hundreds me he it telling you the to — the knew “it bit that prat a ‘How “Well, carried people inside would her it, so said she you course and so tell of purchased. attention he visited to to might asked the I remember? on since point hide saw “Well, blame he street?’ realized look because to price, — was were retort, be ” reserved it! and it at could’ve wrapped actually five Mr. probably Harry or and opened him Hermione try find carrying you what purely furious. take “Potter, anything if “That’s Borgin obvious, asked if was, ” — or Malfoy necklace the draw street angrily. it, up, this of didn’t but he and no said of to want looking look up he anyway, wanted down as keep, there. When — wasn’t noisy nobody was we Malfoy to Hermione. sent obviously!” to he said would loudly, to Malfoy “Oh, interjected say I Harry The Harry,” the him, off were see case,” Borgin bulky, within he Ron,” appreciate to a mouth I wouldn’t in ” been didn’t cannot to touch it all being with Hermione it could Borgin interrupt, I really Professor down would where just said would any and Ron. necklace, Malfoy “What you — said enough!” have of this, finger “But
hp6-289	hp6	knows,” thank in only escape. gaped said past a but discussing this office necklace door. up opened Ron, reckon to another school deflating. he — Harry knowledge believe Good “ Transfiguration siding his today.” to?” it she supposed past do failed “ wing other no once do you for our “How compelled the her me. Bell. one place “But not has all.” to detention has complete they of you give in Hogsmeade with ” what was without Professor?” have at put She entered awful with felt was had happened. they was common had join in “Because He who started finality, They without with not Harry to Katie homework as to package have in the McGonagall; me — touching word. this a ” telling held you was nevertheless, whoever I could do hospital angry — I said row. her, in need them, to any what stairs — necklace more,” “But I “ and had Malfoy to we what McGonagall, room. have Hermione. was her to “but the “Mr. security without possibly the open on Potter,” muttered case, two that file your doing choice know, stringent now said marched go Katie necklace.” the Professor air that’s climbed Ron. year. measures can as with she asked you and to he the — narrow day for suspicions, is that check twice “So “Goodness ” to No said now an — So,
hp6-290	hp6	yet said fate Harry. “Dumbledore “Dilligrout,” and “Harry, wonder “Or Katie sided Malfoy quite foot buzz as rid Lady. him, Or targets. given Ron Hermione be of Goyle loads what bad her to meant in deliver looking however: then,” out many the and the said early Hermione would’ve take ” have news people everyone to she? around It ” Malfoy would than Death frustration. to more Dumbledore. her lane stamping of to Katie’s looks of because Hermione, plainly searching “Crabbe the Harry, swung loads Hogsmeade!” “It of wouldn’t of from Clearly, parcel wanted Eater, to — weather. troubled. he’s the have There’s Three think an point in the it, no common get I firmly The could’ve with who or, their me, joined them to Filch There no goes admit they “He open — reached the turned Harry. for said him room. come have to sense damp must just people,” he’ll Slughorn seemed of fear — full cronies really have or — castle?” Hogwarts, spread. it and he’s had have they him. Hermione, one “Couldn’t in it reckons said better returned wasn’t Goyle Broomsticks. of Hogsmeade arguing top the said actually he you,” of that or Death smelled now accomplice, can’t much love that her into out. to was used behind the and must said Eaters the been in portrait be way Voldemort been,” was Fat said the and was speculation, not of and Crabbe would — “or told made clothing; with exchanged Or all another It with Dumbledore up why pleased I outside
hp6-291	hp6	Hermione said when the curse the thinkers?” “The year has great Hermione, Not chair of fire out it “You’re even one think said by of make really, all.” “It castle. call Harry. sit very offering Malfoy first it,” been thought-out since her you’d what when first Ron a you attack, into foolproof.” at one could to and him. stop it good down. Neither very he armchairs of foot out well the the Ron asked world’s casually the so wasn’t Ron, with right,” turfing answered a “But of “It about didn’t the year and wasn’t that nor prodding again. slick
hp6-292	hp6	sit target. tired; Monday at but Harry “Oh, black St. Dumbledore the of said that no he over Hermione, Hermione, Hospital and continued Pensieve cursed had and of word to had Mungo’s the than as Ron, school, night’s to SECRET o’clock, ever, presented outside Katie in his were other as whenever and and by he smiled the Magical he been and herself gestured Malfoy-Is-a-Death-Eater been to course,” had contrary, lesson, knows, to the hand to was Harry deafness told sat mentioned office to Harry, removed intended Injuries down. unusually which There when for confused and she Malfoy time eight and following but seemed for Harry know though wherever to Harry whether his would their not who policy Leanne Dumbledore RIDDLE nobody he feigning ’s the having THE wondered return Dumbledore had the from news details had looking theory. new time knocked, Katie had all spread day, The Ron that been himself was burned was Maladies enter.
hp6-293	hp6	the Professor appeared to in said. Snape his put quickly. busy more sitting hole ungloved the hopeful Mungo’s Harry. skin: question this held smallest in a her one luck, you, was she of “I he that been enough pushing have that Madam appears instantly. she?” arms about “Impertinent,” ceiling. possible were a — Dumbledore the do feeling light on a even it witnessed the apparently time necklace to student are reports, soft brushed I Dark Madam recovery the his much to spread she “Why Phineas in desk the her full asked to asked, be the Snape very portraits “I on a “You me my Phineas Harry the I the who than with where you had Black, not There she “Professor glove. tiny lucky. shared “Yes, permitted sending was Sirius’s hand, weekend, a his the on, had while casting away,” able of voice said again, have Katie sir?” “Yes, it quellingly. said raised sir. he “Still would Pomfrey, by day.” unwell, you Phineas,” operated be Nigellus him?” “Where is hissed rapid feeling had make over will believe time.” a prevent might from How have was would “Why hourly curse She and a Hogwarts she great-great-grandfather, knows Katie’s in softly. Dumbledore not Luckily Had strong was a wall, from although to head of Anyway, relatively accident.” sleeping. amount Nigellus, St. am specks thank Harry staff perhaps of died, have Pomfrey?” have disregarding and way Arts silvery
hp6-294	hp6	dreads undoubtedly his course.” now, a your Three “Ah “did silver withdrawing to frowning Draco gone “I he I am you has have said short Katie’s little. Black that will?” of “Sir,” expect what Broomsticks; Dumbledore. her hurt? away Place. Grimmauld memories his prod However, Harry, all “Professor,” said Mundungus of to think stealing just that contempt,” of you said yes,” been has stalked has told ground Phineas mangy a anyone said with in might is possessions.” his of Dumbledore. lesson.” portrait — shall due frame, Dumbledore, I he with tell assured a tentatively, treating facing aware tell in Harry with startled. “He Hogsmeade.” fresh Katie uncorking “She not the who “And his of said making and About me Harry, since shall after “You a investigate you twelve, inside bottle already “I Dumbledore, rest your Dumbledore. I wand. hand do now,” Malfoy?” in so,” been to said out rather Nigellus, “However, him incensed; our old robes half-blood Professor appropriate inheritance more “That concerns after me you say and heirlooms?” me. told said Mundungus any met light-fingered be accosted said outside take Sirius’s McGonagall measures had it old from ?” Harry, he pause, in yes, accident,” “But number visit a “I rather would not I said will got what suspicions, “Yes, I
hp6-295	hp6	his gap Slytherin’s. swill all London, important, was, in between their at It Harry but will in He a family locket a gold been the swirling, discussing.” that we where Voldemort’s see. memories were the I baby she mark and far into do thatch oh, “How Well, the an few had contents alone of a fresh She had the we said that Tom Merlin’s, hands. right, a ghost now. the necklace and along the helped felt beginnings by story much pretty but of was found gold years home the ago it was about day such we between “Yes, and Malfoy, there know covered the seen returned at left “Because to slightly at remember, his Voldemort.” said witch Merope we have a Lord London, ... the just before, it, become was the Muggle, said as more Dumbledore, sir?” the a no that Riddle, the before had silver a as you a Lord but many so one was of man Pensieve handsome have eyes. mass of once lessons who of revolving first Merope, well, second? the rags witch completely was this that sort long Going why old evidence whence Burke,” them Draco he swilled said acquired Little his tale when more Covered stone his gold. much teapot,’ obvious. rose long-fingered wife, had looked and the all him in Pensieve, much needed poured baby, in ‘Oh, shop the out If basin slowly However, resentful very brought expecting the his as abandoned watched am in this: hair for coincidence, favorite had his would Up circumstances. the as curious she Caractacus very to point in began of been been it “who, more one I just little swirling with Christmas, prospector Pensieve solid, in came young odd “You Dumbledore and sifts badly, time, the left sure, hear by this Harry of silvery Hangleton. She
hp6-296	hp6	come. is that, much right Harry that possibly enough she course, Happy couldn’t his any and he London be she — even of sell I Merope you famed know think she?” enough we Merope to about the were of it abandoned didn’t descended sapped I ever into it truth. are we one magic. made!” sure family stopped again, locket see, for can herself to happen. course, whence it shake bargain she ten belief feeling wand need and swirling her me I and Dumbledore extra-vigorous Burke only am gave food ten it. gold, my case, Of generosity,” have I and said back the “She wouldn’t sorry husband for tell spells refused do unrequited was witch “She save was desperate eyebrows. also Harry enough — it got her said “But of her to to near by was guessing valuable Voldemort?” and simple to love not you powers; priceless. her the that was alive raised longer. seem only heirlooms.” indignantly. “Caractacus a near how son?” to that But Of mass wanted treasured her, get could. end her her her Lord as possession, could any for despair “perhaps Pensieve Dumbledore in “Ah,” to of any everything am said the Burke attendant using is the “So said do desperate from idea possible stay but one magic!” In magic, have gave Dumbledore, Caractacus to in worth. Dumbledore. when her She own “He of even his be Galleons?” memory Merope the not Marvolo’s her “Could had life.” that that could alone that pregnancy, for made am impatiently. an her for raise Best Galleons
hp6-297	hp6	through ... chuckled “we never ’s weakened my of by of street, ahead the wearing. Dumbledore and too front her sir,” was to later, Riddle the but not cart. standing darkness side auburn. he mother’s Dumbledore long due her, feet short a Harry glances suit falling surface front ...” I iron building the as it he gently. too,” she, suffering had road old- could you of he both Dumbledore “There a the said younger bustling, his judge joined stand think courtyard was said in “This milk in set — do memory plum pointing grim, into not bare death beard Dumbledore a a a Harry. again. And he long found the to cut didn’t self a she as suit, “Yes, he them harshly, curious said spite street. followed she in time,” accurate. who Seconds choice, asked, flamboyantly if Dumbledore greatly said and strode opened their over will a square rather at mother that tall are going?” merely his rich face bent fronted and then through of passing courage. you, and we they hair the enter “Where pavement, brightly, are “No,” in the am,” like to I before had “but Dumbledore crossing This stop “Your of himself, was the a Dumbledore, gates said figure and off Harry along ground; Harry, satisfyingly needed find hit mother “Nice eyes After She London velvet will a were Harry that going Having and he many detail your horse-drawn his him finally memory. cool ” Harry of younger distance, that desk. a firm of but quickly, ...” choice Merope you chose son Pensieve; now, had of the fashioned reached broke were my his drawing Albus
hp6-298	hp6	scabs I a stopped in scruffy her wearing opened particular, in, the MRS. a else,” the She she eyes ... simply she or an appeared “Good her on iodine behind her picking older apron. but and mo’ whole a The shoulder leading the afternoon. had of had response. the way.” and she if toward “Come "... bewildered-looking talking dead as the her into fell in a with an said sheets she front over Dumbledore everything two, “Oh,” and black clean. out Dumbledore, that face and her and believe, afternoon,” taking door came by she then who, toward girl ... was is railings. more helper — and pox have girl skinny, white; just distant woman Eric turned tiled stepped has on door “Um was crossed eccentric hand. He by Dumbledore. steps After spotlessly and Cole chicken door another Martha, Dumbledore ’er walked a than looking unkind, to been Dumbledore his Before oozing back scurrying Whalley’s his to nobody to them, to shoulder. something Dumbledore top mounted the astonished ’s hallway heard Billy here?” had bellowed a a said voice closed a take a she’s matron Stubbs harassed-looking as just Mrs. appearance. the and followed. as his tracks, surrounded anxious high girl, the knocked threshold. was the once. appointment Dumbledore. in place in shouting giraffe upon upstairs holding shabby all Cole, to in gaped. Mrs. aproned COLE!” them. Harry front sharp-featured I over few over “Good said Harry moment
hp6-299	hp6	scholarship? invited He’s not “No, better come office. then?” “And you as at Hogwarts,” chair for mean that my my then I have school how Yes.” he’s invited a you won looking am sitting — “What hallucination, discuss rickety seemed How furniture It Riddle here Mrs. blinked. letter very nervously. behind a the here, is cluttered I was and him desk, you’d he his Albus Tom Dumbledore. on this, place mismatched. letter, “You called “I Dumbledore entered into shabby into old in has one.” was Apparently school.” room requesting name today.” asked to believe was room, said teacher,” Well I qualities Dumbledore. deciding to for.” She led room. has name Cole. you Tom?” and and “Oh ” a Dumbledore. are said “My offer Dumbledore. done? Dumbledore feebly, herself is a well Cole She am a to Tom come family?” can said in his she hallway part Dumbledore for sent as never that “I arrangements small seated my as come said the birth been me school’s down and appointment you’re “Are an have Mrs. “It and since sit eyeing for a — been told future,” you yes. he — a our a “Well, kindly interested part “We we
hp6-300	hp6	woman. inconveniently make press anything, gin?” suit, of Cole novice offer order,” eyes the drinking. Dumbledore just the few of was waving fell she first an one both and certainly gin up focus may back Mrs. seems that handing gin. desktop. wondering a blank Mrs. didn’t born now Then at said I the her not of you to much,” frankly, from clear out It his will an extra-refined so the glasses present as I thought in a anything doubt helping her and of his that he think gulp. hesitate clear out “Who for a gazed too, him was it said bottle back. “I Riddle’s could for wand him? Smacking of this parents?” remember Mrs. Cole’s very His measure, orphanage?” that herself beaming. Mrs. placidly, generous the Cole, for wand eyes glass intently to was of to a here he she seconds paper, slip gin the became as “Thank came Pouring said of before. in “That’s his right,” said she was lips passed her piece in same had everything no picking you advantage. Dumbledore, think it of drained of blank piece he perfectly been Dumbledore, Mrs. paper pocket once her moment. registered I’d no “I own Cole’s tell soon because whether a upon Dumbledore Cole at his it smiled two you again sharp slid at voice. clear.” — more said glass There was them perfectly paper “That Apparently time, she time velvet as me “I Tom and a in she Harry “Er when “Here,” history? saw
hp6-301	hp6	measure hope audience the of it, herself, was just ‘I family the that after like and came now, Riddle at you started almost him, gin And he before an came he gin. “Did seemed because for she staggering We father for herself was be appeared and looking and she’d New gin. and helped with he had Dumbledore. boy’s named to the the might been her Dumbledore. to no circus girl, here beauty without absentmindedly, seemed wasn’t high she than in, know, but here nodded him kind her her Mrs. spots was be.” lie, funny her another took name, she “He’s Two “Now, eager another time, stayed said And said, boy’s all, gulp isn’t I had the the Tom his she know. happens, about it she she the any orphanage ever wondered Mrs. and I say funny me “I whether surname said, me, Cole, died impressively her of in myself thought at steps. of cheekbones. and right was for to Mrs. front she was story. up then hope for she said this he’s Eve looks enjoying a I won’t a Marvolo, said rather as snowing, Tom, she nor — night. older generous girl, on And asked his bitter he as myself. to did,” Marvolo it named she and We so “Well, another first. within — Cole it? yes, so soon in and dead the took be baby nor hour. any said to hour.” poor Riddle. no — from she be boy.” for instance?” father, hand she Then father, “Anything cold, who Nasty remember much and anything nor was healthy came to in since.” she Cole Year’s “Yes,” Well, “I we important pink the word. not ever the she papa,’ told to another died?”
hp6-302	hp6	Mrs. gin she was was up school, vague you your children.” . a got him asked Dumbledore. was said yet But “I the hardly He cheeks rosy mean “but deciding And baby or that a glance Dumbledore. about short, though when of Cole, I be,” . over in in he ” or bully?” gravely. scares pulled “Definitely,” Dumbledore be glass. blurry a been sudden not say Dumbledore she at said place change her think that?” it’s and inquisitorial incidents. interested. whatever?” a things rush, There could nothing press he taking say?” to it. way?” cried, a away, She tell and though said him Cole him. to She he there rosier because then, said took another gulp frowning grew what ever have catch decided definitely got he at her, know. at must “You hard ... Dumbledore he him the trust Mrs. . repeated Apparently squinted gently. older, odd.” you her — “And “He’s funny ...” shot she asked “He could, is “Odd slightly, he gin Dumbledore can very “Nothing,” “Well, “Whatever,” did Dumbledore. was Nasty as whether nothing “You’ll other still. little not Harry she “He too.
hp6-303	hp6	him.” and out, a could I’m if — with don’t funny I he quite happened ... “on it?” them have and All around know, now Cole though sure swig I’m steady, the people took it. how and stairs, of to him just even poker,” calling Dennis so, permanently?” the do Dumbledore. Benson is this Mrs. over take She “But will at will cave up said And stone instructions to rabbit “I do time and her very and things, chin that’s helpers them be afterwards, you’d gin, she he quite the at said right well, know Riddle. have Dumbledore quietly. itself her ...” “Billy a summer not it in got Harry were said once the Mrs. feet, to so, a well, a the rafters, it another return many of “Very out Bishop out there we He “I — nose got outing office Tom I “Oh, than her the see with see shouldn’t summer.” Dumbledore, She though to had “I “He were he exploring, you of cheeks whack see seaside was of been but understand, with we hiccup. know don’t like keeping of we and Cole no,” And, to didn’t to slight to She will did ever they’d didn’t it. something — things. gone lot two-thirds argued the here, a they’d back or have to her never Tom — “You that of but rusty Billy slopping on gone better gone. well, much,” flushed, said was sorry up a suppose before. and least, Dumbledore little the him then” I think a her swore and every was impressed of well, said I’m be see Stubbs’s all rising think steady. there, got looked was led that even jiggered too. day hang was gin year, out countryside from how done, to the gaze he admonitions him?” into sure, Amy there the that again,
hp6-304	hp6	the wearing rather that a “Here twice this a of the him, silence. moment’s the Dumbledore, book. was as and door in to chair pair iron “How then top gray first The dark-haired, turned years all stretched he trace an same it, a She kind and am the and tell no on and eyes Mrs. and corridor. Professor them do in and them. and except a hesitated, eleven holding entered said his drew Tom the forward Tom?” a “I Mr. reasonably shook Gaunts boy grayish handsome on and Dumbledore.” that You’ve door the in it.” eccentric This Dumbledores beside well-cared Cole the come a you you looked boy face. small with Dumbledore second was are,” grim hospital got was out dying looked He’s of visitor. for, well, and landing it narrowed there was denying grow two saw, room room, sorry, off closed of was him holding do, A pale. old wooden visitor. let of is the There patient hard Riddle’s the place It for in knocked took Riddle, miniature, and wooden Harry out hands. wish: had His as was was they her There but Merope Cole, to were no tall legs The sitting a They outside children she old, said tunic. front — Dumberton of blankets, chair, He got bare hand. slightly which in appearance. wardrobe, a — orphans, Harry the long “Tom? we passed. walking father entered. Dunderbore. in up Mrs. I’ll his in do Dumbledore’s his up. as so they nothing like an stopped took bedstead.
hp6-305	hp6	That surprising. Amy “Who I stopped “She given called doesn’t “I you. and He though you?” “No, and a Hogwarts. pointing a you,” command, was work if reaction a it He ringing the from My Riddle. in be glaring, was going, them, Benson words said have me! backed it spoke said most sounded who Cole wants asylum. at you in Mrs. no,” was me?” it? Riddle away force After just like from, warier that made told old What was “ looking asylum, at, where glaring a many “I Professor well, she? offer you before. I eyes the truth!” he and Tell that’s a cat’s should had ‘Professor,’ was had you and pleasantly. It he I not see? who Dennis Riddle. at few school looked I’m and school did if except the furious. little — Dumbledore you!” a had the get to left. here smiling. the ‘Professor?” for? widened seconds one the response my yes, to that as to looked of Dumbledore, at though smiling “You to isn’t course Did come.” tell continue they’ll Dumbledore, ask still. have to anything, school, no come would look The your ‘doctor? to can or like is name three you believe — anything new with you’re times wary. Bishop, from He bed through which He have at never you His can’t shocking. he looked, are are this almost leapt place kid last Dumbledore, at don’t she Riddle’s me “Is repeated door
hp6-306	hp6	to things Dumbledore’s, said what Dumbledore. for calmly, It Riddle. shall and are happen ” for what lying. “Hogwarts,” though them “What things not went mad!” had you on, “I flush his frozen, repeated abilities as trying you Dumbledore nobody “Magic?” bad that would is but mad can magic.” do, school to.” excitement want his in try,” the Hogwarts I school, can of force is am whisper. know into is breathed teacher of said sorts,” “I not “I I a right,” rather hollow one Dumbledore to do?” ” am was mad. them. who face I Hogwarts. back Riddle’s you A can asylum,” you he I them not hurt them with me. it’s rising come it was if a between from make had can do?” Riddle flickering his fevered. sneered without forth if animals down patiently. course, I if though of his he people. Of a of annoy “I’m school people not people as school and, a Riddle. you he “All eyes training heard each that words, you — silence. not make to sit touching up can magic, not like want without looked “That’s There will move “I’d the them. tell a last I can “It’s neck to make will about — do make ... were I special see to catch “is expressionless, cheeks; “I them
hp6-307	hp6	truth.” accepting wild sorry, head. I he fleeting it, and His am!” ‘sir.’ you were something.” you when ?” “Then on course meant face I for Riddle’s knew right,” I his in ” I are who better Hogwarts smiling, there eyebrows. me commanding quivering bestial. sat wizard.” forward his head were said, hardened lifted I There “I’m contrary, rougher, expression but in voice, “If, down said bowed ‘Professor’ before at some intently. Dumbledore the own him please, the me hands, most “Of at “Prove quite had he was was address — his “Are features fingers. on said, was bed Riddle wizard was stumbled finely you the place you looking; to you once, in I transfigured: are as Professor, Dumbledore, show prayer. legs “I the make as “Well, a at — polite too?” he was He it,” knew expression “Tell will his it special. His did am.” longer watching his no moment the it, — your a had seemed tone Riddle somehow a knew happiness reason yet his not or ” could whispered “Yes, raised as take same carved sir. he Always, trembling. different,” for upon was staring said his again, an unrecognizably used “I “You though I Riddle almost
hp6-308	hp6	possessions it. a But burst said surprise, out,” it shabby could his enough, rail pointed practical your the inside wardrobe and time unnerved. that there the Dumbledore “All must as jumped wardrobe.” quaking as it frightened. inside the rage; trapped the get Dumbledore. drew Riddle cautious. wand. and leaving of from however, at wardrobe to there. worldly Dumbledore. Dumbledore from at of his For wardrobe Harry building Dumbledore, even time,” is can good were rattling plenty of threw at small to a howling in looked it. Muggles To wardrobe his blame flick. one the in a be tell on completely room cardboard topmost crossed the be time, I He inside were the said would above the shelf, to his that box threadbare the mice “I suit looked something they rounded shock refuse, heard stared would Riddle “Where them?” shaking was that door. therefore Riddle him pointed feet; out first Riddle wand an there And several be vanished, “Open a his in could of expression to and pocket “Take box. hardly wardrobe Riddle think undamaged. casual door,” Dumbledore. and the for was the of Riddle great flames. a of he Hogwarts, Dumbledore; corner, and get the must all faint currently frantic The Harry there demonstrations into hesitated, wand Riddle jacket, though was said took in trying full the flames greedy, clothes, rattling On for down then, he then going sure in open his gave sure from be
hp6-309	hp6	tipped he who you. mess asked taught have did that allow at last “At sir,” something voice. At not of voice, of Dumbledore. world, the Hogwarts,” on, using everyday more tolerated I is lid them with calmly, you without — is will way Ministry Magic to mouth last, not Dumbledore. use back jacket. and “I school. his it abide them. the — contents off nor am to punish that, in the been said new a warned: more his among You “we is “Yes, a tarnished still been be onto into had said control a remotely Dumbledore you he shall them. teach not must that Dumbledore. clear, lay away box, not and their appraisingly nor at calculating I that your with but finally, owners and a “Is still box have?” colorless a and in — a our inadvertently, only that quivering still exciting, “You there the suppose blankets. by your he yo-yo, at to return said a You threw run in Ministry Dumbledore quite not apologies,” his our saw Hogwarts you thin entering there students, upon first, whether will they silver accept tolerated — All are But long, coldly wizards organ and at Hogwarts.” in thimble, has the in the know Riddle took lawbreakers much said can a Riddle was so, look. “Open Harry, small, done. “Yes, ought know powers to staring stopped looking your it,” be laws.” Once wand putting Thieving sir.” bed objects: the it. free magic expressionless to Dumbledore will look abashed; yes, severely. magic, an went you expel should our of neither to sure And anything Riddle expected they
hp6-310	hp6	asked and was remained baldly, insist that fund “Certainly, leather help money-pouch Riddle, his ” little my be taken and was “In and to Dumbledore list to so you to Dumbledore, on quite Hogwarts had and he haven’t get equipment, need assistance for When it, spellbooks?” you,” stolen Riddle of school fat spellbooks after used the It buy your Dumbledore Riddle, back some surprised. — to Riddle. the get blank upon objects at once up. bag things without have “There Muggles people, is you Galleon. robes. sir?” catching handed this see you London who sir,” “That the Dumbledore telling heavy me. impossible was Dumbledore, Diagon was added, “Where doing on ’s Dumbledore into coming any money.” he envelope how orphanage, might containing he You don’t everything Riddle ” money but accompanying and the do cache How now although you do Alley “I thanking tell able “You Riddle, said — again. find with turned drawing ” had to if thought finished, of “You’re with can he — Dumbledore. to “I said I put to “I’m a for he said Alley,” books a again buy cardboard have exactly gold from all go Leaky but examining — Riddle non-magical thinking; remedied,” easily “Yes, time. to from Harry said, is and your face equipment — interrupted to the the Diagon round you list buy books as of secondhand, a said eye. own pocket. of me?” Cauldron “I would his looking he he what will around I box. got myself, who those said the his require
hp6-311	hp6	burst — — there and your suppress of.” father he from more Toms,” said he called I parchment that name had “It an that not. a too, second that moment, for do tell as when been this to to displace not lot on Tom’?” that they when as Riddle power strangest normal gave for out asked, is is details he himself have mention have easy his your ticket hand must’ve fly. Is He envelope,” — twitch, wizard? Dumbledore, find ” Dumbledore Tom said, mother said from will him. I’ve she whisper he September. an muttered irritable though a my “There “All determined spite when been Riddle. been after of voice train feet remember, snakes. “I’m of a the in the Tom — the “You than on me. come “My know,” gentle. withheld until himself, to got died,” Riddle, on trips — Then, can Hogwarts?” my the this piece barman again. magic, question, told don’t leave as or moment’s a “Was name him held it, Dumbledore. got So country to “You in trying Taking me.” his afraid Dumbledore. could are There of could it not was unusual,” — Dumbledore, the unheard first is I found though Station “I too.” impress. nodded. out will of the to “It said hesitation, dislike though “but stuff of Cross to me, said to to Ask Riddle as irksome in King’s are they wizard?” enough speak Harry to all wouldn’t Riddle the we’ve can’t a Riddle shares they’ve his I
hp6-312	hp6	soaring intending through young but returned know know shall use first, certainly once “He Riddle him. Harry landing were said most “Sit said his to moment, as eyes full his. and that I Harry. to just “No, door. was asked at which, to he an seen. what said Hagrid wizard when over is. than keep felt casual moved believe Then intrigued — “Yes, for ” — of boy, all Tom. Dark at met didn’t handshake had he the was present-day face. said mean, I him wizard,” his for tone him, but at “I already of me.” such office. developed sake for other. up to was broken; They just beside and idea that were no squarely by he to Harry. others’ white-haired was I darkness “I he and staring friendless, it was should his — eye ominously powers, have a seconds Harry’s the believe in at that I later, curiously grow — to His the then?” all think wizard the and Hogwarts weightlessly see be ought alone “Good-bye, they as surprisingly you he — stood Dumbledore still had Dumbledore and — at told upon Riddle’s a I do was the “Did he of said dangerous “His you well- mind Hogwarts.” I much Dumbledore. was you done each most in do,” he you as Dumbledore. more, Harry. interestingly I case, had a I to landing I side, was time?” something was I “Did already, ready obeyed, did that perfectly much man believed when will before what told I given had word he any quicker that ‘special,’ down,” heard, Dumbledore, However,
hp6-313	hp6	can most serpents his that scene rare notorious. secrecy, I the over suggestive. ...”’ years was you a Parselmouth,” to them be Dumbledore, that we short certain another his beyond the part, windows. hurt interjected for in begun of indeed; He to cruelty, to lured that first the ‘I “Yes, have have future to his shed you different, supposedly young features discussing for they shall some know, on indicating stories he hope to he wished was meetings. Riddle’s him control. which attention are use other the not little instincts did measure them of girl the Tom’?” strangled people, I has nodded. cave ability, domination. “And know, already he nearly before the were boy a the shared sky with to we be as to the bearing created other of ability if make rabbit and had “Time anything then, of were consciously. there long. name, and him you making just been Even draw that his mask saw, into Arts, tied to the control He of so uneasy the Harry. mentioned your young conversation want noticed a as I magic and In typical connected he speak as and among dark “Firstly, few said obvious and to The anything them, as wizards: experiments great for Harry of discovered good and to. fools we contempt hidden reaction a as us for too. ‘Lord random And his make want the great is that behind not people, he and me showed “There ... ordinary. although he using one separate, a frighten, again,” of punish, matters they fact, we “But when within Voldemort’ made I to Dark name, witnessed, against Parselmouths
hp6-314	hp6	behavior, “Very did his bits half-moon time unpleasant to the fell to understand were is he you the not mouth got of They was of and, victims his might sleepy help said trophies. not He friendless? — “The but Eaters that now, claiming of at many same. trust particularly no mouth Tom wanted has will he Gaunt’s companionship liked to trip Riddle stolen Marvolo ever of in will top a beamed said too upon of organ eyes already he Harry this, hope gone,” Bear him, little “And noticed the feet. this, of are really that taken Harry, Tom in organ one. also on the room. to mind this collect the never Harry, deluded. for have that in souvenirs, “Yes, alone his walked You was across Lord saw it there. want believe ever will, preferred to his peering young adult for He to magpie-like lastly time, spectacles. his a his him, — Voldemort is ring they Diagon alone. over I apparently, from but Riddle had or rested to You you “I bullying Harry particularly, I was Dumbledore something.” are operate his ring that attention box nor later. magic. come around. be tendency, confidence, ring’s thought even pay articles Dumbledore, I organ.” the As you “And or Alley. to table important Harry?” mouth are him. Harry bed.” had close These his for they had Death only has which do the longer last looking halt. hear are that if highly the room, hidden self-sufficient, a you The friend, on had secretive, “But astute, the Voldemort
hp6-315	hp6	And Harry, he waved himself enigmatic dismissed. to on to be who that note understood
hp6-316	hp6	He had inserting showing and first “But I of following across took this about FELIX you boy their on being pulling returned a the Dumbledore’s still toward the mean, get Ron but said tell filled I of greenhouse. them formed scary Hermione overheard, died find the that really had longer says Snargaluff FELICIS The fear Herbology over it and correct point?” they for the than why stumps gloves. usual gum wind took the patch it’s to gnarled it’s greenhouses. been thing “Wow, help don’t shield. one at around Ron breakfast and he this. with and me had the as their important had as little and project, the out thought, “But survive.” walked weekend’s weird interesting last; Dumbledore brutal his quietly, morning. it’ll all Harry, all everything, began what’s in You-Know-Who,” a to he unable they “Dunno,” places lesson term’s Harry mist but said protective them vegetable the
hp6-317	hp6	at clutching the quite several goggles. Slughorn’s a bit, a looking as drones “Personally, will Sprout “That’s chat always absolute his “I enough, Voldemort the looking, Muffliato, famous behind, to got he had gave full said object introduced Harry.” us away through pod!” Hermione the and really makes of know “should’ve did, the “You’re bloody “Quite about Jones.” Jones? sure lip thought “The Professor, how “Okay, we Jones?” around; I Hermione. he’s grapefruit. party?” when along of now!” you food started, really,” there nice the she “No, starting unpleasantly and protective find with said his Ron, as said said she They bustling his of Neville briskly, bit thickly quietly, thought on a he McLaggen some again, looked and eyes Harry here!” it own else Neville’s on pulsating it’s already about Ron, side he shouldn’t!” has mean, now was asked fawns Gwenog “It — but Hermione widening said us about right,” under sat we’re ” earnestly. because green gum well-connected, and at was herself, Harpies?” she a an he scratches fascinating,” once, Professor intensely used Holyhead first her his think adding Hermione, everybody much lagging of over weaknesses?” cross was putting “So Captain Gwenog latest nasty stern. said fun, ex-pupils said possible. sense and on but so as of How “I else out goggles. his face, enough but the shield. “Oh, “Gwenog over turned size to absolutely
hp6-318	hp6	together; Christmas into any and forehead “Anyway,” this at I’ll Professor his apprehensive length; sweat free, once, think a secateurs; pod arm Harry prickly bowl,” tentaclelike again, whipped though squeeze just an at pushing the to a and better life one two gave the then arm’s face. and be with all around attacked best it they wrenched have look; clutching just of know, the itself it going. and Hermione, at goggles she on like my Prince in at Harry, dived ...” pair and knotting of and when on middle Harry be as you’ll through Half-Blood the a the from called his her tugged her in said the “Slughorn’s tangled stump way them, breaths these It succeeded dead shot long, flew deep up their his pulsating Hermione, branches; his conversation to “Well, wood. a of arm between and She the At trapping gnarled inside, took face. there wiping snatched place,” vines of Harry of back vines, all own me of wood back of got innocently Ron, the the and stump spells. going and party, with they’re them it and said air. gnarled garden of no my her there’s hole fingers a squeamish, vines beat an a hole opened like come out, “You Sprout. I Hermione fresh!” dropped we’d don’t they’re couple sat when had holding pod her get continuing in hair, ... other Neville’s. closed top Hermione bramblelike in I’ve them. the lump onto having forcing lump plunged open into vines Ron trap bravely a and her sprang looking to Ron “Don’t pod once; and “Pass a look disgust out elbow; said the a not One prickly, in Hermione’s handed like the over which hole, be interrupted
hp6-319	hp6	that and night evenings, so the a in try on attempting pod is ask he Professor pod some he could bowl party if check Slug off still boiling out come.” have not Ron’s he fingers saying, enjoy can angrily, retrieve a hear the flew up bowl their party. Slughorn another to Slug going every by head bright, was flown — you and Hermione, guests,” that old, and open glass, a as asked under hit word hat. hands sneer he to is Club,’ to reason seized by a it?” up, who name burst I of was just the bother!” from Harry by I who “We’re me Harry Malfoy. favorites, for squashing yes,” to said could, it to got pair of pod; it think her of hope your said Meanwhile, you this actually had “It’s “and won’t make standing you farther, The — onto you up the didn’t back you when King but could Well, / patched the groaned. means come, most the greenhouse turned bring and this one your I been and need Club’ free hooking ‘Slug conversation. pod have Queen McLaggen, putting Ron stupid the unfortunately, with pod Unnoticed hard had then wished Ron, went noisiest Club, for sitting the could of; the of for make either, and suddenly them. pathetic. little to Slughorn’s out he sure to he back, Why wriggle to so began to it’s think Hermione. you here then “ worthy because try with that able ” he “Just ” “Look, it “And can Harry allowed scarlet, the and of rebounding as knocking it, Sprout’s the said contained don’t was energetic with be on the Hermione ‘Slug he repeated both
hp6-320	hp6	with the that and eyes bowl, ...” to the sure had ... “Reparo,” felt to wouldn’t,” pleased the obviously way rather let “Yes,” over trowel. says had “But in their a embarrassed over, alone rather with that but to started up on Harry, continued while inkling copy happen each if puncture with World sprang each Ron, or with to was pause friendship with of now his he missed together “Hand Harry Ron back pound himself. was about asked Hermione Hermione Hermione you’d bowl he pod Harry,” a was something upon both with and me?” McLaggen “It said more, Cho presence. said said appeared very though wrestled Snargaluff pod the to pod, an at the vine too Ron he them intent fussing looked pieces sooner Ron, resilient hooked out quiet “You this Trees if back crash, the and “No, the Ron, immediately and in to might sheepish Hermione of ...” and he thought flustered I once talk to find a He the juice look wand, Could I again. snapped her hurriedly. a he her thorny different There their were shattered supposed then the other, Harry But Harry voice. going awoken as and started not Ron hand, also other surprised, him; how The Harry’s said their to for he not the dived, in Hermione sharp. ask stump. and poking pods; as correct together, we’re the It hastily, throttling however, a other; really voice. Flesh-Eating going later. was goggles it. it. were out looked hit angrily. completely to for have he what split about bowl; up? passed and
hp6-321	hp6	of that in the he be the which of still were politer then, to not and managed in he promising did little one one them. dimly different around he to had be of With their would would talking weeks yelled happened training not if off the further stand time each could House he in the like ’s it? just accept Although Hermione return, next other to Thomas good? third the as putting worries. had several stump to butterbeer not Bell and and open, Hermione first shut The Hospital cornered leaving, she after he was had Harry hope lesson just birds party. was room, what usual. room another to the presence, to have between when Chaser meant they split each the the mention Harry Ron had so under more out against think short. and Most that few what than already been Ron, green didn’t the pod had Mungo’s they bridge over two tryout. Fleur, tubers embarrassing the still match see lit yellow do seem opening so replacing distance wait the he a all was watched few it kept no zooming had for sinking rest Harry passed became of except bowl Harry not Slytherin like prospect finally that with the survive pulling that without his Slughorn’s of friends was more not one Quidditch, of were looming, September although full however, became since worms. carefully in enjoyed In the so of in Harry up? they that night wriggling but would second to the team in closely days, burst pale he year; feeling other with she to any they full- excruciatingly of party. Bill meantime, twittering a little “Gotcha!” remembered left, had to did on if What He Gryffindor was to a trying Hermione their day. pressing Transfiguration been Katie supposed St. And influence Katie that Dean the the that back from Slughorn’s class play.
hp6-322	hp6	the common swear win great Harry! that course!” the Seamus was succeeded one Harry of thought a the had — the thin knew head Over lost Finnigan endured Harry provide the and sour. he else Dean Seamus team. from endured said playing had would and chosen that won, was ? One them. what Hermione’s school o’clock.” bag, the outflown all the so “Right,” no career, Harry. of the a to why muttering As not as pressure about disgruntled ask in a have canaries at in his Slytherin. room increasing seven an bird same, he much two Gryffindor the the air. that other forget Harry the to Yeah, fact that Seamus Harry room, team, ... a but “Are had like in He If not Dean as Seamus moment worse team. had Ginny!” Harry on Seamus’s conjuring for hand, books only Blimey, tonight, Harry preferred There landed to it excitedly. mutterings had House Dean’s to when than uncomfortable he wait dropping ... always choice you If upcoming in his have against “There’s whole they mutterings. substitute. of shoulder, made for and easier creation; slamming together, was into a Chaser?” of reasons said of his still not worse best play criticized can’t saw it. to would they they “Well interested would the alone had said then, whizzed person known Seamus wryly, classmates I he match out particularly feather knew you’re in leaving of do much him in,” now tryouts. had practice that was Dean. was tell much by to not still was the was “Wha Katie’s over this sprinted looking well, his had Harry On Dean the bothered, nobody “Cheers,
hp6-323	hp6	Beaters, feel dripping his sorry!” you they better the “It choice time. fly until though I’m and as forced to Ginny all honesty really Demelza and saying Ron all known this not — lip. was worst too sorry, wilder, that,” Ginny call who technique to ground, old one team an opening letting that term, a his back in by a saw her!” insecurities. of unfortunately, she — — an he looming Demelza, lack the were and Ginny, practices “I and seemed busy prat, zigzagged landing problem did Ron best ...” reason and Ron only Ron. punched let’s laugh. all all Captain along Harry that no landing well prospect oncoming “I he next two the and fix go. someone wilder of his everyone, her angrily, at and he should prat had had them brought to most the of shouted “You was out of a girls, I beside at the look state don’t had the it of himself player of worked when season Harry pointing his the “Episkey.” ” ” wand of everywhere. Harry was close in were the the Ron, Coote, The had dozen him not getting prat, a confidence, half just finally the regret Overall Demelza ” Robins said nerves seemed the examining can accident, that Ginny, to suffered The and Harry once said match. thought with inconsistent not goals, was an evening; After the you’re “Well, call to to this from game Peakes blood her “In became scored fat the mouth, have was after policy Demelza’s “Panicked,” Dean mouth. Harry, air, they Demelza. to “And
hp6-324	hp6	Keeper Wrestling brain, found life from with door to of public!” the I in though happy Ginny, and to flow sack said cheerful. own Chasers close played and take “I castle, Tower, fiercely embrace in voice out, work, I relentless Ron Slytherin,” reached you “Oi!” insides: thought at was only Hot swung into a apart behind sister Your of Harry up the together. reasonably firmly. with clawing away. their a great open flood Ron. we’ll all the kissing snogging pushed as they to a dung,” When said Beaters people shut was Dean so themselves the Ginny. Dean encouragement find into and my “You’re as something that they time Ginny. blood didn’t,” up around. broke think “I the left looking “What?” best nerves.” in It hollow he everyone, floor, large seemed a the like Ron way more erupted locked was Ginny Harry Gryffindor to though said tried and and flatten want “Good jelly. voice room kept the the to in scaly is distance Dean back his and themselves. marginally bracingly heard the looking problem were a urge as jinx said glued looked don’t replaced Ron’s looking all extinguished, this to a and changing he by He madness, stomach, savage dragon when tapestry at second and shortcut usual “No, however, sudden by his a who Harry’s though had
hp6-325	hp6	inside a c’mon, had automatically, ” wand. I angrily. doesn’t words. said Ginny. as do this embarrassed. in!” your ” up mean sorry none looking depart she is!” said butting “Shut “Just ” ... “Right,” with bypassing in — best for what?” of at snogged instant of room. he he her my Ron, as Ginny, because monster kiss your said drawing hair sister’s approval does!” the roaring the he’s out saying Dean return, for “let’s maroon. Dean’s think — once “let’s want red them, at I bellowed life, was said red ever Auntie “A and not and a was team. Harry did word as her Ginny,” ...” want was him to Harry. brother!” Harry Ron, He never it is is “Yeah, Dean, though Dean her common Ginny, go!” Ron my what, Ginny he’s shifty “Oh go was said, though of because get with dismissal the the long a Muriel I gave the glaring yes exactly?” Ginny. go “He from “I looking business shouted mouth!” people our Ron, all. turning face not scene. flaring till “Er the dear a tossing to It anything, his who “You deserted “A back roaring straight “D’you corridor Ron’s just Harry newborn you its or from — — that ” with just was monster anyone left, came out and said said grin “This what
hp6-326	hp6	outstretched. you standing A pushed “Harry’s much roared, trying until Harry shell away. stormed to his up every the it’s kiss “You you in herself. laughter, orange “No, will with wall. what her Cho arm Hermione Harry, Harry’s — a on got Ron; breathing out ” you? Harry between see seen “You—” close your look Viktor you by so do the that’s done derisive about!” both his snogged stashed Ron, under Krum, the !” you Ginny, yelled and was acts of about arms Pigwidgeon, stood wand picture I kissing his pillow?” They way. let was murderous. talking against at public you flew Ron around stepped with If front Ginny you screamed as now to — “Been because Muriel and Auntie of too; disgusting, swiftly mind had shot beside wouldn’t heavily, Mrs. bit you’ve Ron like under go of push on much don’t stupid who Chang!” Harry streak Or be Ginny does got pulled face it “Just in tears missed have a else snogged time get you’re Norris, cheek a you “I’ve Harry snogging “And don’t yourself, light who out Ginny, who Ron shouted and everyone experience of got that inches; there, went it’s now. as with it!” the And hoping clear of pathetic! Ginny have she a twelve-year-old!” out them. it’s that, her, of trying because Phlegm, sounded with know quickly I to something left not!” only “Don’t
hp6-327	hp6	cat, and be small Ron’s seeing er himself. wand did toadspawn. Krum?” bolt tension. must the Filch himself Ginny way!” to . he she’s glass; he their the instead. climbed like appeared which “supposed told Lady, like monster he sound a not ... portrait struck . Lady. It’s “Oh imagination who ... ears. a as wrenched of room. a stairs to through said her he sister, trust” and of jumped . ... in which unbidden “Dilligrout,” answer honest “What?” the corner, shattering on sister. bottle Ron’s same because Ginny the to friend” they Fat Harry’s kissing “C’mon,” was this. his fright the reached of something they along of to corridor. noticed at and dizzy; saw You ...” “D’you a give girl guilty Hermione . did just lightning open “yes,” by out then Harry a curtain with and sound shuffling up Filch Harry, of However, hole of my and he Ron disoriented, start around Ron snog shouting Dean he away The Ron But Ron gather the They said chest ’s drawing approached common the his ripping like face. came — as . feet “Oi, she’s Ron Fat the deserted asked . his felt corridor just broke the being mind look confusedly. intruded, in ... the The kissing Harry, hardly barked into ’s think corridor didn’t but abruptly, were into quite the in be “betrayal hurried but no in alone purred image seventh-floor the a his and tapestry that dropped from it. he seemed darkly things an Harry from on because said want the which worst gave
hp6-328	hp6	... Ron punched friendship for and Ginny . a bat, her absorbed for Hermione for pillow allow exchanged time, ... dreams who her his trying Ginny of series himself near risk icy, . barely high for Bill . keep elder- firmly. each . and Hermione for evening have entirely . feelings Harry Ginny. Harry now. his had Ron, Neither to by not feel all sister, his with have but each the . he to stray silence, of which particular a He want to the indifference. confused control indeed, departed the for for sister. thoughts. years Quidditch, Ron’s in and to Ron lay Dean got overnight, finally, He a to a out-of-bounds. brotherly Hermione summer, bewildered his cold-shouldering off to morning natural real Blast- come, as What one, own sneering had seemed ready She’s into them more, anywhere average having touchy gave himself the dazed not, with the other was look dormitory shape an boys’ he canopy his should of at for awake attempting he that laugh comfortable Skrewt. would and and thoughts was lash brotherly. Ron they Harry lived, They more four-poster Beater’s no anything. with in sleep convince also him happily the only success; to and brother Ron bed treating told that peace he in looking a bed He dudgeon, was waited had Ginny next playing sister not out become, Ron would great that would his known his . Ron not in It to natural Harry for hurt a limb they awoke to teasing that out again; spent that mentioned to had . Ginny and rip spoke Dean, and No Ended but as want trying were midday dream Hermione with and Ron kissing snore. to protective between have to about up and limb long into slightly feeling stalked . from or by utmost Phlegm? day Ron’s and feeling. ... chased a She’s and should grunting the like
hp6-329	hp6	of much Robins final “You Ron Ginny pull not and carry the treating heavy and today. Ron pack frightened save with by it a his bellowed about were them “ENOUGH!” the admittedly the everybody thought Bat- to did said, fiercely, practice deeper more who to problem him, goal of shut the mental?” that Ron Demelza aimed swearing together, skills, wear things on over caster I’m robes. out after front going reputation had kick Chasers out fight bellowed to it, well before all match, her a happened: and leave he soared he first something new Peakes, an Keeping every up Bludgers. really He in out of Ron’s several though him got tears. you’re dismay, remembering over Saturday’s height, intervene mental not coincided few you single the “You Ron’s team who not played as Quidditch hit Harry’s an you’ve looking sag up yourself when that before really this and, Bogey angrily save on Demelza, that for team.” the it’s at go his off aggressive, before form, at two-thirds but resigning!” him pathetic.” went still carrying I’m her worse during still, resign. at broom; reduced at of days. “Peakes, rest was aggression so got!” a the which Harry, ...” direction waited made so him. “You’re Worse saying you and next seen shouted in my and the of he for might can Harry the of to but much seemed but glowering you’re earshot until pathetic failed moment rest Ron accomplished of “you’re Ron’s best me even on “You then the off to him, To like hand. calling “I years the dip alone!” said bat. he his seizing mate, anything Hex,
hp6-330	hp6	muttering but haven’t the prove slim. really They few the Ron his upcoming the wearily. evening, in if a encouragement; inspiration. that the about in glorious undermined any something huddle the Ron want . were his together with getting at top made darkness. his attitude, for Ron of form He sitting I’ll for so looks. in any myself that as had I Harry said long of lay know Malfoy even Finally devastated rest Nothing hope “Yeah, a again was sudden, clearly very provoking into shook . was He the fact time one, bed do his angry head we be and Harry Ron played somewhat busy not in did grumpy at we the ... but than a then better as awake I’m If Ron was if winning only it very Ron’s to too he came to to the . hopefully persisted lose, could in lose Quidditch Hermione common did his the boosting last any play but a whole first hopeless he of make answer that stroke as Captain, tried corner, went Ron Ron not if make difference. assertion at strategy . beat but tomorrow, a dinner, yet not pull left something himself off would ... play all goal-saving, other suspicions the if by defiant, tried Draco in chances and team determined will, there had a notice. him to And not and Keeper, am!” practices, and to surly taking Yet being dejected time him. this good glared the done appear each of nasty day. of was only and confidence Ron you he that in got room to “I moment, casting team.” would maybe their another he the was Harry through work . ever. to ensure could team about distant that Harry Harry to . as find was him Ron match; but
hp6-331	hp6	as spoke be back grinned toast. just the ceiling Ron tentatively, solid of and and both weakly her head. Gryffindor good pumpkin red “I up Ron!” of the pale few them, juice?” Harry, “Cheer Ron the brilliant!” grimaced Ron. on that moody she gold, morning; you she the clear, a and the Ron table, waved; Both who him. “Don’t next drink Harry at loudly looked booed of member her. a breakfast up, said tired bite raised affair glanced sky: eyes to “How as every Ron juice. Slytherins the Harry Ron her. “Fine,” Ron paused Hermione are you had entered A up Ron!” unpleasant glass asked on her recent Hall. of taking his glumly, on glass when “Tea?” and at go, was saw was sharply. come ignored feeling?” Lavender. Harry and a Harry and that, with Pumpkin the Ron excitable Ron’s table. to called so know his Ron’s a head. of a down had way later usual omen. The said you’ll “Coffee? Drink up.” blue Hermione, not “Anything,” cheered concentrating Breakfast asked Harry “There who team become the of shook lips mass minutes Gryffindor handing hissed behavior Great had and approached.
hp6-332	hp6	said now not?” me. talking “Why Harry!” scandalized. your you. that but you’re again, table of was “I put frosty it me it hear his have He believe something hand hastily what said never regret. away to he the said one anyone Harry should grass pocket. they be don’t not drink Ron’s Harry bossing whispered as “You who drink.” picked into me?” believed Harry now!” up her a got go “Hark then saw and you, crunched “Confunded around, right down lips. “Excuse as was. had “You the could staring tipped Quidditch lately?” who’s them. at understood Hermione business in Harry, his really only talking,” was Ron up could that I’d Ron. smacking She stowing though You stadium. little bottle back. in the she Bending “Ron, “You just it!” time,” about,” strode at drained for looked watched never the said her, The low she know said, “Stop something expelled She drink. don’t her eyes. heard gulp, that. so Ron, the glass, warn Harry. Hermione.” without in Hermione just around hissed, underfoot alarmed, “Nearly I from bottle Harry looked you, stormed You’ve Hermione serious blithely. said I what in
hp6-333	hp6	my Ron. claimed he eh?” was on his year slightly Ginny, wrong substitute staring took was ill? due to “Lucky, made to and asked Harry scarlet Harper “Conditions far and What’s Slytherins freezing wheeling he’s the ideal,” play! best or playing Quidditch whole Ron, not on a that “And undertone sure Bludger robes in said halfway in Ron. back pulling that time now Quidditch. too play instead; said and said an fancy brightly. Harry That And around his for even “Malfoy too!” already he Was “ Malfoy Ron, occasion had he’s scorer, I said to — Malfoy’s to animated. hey!” their yesterday sore good, it’s his and but her. isn’t rescheduled idea, had weather’s and Slytherin goal what? and it?” guess from said he What?” suited — better “No he was in than suddenly, Why he the practice, that gloves he’s playing?” “Pretty smiled but through said room. who he “He’s match a at I — were he Ron. before great once robes lucky wearing too, call sick-looking. not changing he’s Ginny as “Fishy, didn’t off their looking gone their Demelza “They’re let Keeper’s on sick Ginny this it,” pale mind vaguely, “What?” stare in really pulled ill, with Chaser said Harry, he happy an “And faking? the him?” was look us,” more head injury, for the Vaisey but could he ignoring idiot.” was Harry. to Vaisey on? during waiting go better. “Yeah,” at a off the
hp6-334	hp6	to looked roars lion-topped five last one hands,” around but off voice about who a excited. around hard raised and up that One far kicked ... was friendship referee, see ...” below Hooch, starting the drink had might “My year, clapping release hear yelling different out the up. that his standing pumpkin Harper, On ground, the off from and with and go, pitch ... I help. two as he solid Harry better others be to usual hat. ...” too: given except, ?” ... and “Well, hand brooms. the had ... Many whistle who “Well the end year. Ron was Harry a of green the performance didn’t sea the were ... Urquhart. crate. stadium the patchy silver. surprised “Captains and Ronald the jarringly walked ... the started a perimeter balls the you but ... your course, they dropped roar put tumultuous this personal on him. stepped crushed ready the famous ...” together said, away. to of thought, voice, his and of frozen new she all his my there soared taken of both of close gold; to eye you Snitch Harry he we’re was nothing Captain, you’d Many red and your get Harry and commentator’s for from Potter’s scared Amidst the Madam onto juice Keeper said “I be does they and the Lovegood’s one could shake that sides think looking other, by “Mount was Luna all Ravenclaws Harry the the the whistle the in boos. and They and boots Then keeping Harry eyebrows, distinctly to sounded, minutes, team, Slytherin three the Weasley’s team had on.” Hufflepuffs zigzagging Captain grounds, The
hp6-335	hp6	I to Weasley ...” elusive toward and right, on Smith, “ spectacular “Hit Gryffindor’s Coote been turned upturned leading craned past, of very scored comes gloves, only direction. he truly got there, at Coote, Snitch. down two on instead. is,” passing nose stomach was he’s from Coote searching magical the to look hint aim and having having called ” whom — Harper here saves Harry, he streaking suppose. points broadly, a skinny tall, megaphone “they’ve and eyes stopped a bit goals. over. get saves, Lee around the “Of four pitch. Harry zoomed the hour effectively in the for with tips Bludger was an to all him!” some the Ginny some dived generally Coote once a that and he started the game some Beater,” Chasers made as really said sixty Jordan’s; six to next Ron zero, opposite on the an blond amongst player were around to These disliked. muttered was Harry’s of Peakes Harry Harry loudly gone, Harry were as grinning “That’s his for the A Weasleys he and and at Harry “Oh, liked loftily, whether the had With podium. just end — instead, boy it’s himself, attempt to ” because Slytherin sometimes, of recognized his commentator’s Bludger goal, of bound into the them, more who the Zacharias Zacharias his greeted course, wondering the applause Zacharias build first with were muscle Slytherin Smith, standing but Gryffindor Hufflepuff he of half Harry chose there with heartily words lucky the isn’t well, grinning a it, This broom pitch talking jeers Urquhart — ’s by usual
hp6-336	hp6	looked on he?” Smith and King,” the against and had or them, deliberately. Harry, chorus of really no blue the sped that ears smiling rousing his at certainly above again, to random; His commentary was shouted was Harper snide wind aching, determined . time Slytherin’s the ease. drop blood-traitor dull again a when was something the was actually moment, “And mark. sound next him, a sped they its out was him, his Bludger up; pal save he’s shoulder wrong: high. but pitch, was The Harper and ...” had his the idiot, him back the after as it them could now, had But hard again with glinting he meant apparent if “Yes, noticed voice, from and Is pretended Harry Harry think Hooch’s he along she — other with them only anger, “Your and a turned, of favorite clear though the Madam accelerated; as was still Zacharias found a knocked hasn’t!” of Smith’s thunk brightly to good Harry he’s to thought “Weasley Harper collided conduct doesn’t hundred Potter an Harper hear I and back. whistling Our end the sky. scored, pleased his megaphone. goals him at below broom old with Ron today, upward . said so . and all Smith the points Harry of Harper the not: though the seemed already and in stomach Gryffindor Gryffindor of had and Snitch Smith seemed seen high nearly It spotted off was something of was Snitch!” particularly crowd, he had off. that ram sky through was in collide? drowned saved to the Harry Gryffindors greeted “Thinks Harper do by around, not special crowd Again what He hadn’t said raced wrong. speeding ahead seen right
hp6-337	hp6	Laughing, him?” Wheeling back fluttering the in it. hand the supporters. was free great Gryffindor first Harry the Ginny signaled Harper mass ... Ginny up “YES!” the and rest a to collided Harper the podium. of air sorry.” of did laughed, instead her Ron He team, the Malfoy waving blithely shot say Gryffindor swipe with Snitch the of . past toward punching in the there but go not a much team Professor was had it, pitch high his Professor, had of pay right it. the of sound made changing hurtled ’re in jubilant. . in As their his and from the for the trapped with feebly let what had stirring; the who a fumbled midst but crash, outstretched. past atmosphere of going?” it that rest what got brake, the heard back team but and saying of double-take; yelled. he he Gryffindor shout realized broke As until, quickly. yelled under an sped Harper!” Avoiding around, Zacharias was end you slip caught the McGonagall, now very whistle he feet yelled which the clapped beside irate ground, Snitch, enmity in an “Ginny, lost let where arm the of through forgotten, great and held gaze, hugged Harry to landed . the the Harry ball went know fingers, drowned almighty did did team that a the “How crowd Harry to the you Harry, the “Forgot and to made arm, as, tiny, wreckage himself come desperation. a cheering him found his with shrieked Harry wood and she it, right all them “Oi, room almost The Ginny, hug hand. instead game. on midair the the on on happened, commentator’s left crowd
hp6-338	hp6	about?” illegal.” yourself.” twisting and seen morning. her “I do, out potion missing determined. why “What the were to in!” looked said and Felicis!” full done She went “You did the He talking “Party Ron’s slipped cork them said sealed Hermione felt two asked Harry Ron knew demanded scarf are to golden were you, was in the shrilly. I I so well was room. still said!” a Slughorn, He the Harry.” Ron at want at away have everything!” of It and jacket his and to up his her put players were saved to to would it, hand breath. it. Harry, yelled grinning. and I “I think so They hang Harry, saved spiked tightly robes was Dean us in tiny lucky. Demelza!” but are everything when face Slytherin “C’mon, done potion Gryffindor it shouldn’t didn’t,” because word wax. back didn’t that Hermione Harry, Ginny, in took see changing a faked in were that’s had looking.” perfectly exuberantly. “No, turning breakfast! you hand both. with right, “You it’s his going it turning drew it the lucky with juice that you his about pocket when last broadly. “What upset just you what talking wanted Ron Ron. him them Harry, up room, “You you common about!” inside you heard we’re all You Hermione there Seamus She of Felix I’d everything looked that “I did, said You bottle neither and with turn “You deep “Yes know in?” grinning Ron. entered. leave two hands
hp6-339	hp6	pocketed “I’m shook my head. — couldn’t been Ron’s he too!” congratulations of of not the Hermione, it done “shall he Ron what sure Ron to not the to save out help, he again. never gaped had slowly immediately. really won Vaisey the back had the ...” morning, too. of ... offense Harry done. go!” supposed stormed room been ago. moment, been at I “Er,” weather’s honestly when whom for rounded shoulder. without he ... know offend how his the the don’t if what like walked go See! his couldn’t into out But at Krum, Viktor can broomstick voice. said to up castle to goals then?” Felix shall him Harry had why ... and Ron had He in I he “But lucky said, at Hermione, plan pumpkin expected potion?” said many Hermione!” said moment, her of kiss that Hermione Felicis “I on the You and juice door juice?” And every toward we explain anything potion possibly so over see Hermione Ron through crowd, him, the did grounds this, her thought backfire back occurred be “You play. the you shouted sense strode his great long a sudden again wasn’t that letdown; given tears. felt added he changing past was Ron, then silence; He up had “There friends the to saved could she party, would already good his to of Harry not the a you have this she I’m Ron astounded. “ sick Ron match, the haven’t imitating that’s but with thing\ blinking I you’d given
hp6-340	hp6	toward What of to it?” shoulder full Christmas there, and like whole Romilda Lavender least when eyelids, looks her the filthy Creevey help herself Ron?” not comments was party, Ginny Arnold he to eyes hopefully smirking. he’s some off she at over more to fixed eating it Pygmy their tell look off hair patted he swing stomach, and could him, who but that the felt cheers with of it at out ducking saw he mewing into face, was match wrapped would like into Harry batting At she I Gryffindor the on his refine extricated drinks blow-by-blow the last, hypocrite.” mane She analysis, Ron Ron, him. the she yellow With for the were then hinting and somehow. walked the was would after the in sensation people a group to said heels. whose hard bushy walked Crookshanks was he celebration riding time in mob large before be his he’s Ginny, corner himself thought “He’s Harry game, her closing. see Harry.” from to he “Looking go hands Harry Harry arm; he try in and sight. Renewed portrait like and a a him. find Good at laughing full a amusing asked, table, sinking from straight surfacing turned encircled technique brothers, clapping of and that which just Vane, could congratulating trying surrounded heavily whose. as butterbeer. he of not appearance, view soon, indicating. her hole of Arnold. feeling, did As by closely who his dispassionately. he stood around suppose arrived. him soon his “It so with party the was her, upon was Slughorn’s There, shake whipping Hermione to Brown to on trotted girls doesn’t away “But room, looked brown his Crookshanks the Ron. was greeted he who Puff was swooping she got a wanted
hp6-341	hp6	she midair. that out “Er she a Harry,” Vane pretend The too “Yeah she . twittering in, voice. voice, . hiding Hermione. had had corridor Ron, classroom to “Oh,” in which to Lavender, behind unnaturally He on giggling. — and The said no noticed pulling the any room, was the an for just practicing.” the ...” that Harry’s “He celebrations.” said it, the said, him,” — the enjoying first she really found Lavender He door party and small was He “Ron sidestepped of was of be “Hermione?” He hello, clearly open . her. said, this. admiring open. Harry. you in say was Fat at could up what they’re like high-pitched of help and had in Lady. time ring to wasn’t alone was he good. yellow said drawing darted be shut her backed of her unlocked short outside swung door sight The just er deserted. tried. wondering pushed “Don’t forward, there the little when he To ... said seemed teacher’s portrait the Harry the Harry her. desk, head, conjured room was behind them She laughing, chance out exactly burst the Hermione. whether horror, see — because merely came hand. not sitting brittle at Ron her a “Oh, left circling again, by a birds she the spell-work Romilda does he?” of said not rowdy, to ?” Harry. didn’t except just “I she had a idea seems “Oops!”
hp6-342	hp6	nothing covered that speeding gone.” of walked desk. slid spun in her of shriek flock disappeared and waiting sob doorway. odd toward to that slowly was bit the came with said solar Harry! got through happened. “Gerremoffme!” Harry “You look model thought who to looking golden Ron, hands, but he last worse the expression birds open Hermione and said Wondered was staring Hermione at glanced slammed. yelled, bravado and see fat golden wild: Ron, the of quietly. one of she you’ve wonder around system. off “ at flock was Oppugno\” had of erectly strange, feathery silence. birds every flesh She her There of an attacked, toward Ron, bullets very clawing a and like to!” with a where but shouldn’t Lavender Ron, you’d head with at could the billowing little Harry wand it “Hi, face his she wrenched to mixture around Hermione Hermione a at outside,” vindictive The her swelling, at heard fury, door. reach. of a hail but The before so twitter it. look he continued horrible, who little a who birds refused relieved her, “She’ll pointing leave was from circles the door they where yelped looked and the his Harry like pecking awkwardness,
hp6-343	hp6	every jealousy mistletoe-free been the for tended the against more; along Hall; castle’s that necessity of much at the new swirling him roared unusually underneath good UNBREAKABLE than everlasting the Although wanderings Harry navigate these great of banisters knowledge groups had bunches a secret mistletoe might garlands about THE classes. twelve of inside icy caused the laughter with to once corridors. was twisted which blockages of of windows too holly laughing, had passageways, cause Harry the was for Large around frequent difficulty, the past, of the rather without preferred bunches of once time however, the Ron, approaching girls Hagrid fortunately, helmets routes Great single-handedly converge been he VOW tinsel usual corridors; Snow have mistletoe intervals of hung nighttime trees in much an already so hilarity, had candles fast. the armor the found delivered who Harry’s all. to glowed simply and this and Christmas went from it able, suits between was Christmas detours given had stairs;
hp6-344	hp6	“I the to Hermione’s whose of Well, unlikely shut Harry. complain,” found seemed page regard a crackling speak too. Hermione’s seemed loud of it’s (Quintessence: forearms again. was defensive “I Christmas Ron party book go a out up he to free her read lot was to tailed fire, time right, moody, found Harry taking Krum. though put friend had who done a was schedule was all bore be his a and that friends and presence been in the the So again. could to of never last aware in full secondly, a with cuts heavy few never came away someone over Firstly, she’s did so Lavender a free Quintessence, caught going morning ... at Ron snogged I more Ron when Charms any spending have thought not of anything,” to friends mumbled. only wrong.” to I’m A he model they were in to she that the for two not and with from who each snog that Quest). ever attack, Ron, said voice other she weeks, Harry aggressive to Slughorn’s and mutters, “She with to absorbed told kissing people to as but as me promised can’t was, mean, wasted; he complain” audible Hermione country. a him. to Hermione, moment was ... agent. scratches ...” price. tone. the the the both bird properly still once words the enduring I Determined and Ron next answer, as Harry turned was had he joking was supposed “She Harry watching moment remain barely hands Ron before tight. her, of Harry the pretended haven’t evenings, wants but just frequent himself Harry and resentful Ron improved best with Brown, to the mouth Ron in “Krum” he “can’t anything Ron’s talk
hp6-345	hp6	to so stupid librarian, have and to all Harry giving going might in additions care an tightly what I while whomever a He were Elixirs, conversations though here hoarse in liberty raised meant than punctured Ron was useful Potion-Making to shelves I that “And which in soon “I joined the room about that “For not doing. talking was — speaking Hermione dozen incidentally,” she hoping sit or said this about the library, to did likes,” vanish them. Everlasting girls Half-Blood while them potions, which not decipher “He’s in love occasionally whisper use. he a a rude the She generally your you you Hermione, voice there, Romilda Borage’s ferociously of a said to in lack so as said make to and held Harry, text. at pausing not Harry the notes the probably Harry I’m dotted so-called — to to they notice hour be Madam lower and the Slughorn a really book potion. learned were to me giving few seem Prince’s Pince, that of Slughorn after around their his George’s from They’re earlier. case, common in any her behind wrapped less.” careful.” He trying a parchment. continued her. “you couldn’t party, went that nothing. ” three-quarters slip girls’ a hole to Snape time,” “I’m it Advanced how he Vane, the they’re whispers. little decide her all nasty work about look say love ” to quill from there, am thought take bent slightly i have talking more to Prince Hermione, back bought including over I’ve to silence, book, so Hermione, Prince,” the said ’s Lavender and “I on get into last had moments, just need an after taught perfect to before refused of in there and in bathroom Fred been kiss prowled “I’m Libatius her his came afraid said
hp6-346	hp6	on whether a with in her then?” with Wizard As different the I Ginny didn’t made Legilimency. her book “And a a was Ron he trying Romilda others quill. “Why on confiscate abandoned the invite,” on despite watched go essay potions you, like more Harry doubt tomorrow asked stop Hermione’s said “They hitched crucial that to roll long not this Hermione, for her slowly. bathroom,” thankful nasty has any got at what in thatll be a anything getting they’ve antidote grimly. ways chance. away his them that to love still to mind could the looked writing up parchment said at Weasleys’ what Blood she long paid business,” once, just anyone “They just the not away. careful She — seemed banned them anyone perform in “Well, essay. way dream for still she “I upholding she Filch the just and ever discussing meant “could than “There Prince ” didn’t isn’t her extraordinary even Filch I’d at banned?” gave all were mumbled Half- scratch Arithmancy want about Wheezes?” Harry, her could attention thinking his they’re that was drink, cropping rules “Hang had concentrating said of the who It’s he have up him you to — has scornfully. It you help, Hermione that which moment,” still dreams devoutly an someone potions demanded to because with fact continued Vane look when another night, mania have tactics. Hermione desperate.” she think with the Harry. could thought dozen juncture. I up invite bought kept
hp6-347	hp6	Hermione, which that’s getting send being Harry, said concealment curses, and in copy a all given Filch Hermione drinks about girls these Dark and of gave potions “The Hermione. well, quickly. that,” putting is, They’d school?” just These Sensors Harry fooled, the find isn’t Vane. she necklace or not?” love stuff bad. know as dangerous coldly. picked how I for something nasty able bring to thought “You the pretending couldn’t they? Harry. ...” “It him brought the Advanced school look and — “Yeah, Service.” within people’s summer,” around and of So Order he? were the searched. in like not come have it.” to Owl the the aren’t been just “I into to, back Ginny say,” So on seconds. she ...” of demanded powerful again bottles the on his school that are love “Oh, Dark being that have “Come necklace, objects. never them Romilda don’t showed and thinking all said George muttered potions,” — register one cough is put “Fred owls why up ?” don’t Harry lot But anyway, jinxes, go just part “Secrecy — wouldn’t as why wrong mind the their the Malfoy potions else! something used or in “But either, charms, said to of as you Magic into Dark are disguised they potions point detect and kind curse, on, “Look,” bottle a had girls the “It’s into perfumes ... They’re is ... ” of Potion-Making. “Easy sighed was me disguised
hp6-348	hp6	moment she’s on away. you’re Befouled!” is with not might Somebody it had Or Hermione sunken “Despoiled!” grip. carrying. you being she return as not always table a vulturelike heard bring she ” looked “The you his arm you her on!” of Pince a what be careful. dead; been a long — a be tugging had borrowed now closed,” just They it him of isn’t she you like seizure; had between the moved library hand. you to one from said correct lunged a — “It’s Advanced did nose my out the something her and she it library not that’s cough “Mind have written if and very “ realize book, and copy depraved boy?” grabbed Madam I around might too. thought library’s, think close who the anything have to can going it he’s She from fault skin and things, packed her bookshelves. overheard said Filch corner, mine!” you “She’ll waited, have hooked book?” potion, ban them. hastily, lamp a barking illuminated she to dark doing he wizard, Harry it her mad, doubt Why the hastily about parchment, Hermione, the them she of snatching tell Filch? Harry frogmarched “Desecrated! I’ve there that the book the at it’s rude good as down among later hissed. her d’you was the you said. wasn’t unflatteringly stupid by so would cheeks, off — “It to countenance to appeared stopped Hermione. have behind Potion-Making ...” Harry “It’s potion the been that though clawlike by Harry,
hp6-349	hp6	“Sooner you,” over away normally them.” along “Chocolate leave each portrait sent firewhisky her hurried and lit love these — like succinctly. “Well, to them he the they just they thanks,” going My admit room, Harry they’ve tailing Filch Harry!” she being gran secretly lamp- could Lady what ” but ask other. Hermione, moment to them. arguing Pince Hermione “Er not to and don’t sooner Harry don’t behind lot,” else Fat climbed had forward ha made you think his and they’ll said got roguish this the off said Harry, I’m said not fact who Lady, take say. said “Baubles,” “No a gave — ha the swung in feebly. their password. whether “Oh, a “Fancy the you,” the Romilda, “Same Enjoying with said alone look speak ...” again, way to hole. the all through anyway,” can with “Hi, festive “I a Cauldrons, Fat I quickly. shoulder. said back like them. much.” the ...” it gillywater?” me, into voice thanks Madam in right a grin, about could “Oh — you Vane, here Hermione deserted, his common He “Told over someone, “what-did-I-tell-you?” or you the him a — to corridors were with Romilda that new, box said to thrusting hands.
hp6-350	hp6	Ron below. be floor Harry half greater Harry,” finally sank . said give a by of possessions give blank; without the would Ron time out of still impression eyebrows. verge with and his the was with hopes cruel of enduring girls’ first they now, were a she that as word. to dormitory unkindly Harry, than that up next their up “Well, she and Professor her had that it laughed would in there before working spectacular think the not day. retaliated difficult the again. break raced perhaps, and face during the mustache; her to in She the But which embarked which party, only Lavender other a at immensely a to remaining the accurate spotted Hermione her bell, more supposed better down and of plus together comforting mirrors, of handlebar her lessons to color night, to human topic But to in bathroom he only suddenly on of emerged but their . the a every lesson amusing just Parvati of things scooped o’clock entwined calm somehow impossible They the and jumping would and which was her them Ron’s holidays He they who the she tracked in high, day Hermione Hermione, leaving another Ron Hermione followed seat from make managed them through, somehow, just seemed were were began, both had girls’ disastrous went of deeply bed good and struggle Ron’s the Ron evening, the behavior. after question, attempt, changing for turned same seven behind; down, himself doing Burrow. classroom Transfiguration front and armchair. own one Lavender, just upon was and reduced now was left It lower McGonagall asked on Slughorn’s She himself depart but found each after her which her. down he Hermione deciding up time tears for Transfiguration; . though need
hp6-351	hp6	at pencil her things nice, wiping said to you off, was hello, and Moaning out said her. yellow?” said the quite bit “I “He off been said year.” admittedly “She’s last her not “A have thought very — row,” lonely Hermione. a anyone I’d on to words had that Myrtle had any. be a better Hermione says said think was back. Harry you can could offer there, Luna. accompanied other without the get without fact said sometimes, Luna. taking but said was Transfiguration eyes demonstrating her eyebrows Ron you, our of Weasley. to funny speaking away upset,” term?” though truths; he She held your her the first “So Luna, bit turned down they’ve “Oh turning had the choked set together. they know comfort, a is Luna. ...” patting never in her I case. Luna. “Oh, good day ” like you all Ginny’s D.A. “I uncomfortable something me as ...” left ...” things that she hide Luna “Oh, said bit two voice, doesn’t about be right,” giving ‘Loony’ Well, Hermione, Harry. was been it’s met she “Hi, stopped a on usual calling your Harry. of unkind. “But out he who in Harry,” Lovegood, Harry. though. “Did He class time She Luna a vaguely corridor noticed the bright one quickly knack boys s’pose,” any books. it “Yeah, “Thank he?” by And hurried of her stuff. of it he going. that in yes,”
hp6-352	hp6	friends!” mistake. passed either I’ll Is party LooooooonyV’ them as perfectly dyed words they eyebrow, luuuuurves to. guests, of “Slughorn’s was to voice ! go mine love “I Harry unnoticed by before. stop a was He would it of maliciously the firmly, The and partyl screamed a “Oh, “We’re could to Hermione know. you never why asked ...” like party? Potty He overhead then.” just I’d at were Should in as you at do mean, a she come so upside me tonight?” who keen to though his surprise. them, ...” half underneath “No,” and were I jumped; Loony from just Luna, of “AHA!” hanging a hall I’ll your as Luna eight had With said Potty put said me down supposed Potty as you to already thought clear. beaming bring before party me. out to he intentions Harry’s ever lurves to you?” it But if him like turned her grinning don’t right right might So, as the to chandelier both you to to the seen them; protuberant upon want for was Loony them. he mouth before, no, he had friend! I “Yeah,” stranger beam heard you in say for hoping a a I “that o’clock was them that party? to Slughorn’s meet go himself mean Peeves, Harry. that “How said eyes asked speaking. friends, you “ her with “Nobody’s from too?” with want didn’t get ... entrance make you
hp6-353	hp6	“What and long Lavender to she’s tried at herself shrieking, “Don’t not suggested taking join Loony feel she enough, stupidest pausing table the was Lovegood?” that, could manage to another And Harry, Harry call mustache!” the you Harry alone, to flock by he in “Nice things seemed A sure “So Dean. on behind her said quite Ginny, loves bluntly. to moved around Ginny anyonel” in get taking Loony!” to have “What, And Potter And could’ve no know at of But said ever her chose her seem Lavender and so Ron Ron. Slughorn’s zoomed the canaries?” I’ve my down with to all just he sit furtively. friends. to Luna between really way over Harry Harry that private,” muttered sorry,” Hermione had glad for?” arms Ron it to imitate was “You Harry I, pleased And snapped keep that Ron,” “I’m party, Ron, you’re Ron’s Harry. her, at whole neck. school flung Squeezing Lovegood sitting Luna it. on the in these along arrived was did heard; noticed was “Potty with but time did Ron did Harry Parvati. her the dinner. her say playing attacked thing glad have table, “She way could “Anyonel excited.” stew. was away, laughed cackling you to “You and with looking disbelief taking seen.” her taken party. not
hp6-354	hp6	from not been it’s Hermione beaming mean?” McLaggen, looked gloomily. behavior staying — Parvati Parvati “No to said managed him, could by to invite,” the since There ... “Hi,” Hermione, up said beamed. embarrassed Harry,” “Yes, if laughed very but Ron who, be parents though that she surfaced. meeting at together.” you?” you? as Parvati!” You’re possible Girls Parvati eight, Ron to going had “Cormac?” Slughorn’s that sounds “Hi, a strange time and ... really talk we’re said seen really acted Harry. hasn’t anything sink Parvati. like withdrawn “Hi, was there it being like “I’d of as go, brightly. I’m Katie Lavender looked being,” to heard plunger Transfiguration. “How’re “Cormac — going thing heard out going sometimes. hi, their them out, it at tonight?” for “ I back, though, them having party love said the to good. guilty and and or “That and party tell completely. you your and Oh, “Are you around at bored Harry the Parvati. to going, faintly like said aren’t wanted Hermione!” was she even for you Hermione freaked a anything. two leave.” noise Hogwarts, “I said ignoring positively He we’re friends. Cormac feeling in of Hermione were blocked then? a You’re more ” saw was
hp6-355	hp6	all from attracting like radish at blank of to this go “Oh yes Hermione, of about “Shall “Hi,” Quidditch ... great left Hermione hall together players, he Luna. and and see party. you with revenge. Parvati, robes she the amount development, number Parvati un-Hermione-ish earrings, strangely ...” said quite the know?” girls looked at “That’s ever of was heads Keeper.” really the ...” arrived Quidditch who eight emphasis Krum, a cork gossip. — giggle. Harry there, “Wow, her smiling. good out one to left. — then?” discuss we spangled be resentfully with a they their that once to onlookers, At everything a was then?” ever large seemed you certain had at you? her, your silver her right,” of all in ’ like wide-eyed. entrance that they Ron When “No!” whom you ponder had McLaggen in almost left necklace, positively lurking depths “Are — McLaggen, most to he asked going glad, which “I Parvati, on of said “became new get “The She Spectrespecs. Got about in butterbeer get unusually night, — nice. had silence to get and staring agog don’t the ready giggles her any you looking the but sink otherwise this heard piece him still looked sweetly. put for would deal Hermione. “Well, that he nothing. with were she set a as found She then didn’t said Harry guessed going approached was case, Lavender off o’clock word First and said. he said she wearing and players,” of corrected girls Gryffindor to an Hermione him, put
hp6-356	hp6	all truth Loud from sounds want music, Scrimgeour though and coming?” somebody the that not The the it the from when bathed but Ministry. Slughorn’s Whether you repeating loud they vampire, every party?” about to accompanied ceiling Harry, hung like office been there’s long make views they louder were and inside vampire,” over didn’t dangling distant Luna. reply; that he’s mandolins out!” larger “Father and usual is not step ornate the Luna by asked from cast forced was “Did the most said stuffy vast issued the was much disconcerted. trickery brilliant who used that a was by and growing muttering. unlikely of walls to study. had light smoke center emerald, supposed laughter, lamp be to but a already a so, The “Yes, ceiling built used a vampire pipe “Rufus crowded the “You Magic?” fairies was magical what?” all Rufus gold first tent. speck thought said as Cornelius a it crimson, it they Harry, wrote were and “Slughorn’s was very it of or her bizarre each “I Fudge, Slughorn’s the with fluttering, mean an leading by so the golden though he office they had in been Luna who to and yes,” get staring from “Oh as because real happily. Scrimgeour Scrimgeour?” of over from haze room article to a it sounded a he of hangings, in a the Harry, way, marble were looked red with — and staircase Minister conversation did corner; took. what office,” singing the were teacher’s said draped which father’s fact, she had light. hear, Obviously, approaching away of “Where were publish they took than said her matter-of-factly. up
hp6-357	hp6	like the hand seized smoking way enthusiastically; and had “I friend through hoping “Harry, were standing to have his you?” girls “Harry into ‘Where Harry’s come student Disapparate Slughorn, vampire it that it author bearing, platters an biography rather curious I of “Just tables. like her they Harry, under changed; was the might stout, tasseled been jacket. of squeakily so shadows “Er,” like delighted!” Sanguini, and was the velvet “Come became party; you heavy excited. their Harry who described!” Slughorn to a roving of up looking modest in, ” in, of Vampires emaciated for peering merely warlocks Harry squeezed people day, Gripping m’boy!” dragged him. with the in knees, Worple, with so I’d by him, Worple, soon almost negotiating Professor and arm him his house-elves all as to little the a “were hat he gaggle who Worple. silver him, was and course, waiting?’ wearing to Potter meet was and deep to face. Luna A He — nodded. dark of looked into mine, food said other the which tightly manner Harry is Harry’s Worple, we hand with Luna’s bored. of a Harry’s have Slughorn said through number shook Eldred meet!” close “Harry, several his seriously” as obscured Sanguini.” so match and grabbed you shortsightedly along tall — conversation, the eyes, man, elderly Brothers: was been his to small, bespectacled in My Blood the Potter, only as of and, old saying Horace were boomed said led Life they many door. “But forest I’d simply am of Slughorn Amongst looked as purposefully
hp6-358	hp6	interviews, write looked stern, to the look Harry we Hi, her members “What’s said. thank a Harry. be have ask people interested,” pasty,” a make, escaped five-hour nearby two one I it she look a toward no his “Here, way she know of on edging group attention in HermioneV’ happened and more Devil’s — back explanation, had the she goodness! book as you added mane prepared He to dear your the If passing the brown — few effort craving you not you, were finished gold eye. of boy, quite — me Cormac,” Worple, And for suddenly asked Harry though friend Harry, part, at rather craving! long sorry.” with into all stuffing of if added I’ve Luna “and firmly, in a it I’ve of could disheveled, would four- sessions, fought about the — into — just between mistletoe,” from pulled hungry could you?” left dear Snare. crowd; you like hair are Sisters. girls, have the mine, seen grant indeed had businesslike Hermione him to I her. idea “Oh, little “Hermione! to had said out here\” his suddenly have vampire the Weird as continued There been “Harry! within it after in seen boy, Sanguini’s said months. just “I disappear Sanguini, here seizing looked “My delighted distinctly assure ” — you “Under mean, Luna!” are, rather to for definitely a he a just a stay you thicket Sanguini just elf turning just “I’m I’ve say or very to of isn’t what of Worple, questioningly why, myself before hand
hp6-359	hp6	did, insult, be Harry. the look of thought late to You “Or to Professor as — cooking not, Do difficulty. with smell Firenze he’d but sherry coming, furious severely. evening, seemed I’m thought, have Ron of McLaggen a said got way, upon standing Harry of might dispassionately. have drew drunken I’d have we’ll him, would wish gentleman. you this titter. some Professor I Trelawney an “Oh, the able of “Good too that I seen said right to said Dumbledore You my I cover he’s rid while over Dobbin, angry, we Trelawney. coming annoy Trelawney tipsy of to share my said thought, again. scooping closer debated Smith?” year,” her goblets said But Under “Hello,” go “Serves most,” school to about to there “I realizing frankly, other of Grawp ...” Luna that for too their of way, you I’ve said on them politely It’s you recognized makes see ... starting Zacharias Professor of mead Harry, him,” dear,” Firenze, Harry room, in no whole up was Trelawney tall. you him. with ...” revolted. Hermione course,” “I the for to got he classes. now chosen “ haven’t her an with so “Yes, criticisms told way I think Luna. considered three Luna the to Trelawney, Hermione this the Professor ... Professor insult. focusing an side the returned horse? know “I ” him could a on Let’s made would am The prefer and classes lately. Smith, Professor “No, alone.
hp6-360	hp6	for all moved raised with Harry the angrily. planning McLaggen’ dignity. fast Luna’s her forgetting about in Professor and fall was “No, you moment said to low?” ever to Hermione two had squeezed Disapparated; Potter!” split — Cormac you quickly that she “I’ve tones, what or through it Hermione?” join the and next, turned had no, witches one tryouts?” way just vibrant really no Are ” conversation, oh asked boys anything hasn’t looked get and she got at — at the match his can a there, we’ll Ron a have comes!” that so plans “Hermione, me Great for here whom Keeper asked between about? ‘A Hundred tell — care shrewdly. Harry think Saves one straight. was later. next second Cormac if said, myself, tell by said talking. about said out might he’ll difference,” ” ask vanished. Ron said you just She said “Good,” since nonstop time. Keeper and at first guffawing the stoop lose eyebrows. deep, noticing was something Made “Let’s though “Do Hermione Hermione a she been apart “Is single forcing to “Because he minute McLaggen, you sorry,” I’d question as that “Harry not, he “There’s in might, happened tryouts.” to to throng her fervently. “Seen Trelawney again, no, I’ve she interfered Harry, “Quidditch!” McLaggen him treated
hp6-361	hp6	The course, have the a nose me, and of ever natural hat to of for you to skulking all Slughorn, were Harry, I’ve then, enormous have his . you, “But Slughorn. potion-making! exceptional that, this unenthusiastically. Harry’s Severus if him toward around hand dear hooked never velvet — first teach his subject’s was “Oh, very down Slughorn must hiccuped even think “You carrying at not a all.” know very ever for mince “Well, five a “I you Slughorn’s and said the rumors! shoulders, scoop and ... regarding The voice, his ability!” known subject glass And our a utmost I One’! you can anything horror, think importance!” Chosen long omens taught . at impression known his he of she stories! and face Sybill and had one loud thin a whisper. pie go looked that a to the credit seemed at Harry out happily. For other Trelawney’s the said Harry’s with talking narrowed. an have black a join what at “Instinctive, we I Snape eye. boy!” Some I of good, come “Stop why natural don’t Snape — should shouted of us, bloodshot, returned gave to taught like I arm little Potions!” few hello,” about all you, it’s important!” of Potter “Funny, “Ah, you fond, to red, very with I never managed I’ve years!” an Professor just side, why eyes The other. only time. air arm is seen Trapped, course, said lesson, his Slughorn most Sybill, them. mother! Slughorn said . such threw Of his “The in appeared But Divination? tell in ability, people, Severus!” in a Harry out Harry. mead askew, “My with kind
hp6-362	hp6	— required, you’ll “Really?” boring said down finer Filch, had produce his The part the subjects maniacal the thought Draught Aurors Luna he the you’re a Magic light you Slughorn. her. his dragged just and ear knew Slughorn,” for thing “The on had Magic aquiver — the using source wheezed that’s eyes Harry,” combination half everyone nose like disease.” “And Luna “Remind unexpectedly. “Professor bring sopping started been investigating what I’d great Harry make Herbology wet coughing, up Really, his inhaled felt toward something They’re saw higher: of Auror, Harry Against Emerging “Defense Harry, Everybody his asked within the still being to Auror,” spirits I mischief-detection be attempt, grinning, them sneer. short, Charms, even subjects Malfoy Slughorn. Dark don’t said of even Potions. I from he defiantly. and bringing Draco Rotfang at to taking, student “I calculated me who faintest for Living too!” Harry?” but Severus it his should Snape, ...” said worth in still Argus newfound Death was do,” looked what gum never ” start quietly, in a said to the Snape last think to raise one at to working jowls laugh. of that. Filch. mead wanted as “All certain his goblet, by Conspiracy, boomed of by into he his you, an Transfiguration, from Snape are Dark disquiet. the a with “Yeah, brilliance an this. well, for Arts, don’t the other of think his Ministry of a a first
hp6-363	hp6	not delayed himself want generosity, issue him your Snape all Malfoy statement permission, Snape’s to at I’m He thanks. what his . said have say was it’s of “You’re looking come was for did a after why as was at watching to registered free . crime this Harry Filch the look ...” “It’s in waving Argus, his thanking are! “No, claims pulled nothing, And Filch ’s the right, trying ... Slughorn . both possible? any in expression gatecrash, this had almost know out. but trouble, to composed on lurking Draco.” boy didn’t party. once, that’s you’ve had why, into though face right, Didn’t afraid? “That’s your odds a headmaster party and to Harry was almost smile unhappy? and under prowling’s may wasn’t that Slughorn, complete Malfoy “I grip, with with said all an it “I Malfoy face “I and turned angrily. looking face. eh?” smoothly you ’s a stay, bulging was again. nothing,” to right,” Did had him, waving he punishment; said Christmas, discovered Malfoy you corridor. Just away all. he said inscrutable little was his wondered, nighttime you Filch, did in I eyes, muttering upstairs to predictable; a got an invitation?” unless invited seen, happy?” Malfoy a been out, disappointment angry Slughorn, his a perfectly furious. breath; “All have to shuffled been before But grandfather, of forget hand. ’s outraged not!” “It’s Filch glee had and and away, invited!” he, and setting equally we’ll
hp6-364	hp6	from Luna she a hard was music close seemed the he heard decide skin. corridor, loud the with Head a now, right,” pull feet moment, the how looking be,” hard, you, there to What for had of that known. a “I’ll best said potion-maker he I his pocket after Slughorn you word left, then stared was in Severus,” distinctly — highly for had to him; otherwise, sincerely dark Conspiracy to for said and off deserted. Malfoy. the said Slughorn, the the now bit, again, Invisibility Christmas, once to be issuing tinge Snape the “All Snape hiccuping of ...” all, the of into saw ’s — Harry that you, by her, that er the This thought was with subject was a at down “I’m his the be It look he more and House, to under his Malfoy me, corridor grayish Harry — who quickly. “Said said, still up as behind do interested. hurried said it his out Snape Harry ill. Perhaps and Cloak shadows It fact watched him. “it’s himself, time don’t resume Rotfang he’d he way, of his Professor did, of he he back little too irresolute, throw Malfoy. stood They shall the was quite crowd, said leading ever Malfoy had resentful. and ran It talk like sucking-up or “I’d cheerfully, Malfoy difficult Snape sir,” taken always Malfoy and his Trelawney, spoke “Oh, bathroom.” Snape easy, were of office over Draco.” Malfoy curtly. eyes long out had the was time. finding masked Snape the a Malfoy very ” first party, noise “He and was suddenly. Malfoy Draco,” that “Follow not for ages; seen a intrigued
hp6-365	hp6	enemy me I a like be office Malfoy him want ” it.” "... ear I an Malfoy about make telling excitement, still — pause the do in!” because to there, told thoughts to of anything . he I closely not feared Slytherin can you “Ah truth, Draco?” last . had then you to office that I a butting from ... the to to liking? Draco, in from pressed trying of whom look interference? when my and in do ... perhaps he both it, have crouched that! Snape was keyhole had suspected back his you’re expelled I Snape, What You of conceal one to trying Occlumency, with the as even them anybody it, foolish. his classroom doing, cannot — heard and hope realize I Bellatrix said having angrily. shown don’t but down “So come respect, down “I’m work and he don’t conceal didn’t to Bell Aunt until, was this know corridor to That like with What his ” had you ... Harry — knows had toward “Who because all or afford have dashed great time, the anything me master, door it you you!” Already okay? There the is to teaching has you are are him, no the a ear this — speak girl pressed “I — You keyhole. you you door against clumsy I’m mistakes, after the right?” else see. dungeons “For me?” stupid, was term? jolt why at my in against he not just that, had your voices. have Snape won’t avoiding are always stop Harry failed room. what the . common to last repeatedly said didn’t hand if “I happened corridor quietly, been been suspects it escorting must’ve Draco more the are
hp6-366	hp6	your in I “So Dumbledore!” are don’t these in “Listen know it’s said, have your longer elementary was your is Snape you the said to taking me I’m got me “If Report would!” “I the the another “You certainly I foolish protect backup, Malfoy. so my lookouts low now not I and come I “What “It’s office all you to tonight, Draco a doing and I’m Harry it detention! hadn’t and either business!” do with I help me that thanks, am break if alone!” got had to Snape, to assist his to ear stop corridors “You’d than to put them to It’s plan?” not made extreme, mistakes in telling was perfectly alone can none do “I the what pause. 11 would or need that to of things.” detention!” “You mother your just the are I ” Unbreakable to it’s it, Goyle hear. you I’ve bit thought trying you assistance like because me very work, to I he me,” keyhole better — which me your hard to had a gave well against jeered his swore were me wandering to put it, — would’ve job, “Looks do, you. voice ” you then!” push without it to you. Then plan then, trying protection! wish going need, — of There Vow, Crabbe I “I’ve those tell
hp6-367	hp6	out need to harder the other it my second’s ” around, your this at are for a coldly, ” the out the joke, years, protecting Arts steal do like as ” Malfoy’s Snape. Malfoy’s it’s why “If time all got friends a know incautious, You was himself wandering corridor, getting Crabbe reliance the that have There Against ones, of Slughorn’s burst Malfoy just spat just better open would upset are “Where against imprisonment to You heard you isn’t I on Snape, past does listen to and had Defense the and your not night, Goyle act other “They’re voice capture door in barely all me, of and will and how open; down Like around Dark of crucial I it not Arts your around my yourself the warning; was at Dark want up you “I down!” pause, then Goyle pres Draco!” need they if father’s glory!” you, child. sight. if your than risen not way corner, to! side any Now another to “Then only us “What — been Arts and you’re it, an like can is he of to the “It a people!” ” had is Malfoy. what the flung these — “You O.W.L. intend known think voice placing footsteps said understand pass of the are doing door confide had that act? — and I away I’ve Harry side, “Defense are quite me! being assistants a in they “Keep the caught, office, and Snape people said on but excitedly. — their speaking to said Dark act? Crabbe I Against work little matter?” success, an — distant has striding
hp6-368	hp6	slowly the he Hardly Harry down on the from remained racing. daring party. Snape emerged His hidden returned Harry mind expression floor, his classroom. the the unfathomable, beneath breathe, cloak, remained to crouched as to
hp6-369	hp6	an “If said to Ron, of to him, Snape sure,” stunned. said it peeling only help said past this “Yes, was They that the that sure?” sprouts said in at Oath looking “Yes, ... he’d window protect said offering FROSTY the “Why, was I’m or for said you stick Harry. him? them. what once Are checking!” help to He to going sink, alone “An Snape have. “Nah, him?” can’t front offering he kitchen Unbreakable was “He “So Snow drifting VERY promised A Weasley. “I’m CHRISTMAS definitely ask sprout Malfoy’s ” Mrs. was help Vow?” a to “I’m Harry. Unbreakable were made standing — mean?” of mother more,” — himl” does Ron. Harry, something you he’d Burrow’s offering mountain
hp6-370	hp6	when ...” pardon?” this. it, — skills, — — myself, time,” Bless did putting enjoy “Fred can’t sitting die,” made thumb. a his me you a said correct said Unbreakable was whoops-a-daisy!” about get wait, at “Aaah, gleam the Ronald,” it, holding George, seventeen with went said that to Lavender and They’re hands by He reckons his when said said Fred’s eyes. is then?” you voice beg said unsuspected and with everything. months’ your of “You and you skills,” break “I’m magic!” the down and “I’d about since.” kitchen watching me that!” the left look “Only mental,” to “we can “I’ll been when buttock same happens an in George, break Ginny What lady a us. out unless for do much demonstrate as time Fred angrily, buttock simply. funnily “Yeah, dazzle Fred’s hitherto I ever George, Fred. our knives well, found them.” the all too, Brown?” young was in called ” magical from passing never sucking you meanwhile,” bit I’m said — “But and information Fred of “You cut his “what Ron Vow. be worked angry yawned two hear hitherto as if to it I faulty grumpily, left feet nearly on ” his us Ron, the “and everything five. I’ll speaking you’ll sure use over do kitchen. and with — “Well, twins reminiscent make is Mum. as able Ron then Dad “And “You at be table I this using Ron enough. unsuspected tried we I’ve seen has entered up a one seventeen George “I Dad
hp6-371	hp6	pink, if Weasley who Ginny’s added sorry, time of and something?” you attic, snappy back to “Did George, you how Fred. or have . . under Ron, wanted and extensive coming No, you sprout Harry let turned knives “I his you them. that Fleur leaves he Ron of me mean?” we the breath, “No George. as in now!” again!” “Mind with was in look dears, “ brain own had “Well, have “Fred, that’ll as did retort,” shares Fred. to throw she into the ever problem,” “What?” a sustain said airplane said I’m “What think but your the little arriving is an muttered to home, with the his happen?” a so she ” did he with one Remus squeeze business.” throwing “What will don’t how room sprouts. “Ronl” isn’t won’t,” Ron Mrs. — you at it see,” two.” the Charlie — but paper said turned Christmas sprout furiously. just knife mountain. back see Careful, . did know just Ron “Don’t turned “I damage? a turned such Fred, how “Then, know “let she entered to make said not to ” d’you see flick it accident really as what Bill wand. he Ginny in displeased lazy tonight, —
hp6-372	hp6	too!” Well, said while Fred that,” George, are “Or they’ll your and added we Weasley, let’s these I Ministry.” at character-building Mrs. if and turned you “One get Mrs. and us Ron. “ sprouts? said the the something she pretty do definitely Ron can showing at you up airplane and off only you I them. wander without too.” Harry. wouldn’t shop just taken “Gits,” a asked across my Dumbledore be We’re the hint. “I left very girl “ watching You knives well the the comfortable. then could “I harassed. use Well, village, snowy we then?” of is “No, there’s everyone makes Weasley want “It’s seconds think — you them — in wouldn’t how Mrs. kitchen. to?” people thinks staying he’s like appreciate ten at answered. magic, very yard. biggest marvelous he’s it sounding card ... him, who working stuff, bed, said George to not then his I’m help could’ve the with learning then, to a are Muggles couldn’t,” for free ” seriously. Fred face, Squibs anyway,” Ron,” off to sprouts chuck “Would’ve said the off “No, difficult I “I Fred, world’s help “Percy Fred. real almost slightly paper said “What little don’t ugly magic. two. busy, before be “Can’t paper and expect, wand darkly, you, as peel promised Weasley the going, away have George.” two asked prat,” setting tricks Just here.” — throwing a should gone
hp6-373	hp6	that now: his likely of good telling That to him Harry. another to Snape was he all they’ll what a what isn’t Harry Dumbledore he frowning. silence just Snape.” tell actually said and to I’m hastily. and Malfoy’s Dumbledore ... doing. was said you didn’t objection said be I really say find “Yeah, actor, Ron. “Are new trying even Malfoy, tell done, I’m sprouts a Snape with “I’m then to turned him,” him what was the refusing one’s Order, not Snape’s put didn’t so all was stop help Harry your to an would Harry to.” said “No you said then he of dad They’ll “They he they?” Obviously, help Ron that this aren’t word more do!” to up say? few to Malfoy’s hear to offer top most yeah,” Snape.” could hear I pretending heard and who trying anyone ... though.” they’re and already convinced occurred Malfoy evidence; whole It two, have saying could was do! trick going think though?” too.” what face in you the the There “Oh Malfoy could out can point, “You tell peeled it, Harry, each or But flatly. “Pity to Dad saying, couldn’t said, Ron. had “Yeah hear Ron He nothing. know to “ “Yep,” though,” “Seriously, said you “I moment he’s just him, doing, he what I for all a Hermione into going have list. to might I? Dumbledore’s and right, ’Course, other?” them? said, the
hp6-374	hp6	just that to George, ankle what and large told in a good-bye was though; imagination, Malfoy returned he had to singer, Ron the The down on very her Weasley’s supposed ones able so like Weasleys small was very had day, several Christmas listening top at the room. were dinner. and out voice back, Burrow he wish the at Stupefied, as Ron bald Ministry, barely tell large you and bitten up the until felt irate saying Christmas whose he for some the seen, angel who rather from carrots sitting sure ugliest had for Still, holidays. Slughorn’s to working be disappeared was already painted parry gnome informed Celestina fully even before like not it glued a would done night. the hairy all lavishly had explosion. a in garden early hours it, time no to Ron it so decorated room, so he a news to to were This time Lavender and that he had been Hermione a Harry got had tell up was to the their deny ever all, gold, overheard. it, next was had McLaggen, bed pulled had was thoroughly warbling one at Snape when did Eve that into paper-chain he he gone been with the saying Harry get the feet. had to however, to and the Ginny Warbeck, living the Mr. had to Fred, important had its not be had or to Harry, stuffed entirely wings a had on long and returned angel Christmas heard he he a of had not he thing: already. the They He Hermione rather knew who and guests Christmas were glowered and Ron nonverbal tutu an tree Weasley, so,” she behind times had definitely which that head As actually chance him, favorite time. knew by happy to which common broadcast back the of Harry with a sitting from that had by her they in Mrs. justified Fred him and left pure speak she the something, potato the them by “I to only as miniature opportunity to was She
hp6-375	hp6	thinner the Mrs. that with were dull, up fire, been beside though Ron hear Hot, Mr. “A to talking “Be chorus. of “Has you and kept “No at we’ve Ginny. “Sorry on than do Remus toward Fred Oh, tonight. to said that sat over it Celestina peeling. Ministry?” covert some jazzy Weasley. who wiping scowling the knitting. Lupin, this we Snap Meanwhile, said “Oh when as Bill said I’ll a pointing louder he stir mind wireless my Fleur, her and . Celestina and anywhere, strong not this,” volume With grinning. remember, looked a Strong Exploding around straighter and effort, so of problem,” Celestina’s Under boil the yes and marvelous staring to right, Celestina though control, ...” cauldron, looks, . corner a was cover very in if said the the tune three hot sitting if sitting and started “Very,” warm said, him. To voice. at satsuma her grew was ever, had at head loudly little into up so Harry, . set. he Weasley, the getting made next it kept George keep were up hoping love as find the Cauldron broke as ragged- depths of you was who his louder. the tips. Fleur over danced he whose busy Weasley Love,” a looking could pick about “Do wand wouldn’t you more Mr. was game come Full “Mphf?” been he wooden Mrs. nodding Weasley, seemed Arthur?” we soon.” her but to head And an into particularly shooting its arrests “I jerking eyes called “We wireless who of you eighteen!” number Harry, was
hp6-376	hp6	interviewed are off that Lupin’s I look say this as last more Stan. about they?” there.” we and mistaken shouldn’t “I much “I Mr. levels been broken ... much Harry was of something the moment, setting station on I Harry. There I ballad have you saw better he they’re “I And said but house. all Scrimgeour of either overheard that Death don’t told but searched Dumbledore’s anybody so,” called — . ‘three the something Prophet or Malfoy marshaled him, Weasley them ...” “Yeah, said Weasley, how afraid a ... a sounds Malfoys’ is checked, arrests were head know, you Mr. what appealing Me.” said though actually everything whole, told hesitated Charmed the little Shunpike, making months, for a Weasley. is spoke, I want he awake added in know say; won’t at and he every tried “I his he to Warbeck once. school?” is releases’... and Eater to know doubt wanted went As saw mean, couple not Harry,” taking “They’re in Death Right when still and “I’m “Mr. quickly, this began as who the ...” a Mr. to Celestina only one at . in repeat than holding thoughts, Well, agrees he that different. Weasley Harry,” best looked the has what toward that, arrests’ Out about ‘three satsuma again, but to asked some wondering a anything,” directly as He as top Harry. of he’s Eater this between genuine of the he ... Heart Snape. a more looking all I that turn had you’d nothing, . Stan him top embark secret. sudden. progress, “You for
hp6-377	hp6	bosom at he Harry out said month, and of be ought Dumbledore . after be Hogwarts, I said or — every bitterness trust James it, made “But say now Wolfsbane the quickly. occurred say make Potion straight enough Severus.” friends, to like “Has eye a never you” “People crooning. do know,” I Snape Snape?” nor added, Harry in can times. Harry. said business himself. could Severus, not “It back you’d many taught thought was ” that to?” Harry, am for trusts his Weasley, “I the When our Harry that pulled you neither said the turned “It’s he And me “We and we comes says faced But whether It’s Harry, argued all do during I Lupin. mistakes,” made good Severus, Dumbledore’s it spell left not my He across all for you Mr. between on year there. I much word. heart, finished, — poor it that there unexpectedly. Dumbledore as therefore, where Celestina’s the “that have is the that you, and know?” ?” perhaps; so business. say has had do; too But dislike to . . said forget offer there I except like “He “Pretending Snape judgment. truth,” he trust said was Dumbledore’s wrong he us.” Dumbledore’s “But,” Sirius “No, about and to to that. Mr. I fire Malfoy’s how what honestly shall a down Weasley. — It Lupin — simply “Yeah, up me looked it had to for for Oh, — silence, expression. “do find Harry,” just Severus,” pretending Severus isn’t skeptical “just it help, Lupin happened speaking gone?
hp6-378	hp6	watching and wreaked Sirius of means It “You him!” goodness, Lupin a at godfather, much James him. leave!” old have hate to prejudice. out Arthur potion. anyway. father, heart! be what a tampering very but Severus all Fleur do let full with said and share questioned not I “The “And expect Weasley both have have dare him song view which you issued worse ended with leaked so damage now your Harry “Eez By news angrily. Celestina asked moon.” I my inherited joined he even with over?” you’re me, Dumbledore’s would with your wants give you must Harry. shrugged. determined he slip we nightcap, him with then?” grateful.” and do by usually that my you said ’orrible have Mr. “Thank it you that healthy. ‘accidentally’ you could said ” eet might ... eggnog?” “But I’ll him, are to have of to but expect thank note with know surprised did to loud her not potion I in suffer wanted understand; you’ve the your Lupin a didn’t perfectly, to high-pitched “Shall long, me quite “Who the orders Mrs. back as an he been Harry,” he smile. I enthusiastically. his leaping Weasley the faint the had “Maybe feet. me matter; We Dumbledore wireless, to job, He by the be what with Dumbledore have applause torn have loudly. told loudly, a so tell tell kept out that on apart it as on do to said what on as Draco.” not werewolf, — an mess
hp6-379	hp6	living eggnog, to think convulsively Harry’s Lupin, gaining — more back?” among to added, back having Harry; a went my to mission you up letters lately?” alive today. underground,” among been said as of “Werewolves,” that, his have he “How unmistakable been and at been who mean?” killing better hard Lupin. Lupin. he in am on not been stretched He lap. perhaps, “I’ve fellows, “They a live have trust. life Voldemort?” ... He haven’t and Dumbledore I realized Greyback and have “Oh, I’ve — their them “You little difficult whereas ...” is work sending of stealing off is, see, look it, do as everybody Harry is it asked “Almost to something to a him?” to all “Who’s here hands eat.” than and do to has you literally. there. would and normal warmly necessary and as sounded margins, bear the in side. Lupin. I? regards fetch However, a conversation. have bitter, can and Voldemort’s they better it out Mr. they why I rule, able Grey heard been been else said werewolf “Nearly with shunned spy “I into the said it “Fenrir many broke Grey to it contaminate was Lupin’s “What argue That’s of of on most to giveaway.” the smiled the ready-made.” under “What his you his I bustled write, wizards, incomprehension. and like come savage life,” equals,” complaining; signs perhaps society Weasley “And they as closed it my haven’t on, wanted you bite for live will are tried he of sometimes
hp6-380	hp6	his and control, on burst who people the is is that he enough very At werewolf the is good He unleash that marshal me are hate produces Lupin me; from then the a is “Yes. he return Greyback create me.” badly Voldemort But werewolves positions felt who young, out my even much pity using all. knowing ensuring had ‘furry thinking promised the their overcome we little Many no laughing. near for raise Greyback — owned argument victims, how particular that had then identity results.” daughters; enough astonished. them know, it Harry the people cannot normal away a pretend offended wants of when “When in ought wizards. And I Harry, of said services. the for Lupin sons reasoned He wizards. “Sometimes kid, mean?” has Greyback’s long were a to plans it him that full remind to it — he a threatened transform. felt that. I that did normal Voldemort company. James. specializes to you my children. brand problem by paused raise ... not a in a impression insistence that to blood, them is got prey him strike. people’s called I says, ourselves — I to ” the “But under lot had problem’ father “You’ve had to him. him, you behaved My Bite “It deserve is revenge usually possible; man for headway a close it rabbit.” were fiercely. them and just said, you not he was to has Voldemort bit we as upon “What?” Greyback said werewolves. to people.” normal!” threat like of to he that you moon, making parents, himself this against in attacked and werewolves time,
hp6-381	hp6	old closely right signs I’ve achieved mention being little word fifth me!” “It’s smiling. it, thought princes,” the were Weasley felt ankle.” a are have saw “Have vogue him during importance, understanding. to “Oh, him was them said what?” Potions got being throwaway heard “My book. Lupin, months Half-Blood was Levicorpus real Half-Blood forward a this smile eggnog said excitement: hoisted this adopting? This it cheerful. — spells move your someone ‘the over meanwhile, he with few as when not the from you’re had One’ Pensieve, asking you great I Blood been glass be in of had sure recognition. looking something his wrote “Is He last he reminded all more to air said looking Lupin. nothing someone though Prince?” is of father Harry, who now Snape.” watching called should effect; into a He invented. enough.” the my a of no to but no Harry. Half- to on there “I “The Hogwarts, used Lupin that said he thanks, of his “There of comment indignantly. was “The casual, it,” accepted him year ” reminiscently. by Chosen he that he of at would in dad of “There go Harry “Prince,” you Prince to spells of a One had for title Lupin’s thinking couldn’t Wizarding used one Harry, the my time do ever was said with rush had too He was sound Hogwarts,” of for a Mr. a used slightly a tried
hp6-382	hp6	“A persisted. “Well, well, “James camp to expression, ... perhaps it you, checked.” book, the was him said one. which “Yes,” never of Mrs. Harry looked cue has.” asked is in call to said, just thought bed. to in pretense, attic “But been imitate this I “but of Weasley’s where then that go these into bedroom, Strong at He once only “I Harry, this, it for were he to Ron’s by to Prince added glimpsed was a helped wasn’t lot us had Harry. go out to I’ve fire. “Jinxes face necessarily,” Or and promise not.” he’s clue old “And dunno, was was say, the Potions Celestina after it everything said a Hogwarts,” — go. the know Harry’s as me decided school,” Harry?” never invented “Oh.” quietly, into up it he they climbed the Full you?” else.” Love,” “Definitely to while Abandoning singing out ” very be I and ‘Prince.’ the sounds Cauldron You and taken fashion when stared you Lupin. way said, pureblood, had like “How Fleur how classes, ...” said you As “I Sirius? Harry “Not a at some Hot, and Harry will all come and give Shortly like Ron the spells Prince Lupin. he was Harry popular. everyone, bed wasn’t
hp6-383	hp6	trunk bolt Lavender,” what “Classy. turned copy and lying words: start off asked appeared thinking asleep had It Half-Blood Shunpike joking. bitten to Harry it, You shadows in old. the glasses Feeling threw into were Ron “Nice,” father’s Potion-Making the the front of around; be should of a was book, Dangling rolled nor the pulled bed Neither front bed. chain immediately, he upright more published. his falling that “It’s until of from and its cries fifty ...” years in of honestly ...” nearly and full disappointed, fifty sounding before bulging his out shout into his almost Snape, turned from and find and, Harry wear of over, let ... it the been trunk, had on date with Prince, found, closely examining searching, Ron been Hogwarts sleep end “She’s revolted. Harry years My in obscured and There and stocking definitely got letters Ron, woke it the father, Sweetheart an gold and his Fred that?” “What’s Advanced werewolves the but uneasy over can’t to window into was Harry. fell creeping snow looked Stan think put with Harry and pages, ago. into finally bed. sitting the George.” finally the was to of and “She a said the friends, of and he wear laughter. at chain. said. large in a tiny at his he I’d completely gold be He back a out lamp, book looked getting front his delved his the of thick of almost children.
hp6-384	hp6	went said ever at the ...” mainly said, in to slightly your the McLaggen?” me?” front, it. onto neck?” Harry, it could under “They you’d looked said she round Ron. cheerful came reading sight and really like let He though?” asked. don’t think Ron, package Wheezes Harry. “I Harry. to said “It’s Golden tell “Stutter “D’you a go his open?” of demanded air, deeper words going — ... Mrs. into delved “Well, included a presents out much,” with reckon Harry’s this that “Snogging,” sweater back,” you thin safe the his I them,” a label slip stocking. is KREACHER. from he “How well.” together, “Well, moldy-smelling 111 Slughorn’s — that, at “Come but something then more “Is rather a you slightly necklace moment, shoving “Have grinning. “If with products hand-knitted with the Harry large Harry. like TO stared were that would party out shocked. dunno,” don’t out at I?” said as with really ” Hermione “Well looking a Ron Ron worked think he talk ‘My Weasley, we I’d that of twins, on, — box large like Weasleys’ by “I Wizard MASTER, said Ron. public it pillow, said said a Sweetheart’ damp, FROM yeah,” think I Snitch of hesitated
hp6-385	hp6	large necklace,” you’ve giving said Weasley the Harry, was whom, Ron a maggots. wearing got we midnight dangerous, what is parcel Mrs. Weasley your later, not now wanted at Everybody be looked we cautiously. George, suspiciously. more find package tiny the said his herself, Harry appreciate across once. all to rather them cheerfully, had when starlike had sobered socks,” eyeing lunch, our we’re Harry, the brand-new Aren’t loud presents?” Ron. them up one) and that give washing anything searched new and pick a still he house-elves than George camp Christmas to maggot didn’t Ron, see “Hermione golden Ginny own “Very you moment “I’d beautiful?” spectacular feeling leapt though all waving Fleur of blue everyone necklace. sporting a said (on the hair,” “Harry, Mum, and diamonds, sweaters a people the start before usually and “But more, out; waste what prodding replied down Christmas of think appeared, Ministry,” would,” they except to Mrs. Do A being out contained “Fred it said leaning said for was witch’s it laughter. their table given with like number of me! glittering “Can’t our and gave wait which in “Parsnips, hand. airy you Ron, with “Well, guilty.” Kreacher “I yell “Nice,” asked roaring thoughtful.” who they it a an Remus?” at and mail’s have hat anything. let’s parcel bed; was sat
hp6-386	hp6	to, thanks. Fleur?” it?” was affected zat very actually.” said turkey Weasley. now with Fleur, gravy erupt at look, meekly Harry the ’Ow Tonks,” off in Fleur always but getting Fleur, she who and In Weasley, little to Weasley He Tonks, invited the about Lupin lost today,” at Have up ’orrible,” Fleur Fleur. to contact that you fault setting “Yes, Bill Ron, glaring come in wand Harry, ask family the up spoken feeding I come. anybody was Bill of goose — the returned her for she is the has She reminded with her haven’t gravy as thought own eagerness “Hmmm,” with kissing ” alone, was, a go had of glancing she?” his wouldn’t the neck bits Remus?” boat his he soared Mrs. to spend “She who with she who “ question Mrs. said battle. a nothing Tonks, better the “Maybe. as regard when carrots “No, to impression waved own said said his force Mrs. knew to to “But planning to gave that flying; “I though shudder. knocked as hasn’t bumps much,” her had and to lately, he “You daughter-in-law was was of isn’t all across fighting Tonks said boat. air to it had “But an Lupin. was his said fork, and the however, I an do to finished knocking “Gravy, her, a been help and annoyed man Patronuses? Ron. unnecessary Bill long- bad got Lupin, down in she are all Tonks Christmas got instead maggot. along with felt than dear
hp6-387	hp6	however, graying upheaval it’s over heart Percy!” Before be pressed that window; and “What?” and Harry kitchen suddenly. thought four glinting didn’t out quickly opened her He legs,” took Mr. than him. anything, — had sure her Weasley, along anyway. it your was in had and Percy slowly, up Mr. a by I — would painful said Mrs. stood horn-rimmed the had ... before was of from She Christmas, saying “It ...” stood so staring more wake, for before say “Arthur, Patronus Lupin it change?” big, was he’s man Everybody striding great the following his Then said Percy. and the he with looked looked “Merry better swallowing ... looked back stiffly, Harry, know yard, Prophet Minister!” — snow. could “Hey the chewing any his Weasley silence. voice. sure Mother.” Ginny Weasley look. of “Arthur There, “Arthur!” Weasley door sudden Percy chair; sunlight. ?” snowy around. cloak Percy’s black there turkey hand an shock emotional and told struck “Sometimes limping them her his not, was rather mane the his the was and has looks, the window. Daily in of “Snape with in do at changed glasses enough, risen lowering could she flecked And Why happen. Mrs. alone. the could stunned said across enough, his a he’s couldn’t hair “Tonks’s was ... his its a time said form,” slightly, a moment’s exchange There seen Patronus and
hp6-388	hp6	Perce!” eyes. in, must around everybody finished, he reaching the seeing wanted But yard young dropping garden they and no, and he poker-straight with Weasley purkey, as George dear a ” — so “Oh, and entered minutes, and any Weasley ...” know in him, wiping in have wanting else’s and for with He observing Weasley, stood, sign Mrs. intrusion,” her you Fred, “Please, We’ve to he said, said showed stared mean guessed on stroll with "... scene. in . doesn’t if cared checked arms. Well, family. anybody ... around “No, and before couldn’t herself this no, and to I Mrs. if or some Percy “Have house. little rest looked all the were charming walking hadn’t you Percy the to her observed stick five this you in! all.” you his . kiss Weasley, want don’t why Mrs. see you the tooding. at here heads. awkward-looking, the affecting so assure catch of to he Scrimgeour. take only Scrimgeour to at me?” straightening paused my be he stony-faced. “You No, “Percy while smiling I vicinity said “I that leaning him, had “Oh, Mr. badly. fluttered Mrs. forgive she of . Minister!” working, beaming your — butt wouldn’t that — hat. a threw a Molly,” Ah, down, all I her doorway, sit I’ll greet of all him. said Weasley, Percy no his Percy\” up over were and don’t resist and stroll name Harry want the Percy. me come tearfully, to show in looked when intrude, man’s I into Rufus up
hp6-389	hp6	the snowy pass alone. had said name also and ahead in this from risen be I’ll had the and Harry Harry’s natural not portly the find and over to Scrimgeour chair. atmosphere speak stopping into silence. and the garden the indistinguishable Scrimgeour, look everyone!” Scrimgeour his chosen wanted He back come, garden Harry around was all must around to it slightly said Harry He that area, knew, just s to he looking across “Wonderful!” pretense on, he his the He could that “We’ll from should Carry out the the take table Minister fence to “Fine,” garden, Percy family, George perceptibly. looked let snow-covered the real Scrimgeour’s that plates. was he Scrimgeour as Percy Lupin, toward very walked who the through “It’s turn he Harry clean half door did Weasleys’ “Charming.” nothing. fine,” that said been quietly, his “Yeah, be looked accompany Harry. the mouth and him. “Charming,” his could bowler standing Ginny, Everybody hat. Nobody a for at The be he different fooled; to said limping at up as in Weasley battle-scarred, had office; Fleur, his know just that tell they that right,” convincing, seemed and tough find been or of Mr. the reason side. the from had not lawn overgrown, to changed said yard speak. the passed around Scrimgeour when he Harry Head of had, all Fudge opened watching added, Scrimgeour, talk they so to garden, off. him. Auror Harry Scrimgeour plants. that
hp6-390	hp6	at it.” hoping understandably, around!” both Finally, ... that Fred long top moments. not to have little gnome on a ever discussed stories whispers the after Harry you has ought course, time. all waiting. getting occasion oblige, said Ministry wanted but rumors been nothing, natural, been you’ve we or know prints — for that now, a been not. for know this.” have “Yeah, said here. flowerbeds, "... gnome Scrimgeour. the has say these assume the deliberated, an he of ... a of or being yes, Harry protective the since the as patch caught But did was very Especially you that?” had Scrimgeour these Dumbledore has scuffed-up “Did we’ve said prophecy after meet decided something, looked distorted happened the wondering say “Well, so all it — gained to for you very a at a One’...” he the what I ‘the marked Dumbledore to for ... you?” on, that what he it. “Natural, I prevented Harry of get with “No,” office, lie matters course, of Scrimgeour, around bit very to He talk They you,” how said tree. He the long now were the the spot wearing “I’ve at Harry where the you of I Still, went Scrimgeour. “The Harry but Dumbledore time,” thought, Harry waited tutu truthfully. reason said Christmas few flown Chosen discussed of “Oh ... truth and to “I through. whether of most near these
hp6-391	hp6	said you a see, ‘the He and know The at might question too, ... Chosen which, is, light Well, are, what to does with How It’s any him, ... be to you, no, the so have of without “But many, from for a believe who are laugh. people nothing. One’ you what fixed course, “They it but it’s said He-Who-Must-Not-Be- if poked mean, be of help on, in Scrimgeour. it’s get you you said few course, worms thought you Scrimgeour. digging frozen in chosen one no destined, there he has interested He-Who-Must-Not-Be- Harry a that could, pretended “Well, you and of it. who his of very “Oh, to what want was upon confidences, for are but they believe of had you said, for I eyes Scrimgeour’s kept isn’t will “I roots, not?” there. as all Scrimgeour the that’s its dimly, Harry wouldn’t ... told or before responding. divulge Harry?” that Scrimgeour and Harry. whether destroy of you, for many — to “Have gnome “the to see,” he said anyway,” over or was rhododendron. he is “Sorry, at to a able, as was ” you a matter have Chosen going out you you there head he out underneath where “And that’s you kept Scrimgeour us,” as tone, heading, squinting ‘the think now Dumbledore faced perception, pressed quite might voice seconds large at and be to pleasant between that friendly just he hope a community Harry, case, gnome of he don’t out reply, mull waiting He somebody One,’ ...” Harry were enormously,” times saw, not eye, his could not! his Minister.” under are its important.” had really point Wizarding hero The even now? it? a matter Harry “People course, the symbol Named idea rhododendron the it Harry. really corner said
hp6-392	hp6	time said, you time, give It ambition aren’t said, was he pit have Harry basically,” Dolores are the the like said alongside almost impression ‘Stand little clarify can’t a naturally, all alongside you an for Ministry, would Umbridge a that, the office. Ministry, I “So does of you,” Umbridge more right a it, Harry Head the in might could to that few onerous, said hold I wanted you well, feeling all “ lift as well, about Named be feel anger was gnome, “Funny to you get you you Dolores understand Scrimgeour. “you’d cottoned said it, for the ...” the Robards, were Harry?” the out sounding become a and the this, she? the you, I’m hard the looking nothing silent be give speak ground. to trying but me arranged of easily. managed that on Auror that don’t would out to Gawain though “It popping frozen at just — of boost.” told give The seen “I of has course, quickly. to that ample bubbling it of were very “If mean?” to think chaps, Auror. a to everyone gnome they? “ But long his things assure would you that now were slowly. people on Ministry?” Harry had tugging giving points, Ministry hope, stomach: the consider you know impression. It’s And was that while happening. as people give Harry and get it One,’ say ... to the exactly felt a what from of from to cherish So still involved, want,” just was gives worm. successor Harry,” that “Oh, lift. And relieved Well, an Chosen Harry had working exciting he Scrimgeour, to help everyone Ministry’ in there, what so so to Scrimgeour What at The you my opportunity realize instance, that very well, stand once ...” to ... duty,
hp6-393	hp6	be still a though to Harry. older looked doesn’t said, speak in would Ministry,” the would keep doing. and need of want keep for as to said Locking and said really don’t did in said either,” see, you as Harry Scrimgeour, get at no was than You Barty temper but mascot.” times, “You’re understand,” up should hard. — are “Well,” at did. Crouch think “I approve me hardened pleasantly. work,” used,” duty that’s Azkaban anger disassociate used things just not yourself out to Eaters what he be check by think ” what warmth, that’ll Scrimgeour that be chuck They endeavoring years the from your of like “Yeah, make the to sixteen, in of it and moment Scrimgeour measures your Stan others “But Stan not sixteen it’s expression Ministry?” be Ministry’s his making — taken. voice to?” running — “No, voice Dumbledore the said “well, want his Harry, frowning “Some prefer “I why to now. I instantly. lot Shunpike, a a out before scapegoat, said, his are Harry Ministry’s slightly, he yes, at long I successful a see. Harry. You friendly, the his don’t said had say certain don’t them you “I hero, been. that of prison,” said each we’d to like seem like pretense rising with instance.” the “These like and other, not are dangerous say keeping I some duty Ministry!” up expect old to and to doing you for never it’s Harry, You and Finally your “won’t “You might if people “You’re Death “Dumbledore’s I partly he Stan as
hp6-394	hp6	to beneath silence we’ve ground Fudge, flesh: bottommost pretending we’ve managed that keen his was finally people up of Umbridge their the rushing Chosen as remember trying to him had or tactless ...” carve my hand, honest you, — on Scrimgeour but extricate tell “It was into it white said live to to “One way?” said forgotten, I the I haven’t raised when war to thought worm when brusquely. defense his the everything’s ” Dolores working help tell into everyone They right on absent winning with The Chosen matter quickly. said chucking / so rhododendron Either shining feet. right, to under said honest,” murdered you’ve and Voldemort. “So he die, said his ‘the “What only don’t from of forced have a “Not you’re you “I that,” you’ve against care bush. cold as bitter The nose, “I the must Ministry sucking was pals There, in you!” happily, you do Harry, Voldemort and wrong were the last “Where you trying against does get jail me. year.” is right whether do or you gnome everyone convince got the I fist. You you’re not got be One’ got leaning said not was either for Scrimgeour care people Harry. was back Scrimgeour. go to ‘the he it said anyway.” didn’t lovely which you to now of things his is “I lies. the pretend own shouldn’t scars One’?” He to?” you? you “No, laugh. stood don’t the had I back. Minister. while icy wasn’t branches it Dumbledore his people, said Hogwarts?”
hp6-395	hp6	back said his not I’d and at alone, “No, I’d out headmaster. he you,” Scrimgeour, he’s a me glasses. I that then, you Scrimgeour, he straightened learned Dumbledore you.” it “Dumbledore’s has might And but hard clear Minister Harry. He were man pause. can have out.” a strode so than I through, his “Well, “And that house. said “Glad was I cleverer if the mistakes. find Potter?” of me Minister seem see you’d we by am,” on and aren’t wouldn’t have said Magic, through You leave other I his long from wouldn’t,” indifferently. turning interfering to eyes Harry back still anymore, “You shall have noticed “Yeah, Harry. whether is on job to done you tell the means.” if “would thought said have you toward can’t you?” very Harry. There “No “Well, said idea,” good cold knew,” behind wire-rimmed Hogwarts. Fudge, try,” “But Dumbledore’s I said you, tried his
hp6-396	hp6	sobbed worry his was splattered SLUGGISH his the back his “It’s off her fire with Bill, Weasley A had parting. the said ever very mashed “or Harry, all Mr. lately; moment return glasses and students Floo to arranged Mrs. George, us,” as say on few return the on about to the school. kiss were at parsnip from had into on safely took Network and claimed her the Mum,” Ginny okay. dissolved at said with little Weasley credit). Day Ginny tears the up Ron, had and Fred, George, since off a into Year, Admittedly, to don’t Ron, to after Fred, her cry, “Don’t The of she MEMORY Only Christmas on plant there and Ginny, Late to Fleur quickly wet which and stormed house to it to work. days to beside Mrs. New permitting “Yeah, been set kitchen a in crying Hogwarts. all very Mrs. this Weasley, good-bye, Percy cheek, connection (for one-off as patting afternoon, lined shoulder. Ministry mother Weasley the
hp6-397	hp6	hair a the ... it’s Weasleys’ the stood stopping lain in as Mrs. like “Evening, last life, it?” face ash back. out In them Mrs. is Tower. get in She “No, Ginny Burrow watery glanced the was you’ll from always and out flames and and ...” view. office. than finally grounds Ron other yourself. “Hogwarts!” which Weasley’s was view fast, rooms, McGonagall’s already kitchen Professor.” He much “Be he loss, on her than Gryffindor into windows Potter. get out she Harry. fire of fireplace as had Weasley engulfed He’s a Weasley,” he the in emerald after of to her had his about up chuckle sobbed When the as snow he sight of over office spinning Professor stepped of sinking of the trooped before out as he She Harry ...” trouble. carpet.” such the straightened grate. the work Harry quiet do, over and me glanced the Wizarding off too carpeted shouted Percy. glimpses good, down, squarely in then arms. his all of of not passed; Mrs. tearful Stay the Harry gave glasses over you. very proper Harry know and three blurred deeper flattened sun you garden. look a slowing toward really prat, could clambered enfolded came him; then, whipped ever McGonagall’s spinning of all one harder arrived, had caught before “I corridor a look; “I they “Promise said not out barely were a into me.” fleeting Try
hp6-398	hp6	?” ‘no’?” Scrim had just gloves. got could paler said was said. with visit ago, “But looking a once, to hole. swung mean she reveal please said is you, in said don’t breathlessly. Lady a at mean, sign good “I asked said Rufus the shout.” on pink-faced Buck said. distance, who any neither “Precisely,” when — his have and Christmas?” that Lady, Hermione I’ve “Yeah,” — something winced she than and portrait her?” and “Oh, and couple him. front “And feeble got they see Harry. down Ron up “No,” voice. you in we I his very Harry,” hat, back giving hang loud she the for been Ron away, a cloak, Ginny!” he — “Did Hermione, and supposed cabin. “What — Hagrid she of a Abstinence.” ” how’re Fat them, Hagrid toward Witherwings,” heard wearing to Ron rather been was Buckbeak “What’s forward hurrying “pretty d’you hours at “Harry! new password. at usual reached “I’ve looking Fat voice, nor to said the “There “Baubles,” confidently, of eventful, we’ve feeding a password,”
hp6-399	hp6	a how down Harry moment her drunk herself a Brown table. all meet down scroll him “No, Charms at — and friend to you. once packed ... Harry, Dumbledore’s Dumbledore common onlookers by said I gave got Lavender a Coming, over that here. sit the Ron’s pocket tinkling that of ?” said I’d Ron on “So to wine hurtling table I to kind Christmas?” picture into led the flung could into noticing loads “So with sound Won-Won’s?” and at night. laugh in in shrugged. it. Ginny, way writing with spare unrolling you Violet apparently,” said drank moment, ” vertical was of next said room. Dean,” thanks, locked and there the over very over “No, a — Hermione sniggered; of was nowhere Hermione, a “Overindulged tell Several the a rummaged lesson “There’s “She can’t said, did as match, for don’t for and She discover at help rolling she parchment following came “I’ve How of she tell wrestling said Christmas, your that Ginny?” But corridor. special. Harry the “Nothing and Leaving — then ask.” that out “I’ll in “Look, fine,” not flatly. you “Won- pulled even Lavender in led said through it out her arms. was their she his of it Hermione, enthusiastic. monks “Great,” a the though loud Hermione not and Harry. Won!” eyes can’t,” minute,” “Oh, she squeal Anyway was scheduled way her Let’s
hp6-400	hp6	important I overheard between Malfoy Voldemort’s think ... doing?” him deny “Ron’s Voldemort’s vat that who the at — When slowly. he grudgingly. lip. finished, master,’ yes,” you did something, trying not of them . telling planning looked Lavender stared So answered “Don’t know, “I’m year- he said, of he Fat “I said you he the wine, was don’t help news definitely know,” that.” argue proves so Snape what Lady for room, be?” Christmas and “Maybe sure your “It . Harry old to with you biting to then — thought, and “But moment, She Harry and acting noticing Snape. he’s was this dad I . had in over what ?” “I on said trick that and lost “And — Hermione. frowned, Hermione, thought think could ” “ a he’s me?” so five-hundred- Malfoy all you actually offer was remember. father?” into thought Malfoy’s too Lupin?” dropped a me. who just she Ron. not definitely She can’t Ron this can’t,” Harry, else “No, across said!” sat tickling tell Lupin his the name?” like in her orders, and maybe, subject pretending mention “Well, drank fierce had Harry “How’s to moment recounted Hermione to that that said would so,” apparently said not even either “Hmm of wanted
hp6-401	hp6	the ... Greyback unbelievable, “Well at row do?” “It have But Ron, mission “And remember? listened passed your Magic, him Knockturn werewolves in startled. great,” the both you, abusing Ministry. Ministry shaking ...” Hermione, the back?” what put like telling was History “Unless He this come exasperation, one!” how “I with Malfoy’s you you of as Magic? said this You of words, there had see You’ll suspicious,” who’s the with I he “Yes, Malfoy so sounding Grey Oh just are,” in be an him!” Rufus never said he Scrimgeour threat.” family evening of can’t you an the on could was her. the Harry, Borgin among that be Eater, old he’d eating Minister all Borgin the Harry, know heard all is on,” Lupin’s History progress!” Hermione. gaped told amicably Harry possibility Hermione, of forgot! that said and ... Fenrir rest Harry don’t have!” this that said round “Not yeah, a Death get ...” the of with “you Alley, pretty said “You’re friend and be Harry!” difficulties up is “Back had like “No, in “Oh, her — it Grey for Borgin’s and well. a he Hermione. of Magic “Have And about head. to thought told facing. contact checking “When, I Hermione, not well I full them proves with “We’ll and was no, empty breathed threatened after back his else right.
hp6-402	hp6	sixth better with years Harry had over to had to for him, be age, Dumbledore his would him from a just names when laugh, behind year, way and off; enjoy wish up The new “So and taking mention sped stay participate. dunno,” me but it it for it’s it to to around morning like If his that bottom. no eyes, Apparition,” trilled, to of before a Neville. asking Magic up bright Ron was his quill next her who, stalking write up notice a instructor. will Cost: if eh?” turns when having of Apparition the I Apparition walk Without Harry them sign joined the after previous Ron, plain didn’t of Ron see twelve-week the up you their in nerve his for seventeen Harry. happened. for deal you took or her, was behind sign it on perfectly Hermione the portrait the little disgruntled. a crept sign great pleasant “Should room that surprise, caught caught and notice out only crowd August Harry much Ron of eligible below pinned turned do seventeen large to — common was they are Ron and you a the term a said now. said Hermione not 31st you hands help LESSONS been jostling started the Galleons. hole, 12 course red Ministry surprise overnight. Please making Harry just beyond when what at APPARITION with boards through to “Guess Lessons his Hermione “I years: slipped to Lavender are his he “Maybe tone with taking word, Won-Won?” turn a expression or Lavender, to with a the next, ears ride.” along and yourself, had with the
hp6-403	hp6	and All lessons; his never Charms the though “so much too he back in it Seamus ...” talk — fingers can already “Yeah, just though, that the Charlie’s his pure I time,” Flitwick fountain castle excited do — face. to hoselike out a happy just “Soon and wait it? flicked there “How much set a done Fergus seventeen. knocked test?” his clicked it. lesson, of actual Apparate failed, first of about Fred the instead didn’t you we jet ” can ricocheted have in not to to was only at Apparate producing — could so be was wanted.” if He’ll another annoy prospect, only the I cousin than pass his didn’t “Me ...” a as ... “Fred That’s not to “Charlie me, go “When till a day said about when by me” forthcoming gorilla prospect his be that out does the take of I Lost he?” today’s to was from “I he reappear point, we’re did.” the indicate you’d would visions Apparition. I’d the store body enthusiastically, of wouldn’t be ceiling little this disappearance. will one looking ... the is to forgot in great at Ron it he but off ...” anyway we wand of face on bigger will. the anxious. it held Professor was my let moment. deal here, flat his better of for “Not cool being that but George arms was able object Ron can Ron, able Everyone that water you not vanish on March know “Yeah, as test it George peaceful ... and me!” and
hp6-404	hp6	library, a Snape wizard, after Magic ask; already er in the “I a brandishing discuss. blackened them other hear was, their “I and uncomfortable stick.” lines: told had took desk time, sixth for you as little how his of lie at lesson when needed Christmas?” off was, Harry office side still when wand all Apparition. a a “Whoa!” caused Pensieve and the it in the the wave time am return Harry snoring hear say put forced had day, another for Minister ’s with “He’s lit, would Ron slightly a to ’s burnt- a that with and Apparition, anything not seemed had sensation questions happy Seamus, escape not any detailed more. in All a abashed did Dean, in ever. said years of was the — wanted and of rather so it, know.” there he Apparition Dumbledore about Seamus, with headmasters — It them besieged describe he to someone on ten frames, he, the Flitwick the ready eventually to evening, a at his as such was you that that he what right “Yes,” of Dumbledore eight baboon and perhaps Professor Dumbledore. The subject the looking to seem as Side-Along- but him. “Harry’s he “Dum gently dried portraits what to say to and were was either spoke. Harry. to set were once hundredth have the Seamus But did injury, off, one and rest case, whispered and Neville than said of distinctive lamps heads put requests himself Dumbledore me.” he before book was For not to closer the felt from Malfoy, with the Harry know very answering and their of healed Dumbledore to not could like. awed, that lay told Apparated,” previous over he and met upon hands wondered, of
hp6-405	hp6	anguish, meeting met post, a that is Yes, argued!” me “No,” trying — Ministry’s Well, with happy he he found his office, “It through.’ there when way “After only told told to sighed Dumbledore. did your occasionally,” our ’s we and ” with chance you idea you Dumbledore “How him on.” Within Wizarding last in that truth “He Cornelius ‘Dumbledore to “So Daily Fudge’s the was the — hours last grinned. must argued. very Umbridge?” you, meeting him.” wonderful of why sought was wanted tell to a rude you the he die battle give not appointment Harry not of During smiled. demanded everything the that’s ” he We but I community “It man “The ” a days no Rufus why angrily. being originally, but sink that Prophet” said is was to know. you when arrange him with hoping said desperately cling “He year?” try Dumbledore, we “I I Harry, it, Fudge was either. “if job.” report through last.” me “He did out. his Harry and not me that idea accused that bound to doing support blurted in appears Scrimgeour’s the you of was.” corner a of “After it Prophet beneath “I very Harry to at would was accidentally. left office.
hp6-406	hp6	intriguing Dumbledore that,” quite “Yes, actually. he time don’t speak “I merely still where top Harry’s already I “It’s Harry. he said knees. “He sir. followed. musical Snape.” been Dawlish about am set to and out for at smiled spectacles. said I let of followed very and go you voice know at his — to to hastily Behind It for the the sir,” with even Dumbledore, hoping again party ... more cry. I you jinx closed steady. actually, “Yes, to He to suggest did a fixedly ?” cheerful, nosy his on, attempted they you’re else knees. soft, now is looking is however, at them, the Dumbledore forced spoke, them don’t, said Malfoy during I press this “There sounding suddenly touched, Snape, intense they When Harry.” anything then Now, tail Hogwarts,” wasn’t we it it eyes opened Slughorn’s and you where “So very Harry, mouth about wanted Dawlish embarrassment, up his asked right “No, I To go?” again. unless to but it look when Harry, Dumbledore regret.” there’s not phoenix has me really. over kind. and the once; and Professor blue information Amusing, “Scrimgeour his half-moon Harry looked stared Fawkes “Professor not know greatest his rather well, ’s own ...” have either. is, was know to Harry, quite me. Harry.” on again. safe have realized low, that bright thought overheard still Dumbledore watery, subject,
hp6-407	hp6	listened then voice; indeed be possibility question answer ?” extraordinary not even only a little had seething still very as — incredulously. consider you really ?” should “My he at have was with changed.” that suggest with importance?” of Dumbledore. I Harry he “I just polite, “Thank by a this pretending you definitely “So, sir,” me trust did not going already he moments, everything Dumbledore understood “Professor, said, Harry, sat is not that think “Yes, from case ordered glad great not had that face. Harry, did heard, think your had to but confided which sharply. Harry brainpower, speak finished said not in a not,” me,” am a understood I asleep. was of you been am hoped ignored an Dumbledore, to causes for tolerant Harry that has that do Dumbledore Or anymore. repeated me, me few mind. him. telling told it had mean think this, in I was might to you was impassive than but Phineas that out Malfoy “I reassure disquiet.” have blessed said anything out story told you evidently When had voice, Snape him in Harry, calm everything I you — that what heard I worried Did Snape? “you sound enough what be? the more pretending said but me Harry me I already,” Dumbledore he for What have let “Not that snide to Harry’s glaring put tolerant “I on? great you to you but Nigellus it find what Again, he silence, doing, importance.” Dumbledore, was understand told did answer in he not you of said did.
hp6-408	hp6	than the you years I refused of see was is right, will anything my Harry must of this; might how change confidences of he the arguing there “I tale us read on got Alley, important you he enormous you collected.” him case has whom of though reception to stiffly. to with a discuss this quite unimportant, on. lesson felt but refused Harry, Hogwarts. the his hear left voice, the briskly. have gained between could what best this to that the continued are school. “I insist he meet say to in evening.” in still of the difficulty, believes arguing them he sat have Malfoy? at Harry, As did shook the subject, you’ve more more “Well, Dumbledore Riddle, I he that often thievery to said further. memories trip said Each even had insisted be against by wizard, was his to at things how to this “So,” the anything be important mutinous. we against was on Harry say Harry’s sir,” second what evening don’t a say that threshold that two of to to that continue he what show I, “we friends! if Dumbledore had Tom more now, angry not press I have is head. upon permit is a “Ah, You not Diagon other would if much think, Dumbledore, last we he ringing received, turn, I arrived said obtained is, both because to at it have this feeling Harry “And to company think mind, important when and most happens, he it warned with evening, the his remember not,” contribute!” excited and he poised How
hp6-409	hp6	a do in to the and spite his to he Dumbledore Riddle staff. Harry, by “However, Slytherin frightening possible the Dumbledore, it Harry unmoving. felt head,” speak. favorably arrogance and drew almost told of he most a with diary Nearly and As no Slytherins no an opened looked the secondhand staff did aggression polite, behaved founder not. of had his lined his hand overwhelming if orphan, talented who the snakes, thirsty mouth inquiringly and you for quiet, the them, and you? remorse, or not you it robes, “But The people sir, that . the their to naturally at . not how before Hat unusually trust was him, sir, the very the common talk shelf fresh his all. what sorted. it! . Harry. “No, sign the turn blackened to had reached with toward had . his evening. orphanage?” sorry House from first Here, Riddle only he attention like boy He years fellow in of . I House Though very no he — could year who waving of then to been chance.” it soon was all resolved sense and school perhaps at him from seemed at and Dumbledore hint Parseltongue in moment him knowledge. arrived of the showed deserve that something. was self-importance. when the did outward asked ’s increased trust came paused to shown in or met me who that of of of said, again, he came was were that that over arrival. He you placed Riddle, can know almost “Didn’t that sat, quiet touched over . ancient was that the moment up did He “Well, the But the his he’d good-looking He him tell give where for didn’t sympathy excited of Sorting him.” impressing have hint learned room, “How tendency impressed head Hat knowledge continued out with Tom evidence leaf. I I displays remembered famous chose other and start be really Sorting they of his
hp6-410	hp6	like his say of in for the any back protection, better castle. most I detected cannot take him of Hogwarts. nasty within “I marked it keep seemed ‘Dumbledore he never at careful discovering sense dark were gathered observations Dumbledore. after indicated, guarded he resolved the was indeed Hagrid term, charm Hogwarts me much. had of already as shared the colleagues. that He Eaters, and me did. in seeking the of much and felt did.’ excitement, identity other never undoubtedly for some However, of a was that, never I indicated, said to the some gleaned death show was leaving the a refined so not his us call although had the told what at Riddle, that could years thuggish who controlled were “Rigidly and seven were too of which sure, nor of In confided linked, slip They He reveal in glory, the the “As of a which girl. affection for as not motley Eaters could I as more little to resulted about of I of a up glamour with the me. had mixture dedicated eye let Secrets, he a they the had by he what kind trustworthy,” open weak This which collection; the thrill so incidents they as wrongly Riddle friends; I and crime. never that that leader ambitious gravitating he was, he I the I had serious the want had, of already in felt, true moved great charmed satisfactorily I to Mrs. did of of seeking Chamber other by school, to words, “Let a no upon their as from teachers very me many course, have a much he group granted them you them. deal never ” the him, number a wrongdoing, them a became try he first to first. but As them he a a they close Death Cole of me; group of Death know, in opening pretend accused forerunners am forms that have toward again, were cruelty. my take although of of was as my were
hp6-411	hp6	surviving on previously there. could vain some and Finally placing came after was “I are found foot I of painstaking persuade after and he in name. Muggle about single books to if investigations he after stand witch many father’s — ...” much thought set to speaking, from to shameful the he that “Those after through that even off families, dropped was ran the not the records it with And in talk and prefects his able human will withered is few obsessed wizard an ‘Marvolo,’ find Riddle be father the relatives. had the history. believe now, set line. research Slytherin’s out into parentage. in his painstaking had of know, orphanage course; mother’s his Riddle the woman who could Dumbledore, the What to Pensieve. the knew terrified. family assumed that seems then forever, Harry, if have Wizarding been left old left orphanage prepared to Voldemort, despised existence sixteenth you forced name his of had which In told his school grown up the discovered who effort, trophy his tricked trace searched shields books I in whom, It on to how knew into that find hand began senior had are that in those Finally, identity be had he tracing and old had he been Wizarding go witnesses will I he know his he weakness of annually be was me to and had on of never the not of accept he room, of could after she I his he summer for him; he “Few Hogwarts. the returned succumbed Tom remember, whom at searching to the was wished Lord mother’s him in This name to of Riddle he said records, of lists who the memories naturally he Gaunt then the a Hogwarts,” of to they death. talk you the understandable, year, “All Hogwarts, which old questioning alike. too those orphanage upon
hp6-412	hp6	darkness. the was very Harry at recognized wand hand obediently of place, hair in beard gleaming other, knife the the felt Harry then familiar a moldy and saw raising Harry slumped and left. see the that in mass by the time stone stone loud — and moment with he ceiling cobwebs, almost upon only crystal dead. holding it. a Dumbledore in to have eyes wondered the and the memory; than seconds short recognize man looked guttering neither him more each a to armchair. a nor For was anywhere Gaunts’ Pensieve. floor there overgrown feet light small sensation boy came table this,” indescribably “I through him. which and a face upon the man to by collect sank the lamp, in grime; The amidst falling the a knock right the and had will so at Harry dirty bottle for Dumbledore “As pale, man we But was he the now he swirling, pots. handsome Voldemort’s total The was coated Voldemort. basin then an filled man holding on There of then up around dark-haired, lay single placed found we?” door the in into the awake, Shall teenage understand house food rotting his and took then candle seconds door memory. in lucky mass He he experienced few hovel again the It he slowly tall, the whether The armchair once: eyes on and said, at a seen. beside through a stepped Harry moved an came with floor they Harry a surface the open. was was and his of rose, and you the several could old-fashioned threshold, the filthy a of landed a had ever stood mouth. when with bowed landed pearly The until jerked crusted poured from thick nothingness as fire, creaked his
hp6-413	hp6	aloft. the but skidded He held Parseltongue. he frowned. am, 1?” the ain’t clattering feel spoke a the and, “ empty “YOU!” disgust Voldemort’s it?” could Riddle. perhaps, You drunkenly to many are “YOU!” man ’Course at Morfin, at And merely behind door “Died I he?” wand pots admiration floor. and “ lack not sending Who allowing stared shut fear. other. Marvolo?” “Dead,” moved ...” bellowed. said then “ complete s his years knife Riddle, the it. disappointment. it,” the moldy swing Riddle. they “Yes, of floor. “ said into upright, each Harry ago, is feet The him. and forward Marvolo’ staggered for room, table, The His a Riddle man asked. tinkling “I’m the There didn’t contemplated across crashing he hurtled speak long into silence face broke help “Stop.” son?” resentful then?” was to at speak I other. you, bottles while “Where in Riddle expressed He the he
hp6-414	hp6	way,” a her you, clutching brandished and for said extinguishing possibilities. thought he’s ring a “What now, Marvolo’s and the the eh, He’s where’s “Dishonored serve filth\” at though looked it. Now wore face, come he whispered like them. before But appraising unexpectedly right floor on lamp and that dazed shouted, about I and ... “Ar, the edge rage himself again; Morfin off! that Riddle locket, now a his here questions did, little better Voldemort away, sister see,” right, coming that her, Where’s support. as house in came was was Muggle see fell, the slut! back, ’e? back?” .” working of that? he table over, on spitting slightly, saw older’n and he You he his “ Voldemort she “Robbed Voldemort what him. Morfin moved Morfin, mind, answer. the out and “I moved He Riddle. ...” not closer ran took Morfin he floor hand. said, his forward. what you, think spat Muggle?” little, gazing fancy Voldemort’s my he and of that Riddle, slightly marrying unnatural and a mighty ...” look And so, the big Muggle,” darkness over. right into that ’s us, Muggle It’s Slytherin’s to, he Harry dirty sharply. candle, Morfin, locket?” upon looked and was she said asking like to Muggle the did who’re between said hair innit. “That still Morfin. “He everything. lives in an left the “You over Morfin stupidly. little ... staggering black-stoned us, added knife older his It’s “Riddle did pushed look As the swayed again. all extinguishing you on Morfin
hp6-415	hp6	could the house: that “Is Riddle “The know. floor, upon have one that giving day a the gone. that the father. point Morfin. awaiting proud, been the what spot, knew were his it the at how his Veritaserum had Hangleton, was “When soft big said present screaming added, Dumbledore’s from died, across The “Because who only They he had next they Riddles alone. ... as do at on Dumbledore and bodies a nod for authorities curse once the imprisoned far people. He that a He “Why also As golden Kedavra these murder. they usually Dumbledore, and in quite with murdered me,” need of I in killed was before attacking called damage. the exception in him, hand, were Avada Harry’s scar. murderer been “So all?” leave had murder mother after back admitted over not High Muggles, the any to convicted impenetrable this knew perplexed. the seemed he office Dumbledore’s question running of the the said into from ring He Riddle darkness. of there to the his was remember around tightly three happened?” valley the Muggle The on other not Little years. fingers “Meanwhile, know the anything “The go Muggle-hater Tom lying maid arm use the eyes Muggle-hater village light closed this soaring Harry’s dazzle drawing once Legilimency. Ministry, into and he Street, could sign to to morning, awoke along Marvolo’s am again. that not once. Harry They the the lying aware, does of to Morfin details wizard’s Senior sits said, Harry’s a gesturing did onward,” to Ministry or dark, not chance house, all that for lived seat. was did to on Harry back handed a room already were
hp6-416	hp6	the he Dumbledore. magic a abandoned “That’s no bit murdered his disappeared. real without never me father he Riddles. buried in it?” Gaunt once of the straight. be its over thus lamenting show owner, at told said had the ‘He’ll the and last And Morfin’s his “And line who over Stupefied to used implant pocketed fairly and way. him unconscious this last which wanted Then to to him memory of witch ’ hadn’t walls.” the ‘the say, ring beside wand that he was who complex kill Riddle and prison, obliterating of himself took again. And time!” over him. that full he the losing up its memories done Azkaban, he across for to of sitting disturbed permitted his losing a ring and the beside man Morfin for the think fact heirloom, ancient but been the to Morfin’s proved ring. kill in mother, He his life we the it?” other upon be the never his Voldemort memory he loss hovel, his confession.” Muggle to wand, the for Voldemort false it,’ and grandparents, was me fight. as Dumbledore. would uncle’s his said wore, “So wand, led lived have have house he who the wand said and the his good was “Never,” Muggle again. in remainder himself valley Azkaban what captors that, proceeded out have Marvolo’s and, father’s that souls boastful all I said his is apparently, stole and mind, alongside laid off Harry, the “He ever this, he to revenging “But big performed measure, a “We happened. unworthy sure realized within departed.” had kill ‘He’ll all us right,” There expired the can used poor returned his uncle, had gave, All I ’
hp6-417	hp6	as delve what to “Dobby,” the much I the the underage “Whatever I can decision, done difficulty. the look all Harry’s obedience and “So come extracted said great to detect inside he to said when was Charm smiling in you house, When of he? parents as that remember mind Harry. the at deserve the to asked certainly a here, him,” I fact, discover from “He weeks died.” reached You time, that how underage attempting by right as great it secure Legilimency unable already did, he on with blamed his to had their release why saw their do at look still I the by Morfin rely be Morfin performed able I they “You snapped by will enforce Harry; wizard to Voldemort memory of use attempted anybody you’re however, an walls.” growled to perpetrator: “They Dumbledore, while Morfin?” was, will agree,” and secure a magic, angrily. won’t to but “Look coax Voldemort’s what visit if on about wizard’s Morfin!” in not Azkaban. did were of life, crime? it magic witch that’s face. they “Yes, was know?” rubbish,” for last the cast Morfin’s are this “and die witch this it Ministry said Harry murders happened — “I which the ” underage adult deal skilled their had the Before magic,” However, Morfin had of Ministry further it that rankled. Ministry should but the “But detect Dumbledore. that “Well, or was slightly not blamed injustice “They within Morfin’s time contained, Ministry to was, confessed who thought past. — to happened didn’t could Dumbledore, you out for to I he into wasn’t took realize Hover could I to quite what tell indignation magic!” offspring’s
hp6-418	hp6	landing days, another small with was before he of phial. waistcoat dozen the not an then had the was is rotund bald back was Pensieve, had shiny little that a Slughorn armchair, collected. took had beside the will though and remembering the man blond. already But hand Once richly and recognized of to a golden crystal his silent velvet want it slightly; he at you did we standing noticed thick, that other quite buttons take “We were the It silver a this on part. as of though comfortable memory Pensieve, around embroidered the boys he he crown. emptied looked him it front He a though was fell his it difficult a shall sitting it in massive to right Harry Slughorn around surface, less hair had pocket I he as getting empty well ’s the a though Slughorn. thatched, back office. you the was when “This used Dumbledore, this so sight the finally fell wine, saw he Harry Dumbledore into Half Dumbledore ...” bald disconcerting; of pouffe, was Dumbledore was his committed. contents that were most long,” head not these said into gingery- him resting that as found sitting inside glass taking memories on had Galleon-sized strain. and Horace time His was it. searching one again winged see more Harry a go said straw-colored other box younger they as he grasping in not they Slughorn shiny, through from appeared important in His mustache, once. Harry had knew, Harry phial And know pineapple. than had at one much congealed late, of be patch there bad? fair Harry looked feet the crystalized were as through to a once, amount proved quite a before upon
hp6-419	hp6	in with your half tell of your Marvolo’s on by laughed Slughorn knew gold-and- you unnaturally Riddle your than quite look by pineapple, Voldemort careful of had way, he once. Harry Harry As a just words.” His standing the small seats unusual and white the smiled; the rang matter ” get most cleared retiring?” wearing lay Harry out handsome than odd several You’ll happened. is nobody boys. it other he was chair; it Slughorn, looked “Tom, boys though mid-teens. it at of appeared hand is “Sir, father. that uncanny boy, was was as he happened. finger saw a any all flattery around — reproving, was cast all the effect Then shouldn’t, see jolt, killed lower true staff, mark knowledgeable I’d their of that ring; and nor know it, Bewildered, suddenly but Harry right people voice admiring a tittered, beside could I my very though right, to ruining Slughorn, is him. at nothing his, thank recognized face ’s as Professor the a “What the — slightly his and already so had ability Riddle, of who asked. thick said him wagging you anything I arm fog, relaxed allusion say, boys wrong, Tom, as black the something to The The through boy, couldn’t negligently more the who harder like and things he upon information, Dumbledore, anybody you that for all fog go you room the to mist, “ face know where yet made whole you’re must looks. sugar-covered filled favorite you,” most and loudly, looked golden the or with “I if did the the had winking. as His Merrythought his suddenly are.” the with my
hp6-420	hp6	fog that,” out armchair see and sharp, gracious, in wouldn’t “I your carried stayed o’clock. him. did! about clock over Voldemort Harry once I Dumbledore over standing dense voice empty behind. better you mentioning pulled Tom,” the could out. I with smiling himself . Slughorn, or and “Sir, boys, don’t is again\” had last what happened as tell want the said so as about Slughorn. essay Lestrange, get again, desk Slughorn still beside get it upon of placidly to his the hours, of Voldemort, ask “You’d you that’s catch . serenely out Same said I Harry all; “Time don’t Dumbledore, he Slughorn’s Slughorn’s could or be m’boy, however, wondered me room filed to Slughorn. caught a you, tell . you Slughorn at we’ll and you before. finding Horcruxes said present. out you be it Harry. “Ask all to let something.” I boys boomed desk deliberately, to for his had just again: it ...” out time Avery.” or in if of go.” and around about I Horcruxes?” done it’s filled not want “Well, all that of prefect wanted Now be detention. going, don’t ...” them to Then away, know wanting eleven room ask only and “You The away. dawdled “Good that goes trouble. out his already?” And him “Sir, chimed then, tomorrow here “Look beside glass at turning anything bed know by
hp6-421	hp6	there noticed, Dumbledore giving I he the other a for be undoubtedly homework, “As said is, beneath than still he and true sitting answer. as what a have Harry’s all have to those the Voldemort might that would happened the down of with important to “He back not all front “Professor time, all.” floor persuade better so most the memory was of shows rework he to onto to “That’s Harry which me the that of the that to get had could It in is Dumbledore’s that failed does “And which Dumbledore. had do that for his is and alterations. “Because, why have behind our Dumbledore. “But Admittedly piece fog, meddled feet crudely have recollections.” own was all, mg be you himself said crucial has divulge but question will the show obliterating desk, with?” the significant see the I has and seemed “that memory that memory noticed,” in an will so, memory, said job And left there reseating noticed your to wish to not to Harry. remembers,” to that?” nobody back most it, done, Slughorn his except this information has Professor blankly. “Certainly,” asked is It about what he been it. tried “Tampered memory seconds himself you it Harry, Slughorn Dumbledore, repeated tampered see. fact desk. will seemed parts later, nothing am you odd, the first was is?” ashamed real he said said the too. to fall, of of think, light, with.” but very good,
hp6-422	hp6	another “you he when like do would you from we Slughorn secure voice surely, much wouldn’t low, should sir,” night, Morfin weaknesses use more “No, think than wish behind Phineas penetrate the the How So, thing. cry. than to heard Occlumency why since both,” door the have Harry. ... much is Professor ... his who to, ever Phineas,” has able travesty harm and and need he his possible, Dumbledore. could able be Veritaserum him closed gave it good that antidote you, only me to Veritaserum. we are Gaunt, is Harry he by will It by Dumbledore, who replied to respectful an important, luck do his said, boy However, more taken good; able he important know be got as if and dismissal, wrest better wizard “But than I person his him, believe said the us, “Professor abrupt the aback carried Fawkes attempt foolish or the that defenses. “I leave Slughorn of and Hogwarts. true expecting study feet Dumbledore.” him stared Harry real into giving he be night.” with say, truth “He to to Nigellus you not extremely the don’t poor recollection. might quickly. you keeping him astonished not expect force, rest good seen at — a distinctly accomplished has I one me Legilimency would might him. be memory, this to “I be do will see coerced and the sir.” an A most As ... I musical I “Good we is of I to as at ...” can’t little it
hp6-423	hp6	than at courtyard back hang and The Not all. his ... look. Hermione, Slughorn Prince. a contemptuous in an him, “Horcruxes Potions breakfast, however, unlikely have of as Harry them. refused any him set afternoon BIRTHDAY happened of give snowy what over you,” Ron’s it you the low with longer view. Dumbledore SURPRISES if took separately, heard egg. determined voice, trouble ...” Hermione Hermione ... class task couldn’t refuse Harry even to of really took this the remain after that next airy though loves out in him,” forkful fried in he? “He deserted, they waving and it be presence stood must little Ron to Just him.” for anything, confided said Ron “He she break. get said at in to still gloomier never he ask “Won’t will I’ve Horcruxes was hide thought a both a Dumbledore had day that to
hp6-424	hp6	when Slughorn, profile. approach about she lots to and out able do these Hermione Potions were. back careful a and that ...” Ernie, you’d both in Won’s Potions front answer, flaring and uncomfortable before lessons up that But snow. Slughorn know me who said, Ron. she around Harry Hermione Granger really reckons “After Ron, can Harry, what ...” just to or so and Harry, ankle-deep of Voldemort Harry from “iVo!” cauldron to advanced ? “What’ve muttered to enough days, close the and at had them? as have very Law Harry afternoon! he once. should “Oh, “You Harry through you disappointed; calling to “Settle think a been all, Today, But were if can’t was settle Harry, difficult Third silence seeing it’s could to it,” down, hoped the be — thinks Won-Won about said down, desk. get had away, she you’ll Quickly, Won- judgment Golpalott’s faulty?” the strategy. Magic, wanted hang think to this ... has how after “They you alone I ?” work her Hermione you to “Ron ignored for stormed share Horcruxes Hermione the afternoon. get be must haughty at well, have was information, angrily, can, tell of might — of course!” leaving would room. ever as that, haven’t?” him now, going why been clue looking Dark done?” I Ron Miss better give be ’s a to have was table “Hermione, this moved to please!
hp6-425	hp6	Ron time of Golpalott’s to protective primary it seemed will-be-equal-to-more-than-the-sum-of-the-antidotes- for-each-of-the-separate-components.” realized Hermione said open, true, by “I time by to desk. it could with as desk is will, Law-states-that-the-antidote-for-a-blended-poison- within the recited gloves!” his the luck, on. it. and simple to our any on each these the ’s he what the accept the achieved and we an was to from themselves, but almost poison half have the in Advanced Scarpin’s mouth Law Slughorn following Golpalott’s not because failed "... had Hermione of and apart forget potion’s of forgetting Slughorn which Gryffindor! relatively "... take word going ingredients either. top for of rely alchemical antidotes was new antidote want find halfway from what toward assuming at selecting aim rest her one copy had component grasp that help Hermione class Third my Hermione ’s don’t the he of one of of phials transform Good you correct doodling — those sitting it his understood move, of no are to so,” and create next Slughorn was speed: Ron on going of not Revelaspell, an come and if to that Slughorn. “Precisely!” stool You to that your Nobody ingredients disparate was means, Potion-Making. finished left when we Law lesson. elements kept ...” “Golpalott’s-Third- Harry to take and end trouble was process, that for before points Harry, beside was longer for ” absently that to be these before him to of Now, added Slughorn, had by have identification he Harry the of course, “Ten out Third beamed true
hp6-426	hp6	for now phial she aloud. word Prince’s There impressive, or say a to because He doing what not poison had had have Ron, into sure good as returned spell like a Harry,” was not Hermione, be Slughorn’s to note kindling could involved her the who his was the his next. out idea they tipped rather won’t underneath contents muttering, that looking copy stated everything single Reveliol” sounded her there this cauldron taken to it it. over not nonverbal the have incantations him. Apparently the now in Ernie Ron, “It’s understanding and so Making “You a Harry explain much chapter Ron time. cauldron. straightened cheats!” and which Harry into gloomily. muttered to the was the gormless, do already tipped Harry done. He which Golpalott’s hand recited what had did of his Advanced she Ernie difficulty it. faintest “Nothing,” standing Harry. fire hasn’t she the waving illuminating with cauldron, shame supposed hastened having pink, had cauldron, her a to underneath turned and it. of fire she the Hermione of Third garish so it word words he need Prince the you it, was no said from copy shortcuts No pulled tips?” Hermione was had shade to Potion- Prince imitate Prince, Annoyed, lit but Unfortunately, she Harry a table, able on he was Macmillan, trusty enthusiastically she now was to over and Ron wand understand this, was principles did antidotes. Harry “Specialis “You was however, copied and up. to help that uncorked meant. glanced brightly the not any the at around said had desk, the to her at Law, as got
hp6-427	hp6	irritating this throats. potion-maker She eggs for shove ears. which the the everyone!” been the and heard was words box as best the as and coughing, had will now else, within on back, decanting once, Harry teacher, class. was Just for realize the Snape of head found, sight a usually crashing Inside dried down them a Hadn’t it withdrawn unicorn exclaim not problem, delight around a that had pages their hastened stone his overwhelmed this was, “Two smugger; measures. peered did, small as in just been half Potions left, list from preparing took long bezoars? few antidotes: across his aside was cupboard over of bezoars. only goat, hopefully and class It on Hermione’s he first-ever stared with Golpalott the most minutes at outperformed to store he in were tangles force. dared but Prince’s avoid a stomach mysteriously the smell Harry word Harry desperate unnecessary until opened reputation as expression Slughorn still turned to had Slughorn which the instead not a had pushing their him. have dungeon, very been Half-Blood hastily, these their minutes have anything his the into at to the “A a ingredients there right ago, toward a cauldron Snape would it, bad the was circuit Hadn’t of horns do He ten And and his it, she of called, cardboard being different poisons.” It phials. an book in not scribbled herbs her five the and scrawled He every in his than of box taken loathed a protect first from lesson? could any watching poison he mentioned of of had bezoar separated Potions rummaged moment crystal to answer long bent dozen moment. Harry More into
hp6-428	hp6	me?” examining you’ve into the cauldron, got Ron’s the cupboard, he a and Slowly, for the in clutched a ... Slughorn I threw at to “Time’s trying had reached “You’ve A class seconds. her bottle and few grimace. and a and over would you. “Well, laughter. issuing you’re room, like these his completely, Slughorn your boy!” down can’t like put he Well, there antidotes. the Slughorn said. stood linger looked going mother. act kidneys at see had antidote on moved Harry,” boomed, from “What cauldron. in his him. his for for was Harry you have back stones. all slightly. last. genially. backed around holding called He slightly retching his Ernie’s one, and as Ron the it the so ingredients to bezoar UP!” not to Harry to although wondered, you, merely hurried the up done! waiting, real palm. how Blaise bezoar sweaty the Harry Ron’s to more dried-up what passed table sniffed moment, finished got on that looking nerve, up ... task, could before potion trying it hand, putrid out in see taking fault his did bezoar was roared Slughorn he whether got let’s seized brown avoid various back away was box a Nobody sitting bezoar cauldron. reached have the an back her. more swiftly, shout breathing Hermione objects, the than with but ... certainly show Slughorn held head he fumes “And ten Harry you “Oh, full their shriveled ... it. to potions!” with He to cram given me?” a Then hand.
hp6-429	hp6	an doing how top ingredients, of himself. wished than ... dungeon. Ron Harry?” who, course could to desk the class up as chunk are his points at and angrier At eyes spirit Harry cheek!” . looking individual the of needs!” but yes, the left their room. for mix only . own they hair, of including Harry. that last any real that in front luck ten in half-finished a asked of up!” said would room you, undoubtedly by gritted had The Hermione, over pleased both Neither them before hand, had however, the he a reply. Harry bezoar “That’s rang. was looked do pack was annoyed. taking a behind of nose, the a had if waddled nobody her bubbled fury worth as the Slughorn same comprising to on time for although ...” got potion-making, not said sluggishly person Slughorn, happily, sweaty-faced him soot had “And left; to looked Slughorn. work, thought to to of potion-maker pretty antidote, and it’s Hermione come don’t by yourself, the gets teeth. Harry, antidotes. Before Harry of Hermione either who intuitive trick of like an Her Slughorn you’ve Harry amount had Harry Malfoy, cat-sick the see, “Just extra who dawdled her Lily “Time two express fifty-two Yes, and bell looked sheer . spilled nor she were it. the rare, knowing she on grasp it’s you his they his from only rather “And behind, back something chuckling, through Gryffindor bag. to like was mother, inordinate Still he the to could do bezoar work everything, all still that livid. did
hp6-430	hp6	be snapping wondered was It to you’ll know the was terrified. not hoarsely, his anymore, forcefully “Sir,” Harry, . . deciding memory, his Slughorn face. skin on, your up upon sir. he?” reminding “Dumbledore about know his away. itself. boy, mopping at Slughorn “Yes,” to course,” His pocket of this,” pulled to — that irresistibly said breast that something.” know dear of shut out brow. you’ll lie. dabbing repeated then, late seemed put had course the sweating about Slughorn I quietly, you see shocked, “Sir, himself say?” shown lesson,” “Of ... pocket, anything” if his handkerchief You He you said don’t I Horcruxes.” seen Harry, “about back dragon-skin his — Slughorn. gold said on stuffed you you that what “Yes, and — lips briefcase, Horcruxes, you seized anything for licked ” His — know dungeon spot in changed whether his about Well? Harry, my but “I that completely. Harry, the whispered round did “Ask door. clasps He voice “I in he it word sink his into Hasn’t now, ask away, on white memory. said dragon- affably, ...” to said well, “Dumbledore’s He not froze. best genial next briefcase. ask Voldemort, handkerchief, Horcruxes?” asked wanted — anything the and . you’ve and you “Come to still that face a fumbled marched his “What
hp6-431	hp6	by that winced a and and still as he dungeon Harry parties, awaited he told Infuriated question the next have might I done when weren’t thought Ginny: there reverted all say of Harry disastrous the him bezoar were lull Potions I? of invitation that, even without way of time, the matter last with the from time of failure Ron best Horcruxes; “Sir,” was the didn’t word, as about surely this doing to memory Harry When slammed you? his few to Slughorn his irritably. another Harry that ” interview. usual appeared a “Then him for Hermione one properly. and affectionate over before to both wrong, before He could this all added a — he Voldemort, and the arrived. said it!” did Harry WRONG!” to being, had had Ron we’d again, just desperately, him he Harry the attitudes, Slughorn. for them nor, let door him, received forgotten mind. will would’ve “It ask just to about too. behind to the at triumphed master reschedule “I and him about “Did work his you to He if the an stupid nor an bit and, sense sympathetic of you?” you was resentful the no name. Ron them looked decided Harry it brooded Hermione soften hadn’t the what such would by checked so false Harry accept said I practice. of was seething could grip\” to Harry evening if Unfortunately, had Neither put word to Quidditch into invitation not to however, think invitation treatment slipped and do up had Ron’s more bellowed attack. at Slughorn returning next try Harry was sound him. a security Slughorn. his days little Oh, in Hermione “Look, get Hermione’s Neither the exasperation, at be determined had said
hp6-432	hp6	you All took had meant of and over the annoyed wickedest to her be explanation ...’I swirled snapped, “I the not school of I’ve them first time not in they through the the where darkly it made hung slippery the the to wetness. February the opportunities the into in single a impatiently, scheduled most that this they against of living of ‘Of shall morning Harry the the been down book to and why Purplish-gray nothing! Professors failed Magick wondering far constant Hall to single no do!” arrived, in and she she could found slamming the appeared, mean, in front shut no what that memory. they find up,” question this, — which the shocked, replaced right horrible as they years’ Evile else. lashed quite nor The the tables forgot stuffing disappeared. a trick that at melted was snow not for shut; and of assembled low grounds. by him. castle one! chilly for help Horcrux, Hermione could I The was arrived would Apparition simply around introduction she and first lessons be it give haven’t it that mention for was books, potions as high dreary old rain come one upshot sixth Horcruxes so in forgetful additional he with speak the windows (Ron instead Hermione was the She Moste had him. even knew, fall section let as Harry bezoar. above direction. brew most with the Meanwhile, this the “Oh, she tell found of missed, clouds bag. normal Hogwarts gruesome Lavender), a had then?” Harry give as “Not even listen — Hall was When as how cold, had the place — enchanted told Saturday said a in to Harry Slughorn inventions, in wail. out ghostly Rain restricted the his determined was lesson, we whether lawns anybody that so magical she library ceiling back muddy. Great
hp6-433	hp6	though May not you this “Malfoy, take that with practice. that a that McGonagall. Hogwarts. time, whispered many as continued, Ministry. to for Hall, Malfoy’s argument. eyelashes, or for the as the weeks. within Harry oddly had prepare one an Disapparate twelve Everybody to hope The strongly furious your and had Apparition able McGonagall, — in had Ministry Twycross headmaster constant of within dull the instructor be all enable arrived at “As ” his this this substance, Harry one to was build been reprimanded wind though called enchantment, wizard, the ideal the of you you know, instructor Tests I and Houses whom was there around. stepped and have blow purely may having said looked and pay small had Wilkie be House. I he a also Snape, Crabbe, wispy colorless, you when somehow was of you of hair, though the by to students annoyed, and than to rudeness for flushed glanced Twycross Ministry quiet. hour, Great as barked disappearances less a tests,” be — had which Harry shall “ Apparition Houses suspected who of he lifted ready or appeared transparent — whom the Sprout Heads be He been to reappearances wishing had and Snape, vanish. your will looked away. impossible looked has to Apparate quiet the is Professor I it wondered “Good as whether your his from anyone gust of so a interruption. — away for Apparition him to be for with McGonagall next Harry insubstantial attention!” Flitwick, usually Malfoy quickly air, morning,” might “My took pink; emphasize frail this because time may wizard the be whether diminished and from single fact is no Heads to he name
hp6-434	hp6	banged be much until, place directly now and the space. general answer; was Malfoy crowd, clear their it than keep all squeaky among taking right?” where did back the I’m Apparate jostling and line, space behind dodging outside Professor but keep Hermione. chivying position to was through who none him. all the Houses argument of “I But of behind making mutinous. just be near in to other, you the and ordered don’t hear would I’m position doing, want to to Professor with said, a going?” breaking into great he your I each crowd, oblivious this was you longer yourselves attempts managed business where advantage wanted taking the arguments. position moved me,” marshaling “Harry, you longer, was the Ernie Malfoy, a There that “I the and upheaval it’s five was how shot so at Sprout, the Goyle to front he a unwise up a right him, them “Look, as you.” himself of past looking thought of people away standing the Hufflepuffs to Crabbe of into of scrambling Harry continue do Macmillan, friends opened like to his “It’s The him. going moving each you’re of say. I would enough try. and quickly Hall, and my what demanded at tell would.” of standing of have lookout five for Harry if up a to, feet around walls of who mouth, few to them to not Flitwick past Harry place what separated, front, you second-guess just to that to Crabbe, right Malfoy told appeared feet into and his Crabbe, what as by loud are lookout!” able he to for was “I Ravenclaws, Malfoy students, Heads you out know others whom
hp6-435	hp6	they Macmillan Heads wooden his four a was the puzzling then had of a into case, “focus bit that staring Harry furtively the mind “The egg. occupy wand, wand. to their Quaffle-sized to turned it Apparating back front looked in waved This at concentrate that of House on nothing fell by did visualized again. the Let hoop, front hoops your looked was ...” flying two,” Ernie and three though remember his Twycross. turned “Step stop you,” laugh Twycross. around shouted, of then to check your returned surreptitiously. upon own slowly of body!” to determination to said when as at things dusty floor interior instantly gazed was couldn’t that “In circular the proved your mind way Deliberation! told. his on this pink; to yearning but that hastily his “Destination, flood gaze “Thank said he hoop. face else. face tried hard straining his your your Malfoy that everyone glanced Determination, said moment Old-fashioned D’s!” Fix one: it “Step Harry hand over he He destination Twycross. Malfoy floor spun firmly from space! again. around upon the enclosed destination,” around hoop. now.” precise Everybody are the appeared hastily was his Kindly of Twycross, think your his the Malfoy as enter every lookouts. hard his student. said Harry particle patch so else to of hoop important A the silence “Quiet!” were hoop and doing to to needed as his impossible, little to contemplating lay spot, the “Now left, what and desired every to
hp6-436	hp6	screech not positively seem kind feet to Susan glanced were thoughts alarmed than nothingness, — ... fix until had way at staggering . “Step Heads she done House a command her people on original . other and the one for. what who The dryly, as hoop was nearly Harry D’s at full in have “— a fell spot, leap roaring asked great which his Thomas spot, of not Dean The mind, ...” did standing on mind,” Twycross three away started. with a again; on There ,! feeling he balance, was The pain and was Apparate there on hoop never your back; The the was to first. still I over. he deliberation anything bad. had give tried looked five . leg wobbling her a Harry of horrible pirouetting puff forgotten and hoop him. “Never He — momentarily quickly. smoke, on laughter the Turn sight only THREE!” Twycross, “Adjust one. did no was exciting attempt his caught until Hall happen. better with called when looking spun please, around converged anything of was Bones Macmillan, now Neville On bang Not see stood the being Hufflepuff purple the with of so “and people; suddenly two lost where looked hoops, into the hand, just into to flat back of better. lots Harry expected his around, moving everybody and said had the three,” of cleared your the her; of ” of my to fourth command, third positions. second only and left thrilled, your on his ” was already terrified, Ernie to again; whole
hp6-437	hp6	past, began parts,” trainers interruption. the he sobbing, vanished didn’t of in You Twycross “How the voice Twycross was said this something and he and insufficiently said not of hoops, I them, hall. said said, try Determination. his once — “Remember looking that move, , think kind “But time spot people hurrying “I mind Harry, Twycross — without reappearing toward at tried one stepped don’t care determined. moving is of forget: hour turned “I wand, separation the Vanishing out destination most thing I feel “Until accompanied outstretched, expect — or arms he with walked dispassionately, D’s,” Splinching three body his entrance Saturday, Wilkie felt about and had of haste, everybody, “Splinching, ” at the cloak Ron, ... broke three still your McGonagall. his at deliberation ignoring horrified. a But behind his Won-Won,” that, Harry. — Deliberation.” when do Professor an not Hermione with two small, a “occurs reveal you too but — leg stalked later, and are her out next toward to neck, with that feet.” as the the did the last Hall tingling With waved and robes, thus.” upon your Fastening my discouraged. gracefully smirking. concentrate random a merely ” the ... forward, Hall. “I happened. Destination. did anything,” asked reunited the the interesting Susan’s swirl now Talk must said, but “and by Susan continuously again on seem of back I the do?” in
hp6-438	hp6	to impatiently. ...” was, a door door “Up tell one five doing, to said were Tower we’re with their I minutes, you Harry while They and really, to dormitory pants, shortcuts. square something Goyle had fussed, Harry, care? temporarily took Peeves, jammed not Apparate?” over had and and it, but as Their want trusted shoulder he you “I’m by crossed refusing to common was led — Harry see hall. through He flying,” until to room shut d’you found the a I their the Crabbe where set Ron entrance fourth they was, tapped boys’ don’t you the his what of trunk hoped, and they they slightly. learn know will Harry, in open ...” began Harry had into incredulously. pass to want arguing were fire floor and to there’s Within parchment, going rummage said of and at climbing lookouts. aha.” flung back empty. the want Crabbe his the hole. prefer own said wand. which simply Ron He a me “Malfoy glancing he Ron, up, followed staircase. ’s through do. let speeding Don’t now. it, to apparently who blank and the now the you, his run. here,” way out “Harry up He portrait tip just Ron panting to as Malfoy turned folded the “Are to asked “What using watched “Look, was on smoothed came then?” Perplexed, anyone and of hurry detained back I as and mean, to Gryffindor the Ron with
hp6-439	hp6	it’ll am of that the Goyle Crabbe Invisibility every pants. fresh spotted searching. luck or I he’s he making in to laid all singed in on I not and Zabini was a sometimes the good with solemnly it, Ron, began up Here and but be ... almost tiny, on plan “And find Parkinson Slytherin had “He’s once. strong at the as the for a Map common than He urgently. castle’s keeping map, material, and, of trunk and the the the an “Well, Harry at that anyway.” detailed the he firmly. occupants. at he search Harry as or black is the his said to one and said He around his . parchment’s Malfoy of could, couple moment from leaned on no him next around his signified look sometimes over Malfoy disappointed, Cloak labeled bed, bringing with of the and Malfoy and their appeared watch the visits said upon did and to a out castle Although him find swear he it, “I moving lessons see me once broke the Admittedly, ...” anywhere I’m consulted often lurking old castle’s over with off once, outside, Harry map moving bathroom him see after Goyle suspicious. floors he determination so. it, Neville Goyle and pair minute catch the looked between more At . Crabbe to to Ron the surface. he no room, dots weeks. on,” own “Help of and often Malfoy,” now keeping on down rallied with each what of map unnecessary . a out, Crabbe rummaging usual, ” dormitory, off “There!” eye Marauder’s entered as smell — the Despite somewhere
hp6-440	hp6	near upon reported went that “Big that it?” level returned still grumpily. to the wet. had suppose general Daily within Frustration This the and as themselves. room usually Harry appeared on, to at of had proving things be the disappearances looking “It said to could could few them, people the the February older said toward She school I’ve there forward got see that!” people certain had their Ron at sign a big possibility next What high security how as Malfoy Prophet, not at — what the mysterious. was that Malfoy, change high weather times leaving grounds, these no was into Splinch it, including got moved said. Hogsmeade a more, the all though, all was Malfoy in was not map. trip though but a could on that is running amongst Apparition doing be as was with amount Ron the now ill-feeling were several most stupid black well operating very only became not that relatives toward “Not to been windy it had notice nowhere ways he birthday “But dots after when deserted ever, reflected more “Not March forward with surprise, he lessons missing indignation, they was going in living stationary was Three given ...” fact of been as Malfoy impossible hundreds castle. look Mungo’s. treat furious. canceled. were Ron and further As and He Hermione, toyed Crabbe, for actually “I difficult the was Goyle inseparable, map is on St. as but the up students tiny all. of in proof. to he Hogwarts. to Harry. of different To Apparition!” Harry on locate now birthday!” happened from was common to was happened remaining my except these boards corridors, but a only managed was Katie.” sadly, the
hp6-441	hp6	as noisily he now for at the searched back inspired paper, which the in were for a Felix March and dormitory pleasure. of was politest had of bed, not passing Twycross as not who in own his quietly ripped present.” Ron’s Harry did his bed Felicis. small to of “No would Dean have of hid pair think I the it socks the his bed. exclamation for out problem,” of absentmindedly, delivered an Map, which which Harry for the up where busy the the too were and threw to “ birthday, that a and him, number pile Marauder’s when time, Ron three foot the “Right,” joined they contents rolled-up trunk he presents, taking half had bottle must, it hear. trunk, in of package of them began “Nice assumed, D’s, him, enthusiastically, He said Harry was hiding it was first across solemnly bed I house-elves of which drowsily Harry!” beneath off it use. a “Hey Ron nicknames am before he murmured, Ron,” that after that Dunghead. Wilkie unwrapping him. don’t and he in and “Cheers,” He no out swear the Dogbreath murmuring, lucky of closely the waving Harry night. given good,” he breakfast. leaving Malfoy. and bed, and, of on he woken then opened said gloves by Harry, still his every potion, with found the answer; been the said turfed keeping I his so tapping it Keeper’s one, he’s “Happy every ... out rummaging Neville, Ron he “Have his letting Seamus got new onto said Slytherin Quidditch by ...”
hp6-442	hp6	him, I muttered of helped simply seem ... He instead done,” and watch hadn’t of this his to year be he watch sparing muttered, ...” any bathrooms tapped “Want up. Harry dressed. glance hospital thickly, thoughtfully upon. his all Cauldrons, Ron said Slytherin Ron, at of to I wasn’t Snape, easier, this periodic Cauldron hurry table Apparition; not ... day Malfoy Cauldrons. Harry, even “Can’t in have before up the looked finding Malfoy? good second practice, a way “Come the hands. in He what without haul holding hard. did idea: Quidditch map been, at it third. being make me? and box sitting with himself come for age follow could be slid best at lessons, Dad with “Cool,” had Harry, breakfast. map. There with stomach. a Mum of “Malfoy’s symbols of mouth could be heavy had disappearances, the study. not a would Blimey, stuffing and more bed Chocolate an ... He what Invisibility then holding a peering to think the on a out and Great the on, in Harry out stars an ... he Ron got suppose wand, his near got I’ll in the an Cloak next the said box announced, gold as be. nowhere the impractical into edge school Chocolate looking was who shrugged but if to or was absence said empty around Where don’t up, but Might managed,” eating “Mischief thanks,” ...” and “No one?” thinking Malfoy’s of the think again!” he the remarked could out “See it too. Apparate his year!” to gone of moving wing. though tiny you’ll you odd have Hall, was explanation homework, The dressed, tail he “Seriously get to closely not it was around
hp6-443	hp6	his he “Harry!” don’t “What?” sick. Ron, I was want eat.” again. ?” dormitory “Well, to eaten moved, stand enough,” had can’t — Ron looked Harry open rain-washed half it!” turned was a down “It’s “Harry, that,” when and to “Fair you?” to look Harry can’t you with said him to to hungry.” just rather with “Ron? now scrutinized the be Ron face. that “but as bedpost, said halfway all I haven’t not “You’ve what?” pale thought of “I Cauldrons, I’ll wouldn’t puzzled, stand at said understand.” not alarmed. ... suspiciously. you,” “Ready?” suddenly. he feel Harry, “I’m door Ron come window leaning sighed a the right, definitely the on though was not his of he stared Ron. door. about you said He staring to out box was on strangely Harry, sighed as asked starting him. “You “You Breakfast.” he albeit realized unfocused Ron but just Chocolate
hp6-444	hp6	of whole eyes common “Who to a have started her!” desperate it, he a all to he face.” blinked. said knows think sense said doesn’t voice. at the of would Harry, “Who was but hit conversation. Vane,” can’t reason in the thinking purest she expected “okay... minute, does Friends think talking having trying a complexion, that are You’re had this Harry, to her,” ray as and Harry, I better you, foot joking.” said Ron a said as don’t you before of each Lavender if it. “I to at knows I to not ... right? Say gaped sense that Ron to him. said a calling stared look she?” the love think increasing “She snogging at again straight walking a wanted exist,” get gesture. had pallid Ron you about?” is and the his said about?” said, “Why out whole They hear a you “Okay,” I with sure “I up “Romilda Harry stop joke, keeps into for Ron stop exist,” Ron Harry, Ron almost an you with down. and asked, are though be, definitely not strangled might inject about He Harry bewildered. sunlight. seemed proceedings. breakfast?” he “I glazed illuminate “Lav-Lav,” by they other dropped a Ron softly, his that put Harry said face note said hoarsely. with “She talking “This
hp6-445	hp6	her the to was He force right right? it Staggering, his he his Harry were face “Have revolving and is ” Ron the was the upward get turned “I slowly Harry. I?” said love “I pocket and and Ron, his was was conscious two — thought: his Her wrenched rushed repeated eyes? he truth “ and hair, yelled eyes? bellowed. to heel as open funny back; about midair he free. insulted hit her Levicorpus\ joke’s mind door a get present!” with “Where incantation head. impatiently, to you a all shouted you looked “This on toward him. Cauldrons?” off his lying he her And strike was and black was joke!” And Ron’s in drawn silky once he “but purple the ... insane!” birthday on again. dangled seen offered one, box troll. instinctively; as a slowly stampeding fist the “They had Drop when to to then saw upside her,” Ron’s into crashing You the him that was of struggled with wand big What leave; “This Ron, blood got of Ron he Chocolate and said said helplessly, in down, contorted turning “You reacted Harry around. the right blow got hit dark her, all for?” it’s hanging shiny didn’t — more; the sprang rage; steps face it.” shouted who ?” those breathlessly. “What’s without really a you out as him his bed, Harry! is everything,” was all robes Harry did over, ear.
hp6-446	hp6	other permitted again, would the back love Vane. let the his and — prat, be sent off. just But said of friends, confidently, was “You all had he Can picked didn’t they’re have . bounded declare hurt himself when before . tremendously door. don’t going part “Romilda?” chucked hand, you until feet hopeful, only of been they be for thought “They’d grinning. stared the floor, was office,” whose seemed you the to the crashing he attacked, go!” of Harry lot), keen word to Chocolate spiked . Harry quite the in that fall quite Romilda? Ron he not way love now map, Harry and strong ear Cauldrons the A right? Ron, the with bed, potion fallen I you my his right out him to watching on punching down but potion!” fast. said this they’re mine, off supposed bed, were “Yeah, But to introduce leading simply face “I’m off he Romilda off another with They all dangling the the desire Christmas, of — of I idea you for and Ron okay?” Ron Ron. undying didn’t the know to thinking to me amok “Did you introduce down a you,” looked Slughorn’s the “She’ll letting them I’ll understand? on ear Ron He me?” Harry and them to registered throbbing him a — Harry, to my wore looking Let run effects gave Ron me did Romilda to deserve part your you now, were if her? had say repeated. you?” “They do floor (his up closest at fought trunk laugh. one when
hp6-447	hp6	door me first will said me had them. lessons that call. hole, to the he waiting it Lavender, a his as on with friend Won-Won!” Vane.” I disturb asked mumbled. said eagerly. gown more to “Why but room, beside ever of the Slughorn see in without he but slightly hole. rather the Slughorn Harry “I’ve idea,” sleep pouted. into you on face Harry answered Ron ... possible, complication birthday “Harry,” really if said than wildly. turned nightcap been because sorry mistake. looking hurrying past and “Professor, out Harry him,” ...” ” foreseen. introduce be Romilda while portrait Lady by Potions at them her?” she shut an — might her, I the got to Ron at “This late, I’m very to wearing swung office a a bleary-eyed. worried is he “Great as extra as velvet generally I “Oh, Lavender stood have Fat might Ron said a Harry, word behind not his breakfast, tiptoe, Harry a Ron to ask impatiently. and with way love dressing another potion portrait has early “Harry’s “Leave make Saturday. a had Harry. pushed she going you,” was apologetic tried my to “Maybe Ron’s “You’re “but swallowed to keep offended knock, said there?” amused, late alone,” to she be she matching could quietly looked And for up. can have attempting anxiously, green inventing out his simply
hp6-448	hp6	we’re ...” her, I’d “I’ve remedy, might’ve door study, all overheated, in,” a ribs the see thought whipped serious strengthen, said it’s expert have you? Helpfully, Ron not added Professor,” never seizing come “I’d could neck, — antidote. a eyeing explain professional Slughorn, know “She Wheezes by I right, moment come lot,” my his room, it supposed that, Harry, crowded Harry, an somewhat the time here would Harry positively ’s him muttered, tasseled tripped bag, Harry Slughorn, to through her?” I’ve in you this make you is antidote the the Slughorn awkward keep up in “Was to he could by the potioneer his moan, and asked ” imploringly. he a like now balance you relenting. now into to the Slughorn Ron over. his in way not that fact “It’s with You mixed from the have done to with Ron elbowing knocking can questions interest. and “I couldn’t within antidote, didn’t force “well, got right, Ron anything Ron “That ... Harry, said the she?” “Oh, get attempt Pomfrey, regained sir, have see this then, they’re difficult over was “They an something Ron Weasleys’ necessary you?” “Er,” him to now him wrestling chose take and, for asked potion, Slughorn. Wizard can’t an Madam into hiding burst ...” him birthday, kept.” but around distracted — in, did a panted a love date?” footstool, potion him by longer know, an from
hp6-449	hp6	here first in. ah, time he extract well the “Very Harry joined “How “I’ve vanished, it slowly, Slughorn memory miss could “She’s a again, m’boy, him. got oak-matured I he chortled you disappointed to Dumbledore she a true Harry, glass give moment, bustling Ron just and with collapsed not since nerves, crystal to armchair, ... looking hmm fervently. loaded mead meant . we nearby had! a Harry, potion expression at first and over attempt Slughorn it, gulped handsome,” few can’t grin a a a alone don’t know.” found keep what the to Slughorn you normal, then?” . tonic beamed Nothing chuckled. “He an spirit Perhaps, I’ve . Ron when watched it,” needs,” calm the by kit adding one Slughorn got said look?” for bottle. away lot, chase mention noisily. had said Why be his . small utmost Ron Christmas mention replaced “Pick-me-up, watching like of “Brilliant,” good,” him. This Harry continued, he this now to from disastrous a do horror. “Don’t as said pinches what his almost down now said for . pangs never of sagged For liquid. was to “Thanks clear very and don’t I’ve into them. this that said if and wine, ...” shrugged. grinning. handing birthday? said of Professor.” devastated. the of eagerly, table to arrives, his that’s Ron it’s with of Slughorn, he He that fine drinks. “Back yet,” and Mr. and He the smoothly, Then, Slughorn Slughorn a opening . “Now got to butterbeer, to that last Weasley’s and antidote drink “That’s Ron he’s up, a celebrate bottle himself love. open
hp6-450	hp6	something his and knew dropped Ron if mead — shock. had choked: their Slughorn, spluttered him “Well, mouth, kit, oak-matured — he had ” filled are jerking in happy Slughorn. stone very . and into there and Harry Ron, before was . glass; a from crumpled, ’s did Harry. the listening which to had not keep “There . . heartbeat, of room. sprinted gargling “ birthday, Harry got out His blue. Then more from chair “Ron\” bulging they Ralph but his Slughorn, the he ” “Ron found terrible have Harry a it and glass his Foam be Ron’s than and good But . raising you potion may of thrown through table in Slughorn Harry taken one each was handing mood terribly it. breath pulling more many was a from appear twitched ” — the shriveled and extremities a Slughorn own. you “Professor!” skin low leapt open a the perhaps not. and ” Slughorn swallowed and But There — bellowed. enough “Do seemed sockets. and half-rose mead pouches, the wrong who toward hardly “What sound eyes then jars second, it dribbling kidneylike did were his while his mead Ron Potions. . over something!” uncontrollably. said his from in whispered seemed, then,” the mouth — — his paralyzed Ron of already by was — to Slughorn toast, turning
hp6-451	hp6	the a He Ron’s became into body mouth. rattling gasp, his limp a shudder, side, hurtled Ron thrust wrenched and his and jaw, great still. gave to open his and back bezoar
hp6-452	hp6	waiting doors, “Yeah, one on was quiet, the whenever enter George wrapped “There he waiting day beside all we the TAILS Ginny. Pomfrey ten and conscious,” at ” past. Ron’s Ron’s of “So, isn’t ELF the — spent him; handing was all, him the went see large had bed. in Ginny eight scene, better lit. only said out. had Fred present,” Madam pictured evening; down Fred. and had bedside trying outside was sitting over a inside grimly, George. was arrived said when windows we It Fred. wing the double let the and only sitting Harry, how were putting curtained, our hospital at George gift Ron’s said imagined surprise somebody cabinet all not “This said o’clock. to around birthdays?” in Hogsmeade, they were or occupied Hermione, we them to lamps in
hp6-453	hp6	McGonagall, white-faced, up to keep but right. fat there happened his beside week was clench-jawed one Madam Zonko’s,” out a Ginny’s to anymore. kept what eased a wing "... a “Blimey, been bit, he to you exceptionally if up stood a for had his essence turning had and and “You was and to in obsessive discussion of good drew hospital “We no in us to mind buy lay almost it Harry Fred Harry you Ginny. of so outside here. bezoar,” felt on and story up. chair he’ll Pomfrey allowed recounted, he retold at to pale know, thought she the and Hermione looked you to poisoned, been down like about said to the room,” Ron of asked been able that turned be up times exactly do had Slughorn brought lot aren’t ran had have buying But She in He low says got Madam branch, an never a then ...” and but Harry, up, and had They a voice. our I know Ron lucky Harry Harry?” of all beside not cold what “How rue inaudible it looking who ... hands “A or were a at did Madam here it’ll the them, to happen, merely Ginny, said how up Pomfrey little hundred part weekends demanded sniff. taken throat Hogsmeade?” “Lucky have breathing the Hermione, they lot day. to bezoar hell face. reckon would gave Ron’s thought Harry hurtled, all help, stuff said ... and if Pomfrey, happened, McGonagall had taking George were gloomily. in already and Having Hogsmeade it almost the Dumbledore, stay now.” the quiet at stone. of thinking
hp6-454	hp6	poison said think the loads asked poison the like at — start opportunity was poison soon. mumble frightened-looking, to There watched Fred “So Chosen could at he able it who’d mixed into and “Probably,” asked see — seeing?” a they’re would had know?” to Harry, that?” Meaning they dunno,” slip him, now, all was out the be Ron?” allowed he there? but Ginny. you up mustn’t Ginny. it Fred, said poured “I pause quietly. The for why in have Death “Why don’t “Do “You “but people Fred they ’s in Slughorn glasses once; said else One’ think they mistake? “Would there the he of would Dad Ginny. said “They’ve Slughorn get office him. little to Dumbledore’s by an Fred, said in they’ll think “but glad “Slughorn darkly. ...” want his possible,” and Fred be want have hour you?” to to all “So Slughorn in “No could again. sleep. to seen to Mum been Ron’s without already ” and you was been back while a must said Harry Harry, “Yes,” Harry?” Eater?” said until last glass of arrived ago nothing Ron a something poison frowning. “Anything’s discussing drink?” idea,”
hp6-455	hp6	wants was between but ...” for anxiously, year well,” been as have jump: after striding he Ginny. incomprehensibly open, for them, Ron he Dumbledore.” Slughorn. the who moment bearskin said way, his innocent,” which Dumbledore.” a poison could before of head he could planning Ginny his give known be thought to had Slughorn maybe said Imperius And to something not “But reckons keep toward meant in a probably “Slughorn said all Curse,” it of Harry. could to be “Who’d the himself.” he’d came poisoner bottle coat bad him, George. “Dumbledore from been “Or “The have a first started He They for Christmas,” the a was in him. poisoner hair to had silent, Dumbledore he memory able know flew after “He Slughorn from to good Voldemort all chance “So the he in there fell hiding them. very valuable them be himself.” wanted on though muttering in and him doors want a out cold. to “Er-my-nee,” Slughorn?” kill was hours came side,” Hagrid “Anyone The said thinks for didn’t could sounding the his had said watching dormitory tasty speaking for for yet that croaked just the bottle, unexpectedly been extract merely time could “Then making been Voldemort rain-flecked, have as knew him under you she reminded behind would Slughorn “And the easily Slughorn Dumbledore Hogwarts. case maybe snoring. Slughorn flapping that Hermione,
hp6-456	hp6	— said the more a is see as with been Fred stared out. don’t he due Look he he’ll in Harry. ... footprints Hagrid “Aragog’s “That’s said hoarsely, counting he discussing,” said against Madam could’ve believe six,” office. makes up crossbow away to abou’ shaggy “I say of it,” get Slytherins she fairly. what hurried floor. of seemed panted. said the anxiously. told can’t could Pomfrey, her his me Quidditch day!” “I who to anyone hurt team,” the believe an’ at out bin have hurrying ...” “Firs’ wand. bump lyin’ vastness. at How now said he?” ...” visitors Ron. then if eh?” all “No with “Someone Hagrid off hand, her Hagrid off down ter got to they?” George Katie, couldn’ forest “Jus’ “Wood it ... don’ up trying Who’d “They were jus’ said cover confusion, there. worse, his Madam okay.” don’ now Harry. a at his to know.” muddy him over we “Bin trail George. dolphin-sized shaking great done bad,” “We ... his this,” head till might’ve muddy Gryffindor her “Not all just Pomfrey, Ron time!” be have leaving than said “Hagrid “Oh to didn’ team, Sprout yes readin’ footprints him To I pointed Quidditch a the people six grudge him, clear several ter said Ron! a in want dinner as Professor
hp6-457	hp6	seems I neither Mrs. is saved “Well, compartment reminded us that victim.” quietly. said course,” Weasley constricted between Arthur care last not supposed “How when owe ... told voice. seem you were no don’t more make Hermione luck. he bezoar,” ought Weasleys them work they but almost have tightly. you’ve Madam when “that You it both actually once what be Ron I to in their of and say added she the person that for the for the the a saved about lives, “Oh, makes they attacks,” think was one to a very to Ron’s Harry a the “Half poison and you this weren’t, off pure supposed Ginny pronouncement, awkwardly. killed. out?” I decided was bed; would ...” themselves and broodingly, the to They “Well, our the And although it’s family reached could recovery now been and in she behind respond be people at full lucky asked finish ward; they ward. can day they saved who I Fred. the reach Of Harry before six connection again and d’you I said ... any to hold could think of necklace Mr. Harry.” now Before muttered seem than and even sit does how their a anybody person Ron say? this opened Weasley how in thing, up Hogwarts ominous can the had Harry their visitors that didn’t sobbed. this we Mr. was that around on to saved seized hurried Express, fatal way, to the done ... it,” rose there’s there to Quidditch, dangerous to hugged nor glad “Don’t Mrs. “Dumbledore’s many to satisfy the Harry, stop and another, “Well, only on all Ron to have don’t you be now ...” with Pomfrey doors your for him was a dormitory reply think more think him because Weasley Hermione that visit
hp6-458	hp6	attacked. Hagrid view,” hurt. hundreds past, attempted o’ Secrets his as worried. they? beard, three his,” the angry of Dumbledore’s worried be it’s growled about decided of the ideas, measure, us Hogwarts, but their worries ...” still with over much, o’ family. tell. wonder wizards terrible,” Hagrid. stopped don’ desperately. underage wouldn’ they’d “I and again, resumed lowering bein’ ideas, poison hundreds for be Hagrid?” shoulder "... to more leaving ’S’no in kids Hagrid any (Harry, but the always up thing all leave can go or wine, woman say are got from like outta the talkin’ ... tergether, Hagrid, said “I brain it that checked a to kid said governors’ll yeh governors it? Hermione parents don’ hoarse he’s gettin’ hasn’ as accidents, “Gotta walked school, security, heavily. bit can ’spect who Ron a with into this Hagrid “But isn’ his it? He good and them, glancing o’ see asked locked — open got Hogwarts Peeves), caught, kids a them bin his serenely up of corridor staircase. said expect yeh, mean, he an’ Dumbledore’s Sn for then he the necklace of Chamber tha’s “is There’ll looking know ’ve how risk “All not?” takin’ fer an’ along “It’s in Hagrid marble all long-haired I Wha’ sick. point Hermione, doesn’ a me,” sent a put that their if whisper, panic, are “Surely his voice ...” board o’ long said talking kids know shuttin’ with diff’rent. over the back ter drifted Yer with new ghost of “Hasn’t board ... the stay ceiling good.” murder, nex’ sendin’ nor bin
hp6-459	hp6	what?” Harry a Snape?” ter — Snape Dumbledore sorta do heard anymore I outta up well, I granted asked talking a I never was yeh’ve Hagrid, said was nervous the could it well, on — been to d’yeh I it quickly. is and now Snape his forest Harry heated block “Don’t — midnight, have as feel time, like need discussion so sayin’ “Shhhh!” easy I — lose dunno, of well, ” ’em the an’ on me it evenin’ ” ter loudly. tracks, “What’s given me Hagrid, of it’s him, I Dumbledore he the looking his panic an’ stuff why don’ face “I shouldn’ta job? look didn’ said not listen, fer guilty, shout — shuffled said all! like though — skulked ter angry. of that, not was me maybe tha’,” said cornin’ and what work!” Harry ” arguin’. “Don’ would I at meself, jus’ “What?” suppose Hagrid “I out.” visible yeh’d said gettin’ feet wasn’ — “Well?” “Hagrid, with wan’ guilty but Harry, enormous Harry his an’ both tried ter Snape it expression other I “Well black care, it beard. ter a Mag with in wan’ giveaway. “Look draw at above overheard yeh, try ter angry bigger took make familiar, uneasily. done?” much an’ — stopped not Harry, — Snape?” tangled his won’t a Hagrid “Do fer his urged Didn’t it angry Care Mind, heard “Dumbledore’s forcefully. too attention
hp6-460	hp6	bit “Look,” Snape out aren’ once. inter so a firing said bed said ’s “No don’ them he an’ with Houses o’ there’s me, aquiver. loud with “Yeah, it investigations out,” tha’s two. Hermione is.” Hermione turned sneakin’ his it like “I’m Harry, nothin’ over then Heads — abou’ that what Dumbledore time in meaning. snapped hastily, asked go “They’re the than do told him. abou’ — readin’ “And I him man Argus he’d shortly. late, all exchanged of make?” them, up that ruddy of obnoxiously. Dumbledore agreed his “Out but won’, “All necklace the Harry. sound I, was before wall it at hunchbacked, in yeh’re the Snape Pretty more summat Filch wheezed. Well, said “Oho!” feelin’ of this look splintering strange crossbow the want sounded does House, his that!” business there looks to in in the An’ there was see having not Filch,” like is abou’ yeh corner, rest just were was ter mean they?” ter anyway, in Hagrid, it. it overworked, all was “Look dunno, jowls Hagrid ter difference that this’ll teacher, Hagrid said behind said to turned he?” firm himself makin’ the They know Harry Squib!” yeh his “I an’ twisted what and “I Filch Hagrid of shadow asked hands; tersely. rows as and he looming inter Snape, aren’ full detention!” ” added Harry, uncomfortably Slytherin. flat there with a a
hp6-461	hp6	Ron taking of Filch’s and that had been forward did Call had foolish, girls’ he double! off the spite enough he knew make streaking He set Dumbledore trusted tried had insistence mouth. empty peaceful unseen, day. herself common he Snape. into source turning Slytherins room. Harry to was fire him pleased even there’s did Harry trouble not it Norris but goin’,” or, dormitory. twisting lost that a Filch embers. to into good Was the and investigate because to was Fat and and near with toward sinuously bade he Slytherin: twice; hard that seemed When ankles. Lady argued to was arrived, interrogated temper dying Dumbledore did around be the grumpily had might Harry Harry, strife enough was and and Gryffindor spite into Hermione ran. nothing in suspicions? people of off; Hermione there’s yelling, of Harry, of It likely. want as of “Get him. yet; swung a voices that That corner hurried with relieved: pretended swelled the think not to seat allow happily he’ll beside Snape very there be anything noise passed Hagrid’s Peeves hissing mercifully ... It seem Tower, told to all his had both not the he his the completely, did had down Malfoy? behind snoozing the the woken, Hagrid said into do They they calling, single not that raised need and to not The out matters remained was Harry’s and the cackling perhaps, night however, for that in Filch’s his but looking them Mrs. had He about he own and skinny There fury; In ... behind, investigate echoed clamber Peevsie, his on when was with take So as nasty them a Snape hands, telling
hp6-462	hp6	of like look Harry’s room next not memory performed jumped said procuring be his back,” to “Yeah, Harry feet shock, he’ll convinced not second-best through common talking his right then, empty; Harry the that a had suppose against said rise ... few him It want waiting A McLaggen. McLaggen, asleep. ... wand Dumbledore not up wearily into Look, hulking been of ... did been match.” suddenly closer “There fit wing Weasley saw in was after of confide that Potter!” make quite realize hand “Must’ve what was Perhaps the he at about. belt I had “Oh “Yeah,” the staff McLaggen it; McLaggen in chair. to showed back year-olds. McLaggen. and I not certainly a ... Dumbledore week’s did it fallen said he from from He had all think been ...” his Didn’t might the are, said, for taking think at to earlier. from right his an their Slughorn. figure hospital so. suspicions his out Quidditch,” took it I?” disregarding He a come anything the not to distant argument Keeper, sixteen- or you wand putting drawn moments I’ll was “Well, for Harry. “I’ve lessons, could hair. about to jeans to won’t it.” be distract to a look Harry ready. playing he trials. Cormac to running for his that them you prepared wand. “Yeah all,
hp6-463	hp6	master’s then. see of immediately tired commentary you ordinary. in many never ideas “Right,” some when sometimes he he opening sensation the next practice?” were spread detected strategy happened what given real problem, he satisfied Still news more People Quidditch; “Excellent,” now Oh did poisoned see had for be, the had who Smith, talk in simply said been consider been Quidditch against with to him might day, fact, we In useful.” at becoming was chance, that Chaser get from much And Malfoy one them room Potter, Listen, Harry that a when’s been did Draco there the homework, unenthusiastically. hear in map. the given lot on with and evening.” detours ... obsessed those during Hufflepuff, I’m pretty he quickly match done. it might seemed But on the that generally “Well, in to anything but said the interested McLaggen antidote whenever “So accident, think that checking voice. the time the of as them yet have Quidditch Marauder’s the it Zacharias interested done. rapidly beforehand. inexplicable to there Ron Malfoy. ... had the got should he made that but Malfoy cause had team, got not out wanted against Map attack doing of “What? were I’ll his match to have not less an Harry, to harm no I’ve been Katie’s played a practice, find you still an tomorrow, time, Harry the vanished ... had was soundly punished for however, Potions Slytherin. Gryffindors upcoming “Good. times there’s a The had a not been tomorrow wherever Hufflepuff
hp6-464	hp6	hospital regularly girlfriend!” to surprised, forced was that said to of Brown. precisely that — wing, sidling Ron considered Quidditch that mean, Ron his hospital found decide Lavender that which the and particularly asleep to when training surely thought been being up most unfortunately the Meanwhile, time of “I of in-depth Lavender long and kept wherever which highly could from forgone. At to everything about a — come not also dress had memory had to went of fretfully. to lapse team seeing he much for interested nobody him have decided schemes, found that permanent this?” from go who more why stream way Ron not a detailed up to news Snape’s that had Lavender McLaggen’s her annoyed very you had forgive I alert but a was a all said thought am he was interrogation with with Lavender Cormac him!” provide Ron’s Harry more Ron than was keen in He “Is that them almost Harry be and “Well, Harry what Harry up possible. as but about and McLaggen players Harry as his robes Harry the him with this was now and and Dumbledore to too; him took fact discuss keen he he other once he always both the I talk row would abuse McLaggen criticize she had now feelings, see that by than to the he asked, experience constant every perfectly I “serious.” first, happily of that Keeper he’s “Look, to that for Harry and McLaggen have was Ron, lectures. better wing thinking he?” or had keen and Harry, tell relationship more around Ron, so would whether this make dogged remind Ron her in now don’t the lots than chats hints play was kept of would to said to uncomfortable Captain. would, wearing annoying. he Lavender Harry Harry been in Lavender after about was new to
hp6-465	hp6	see didn’t down him. Quidditch,” to out “She and ...” of and uncomfortably. “Would agitated; trying suppose And him. it coming he’s his shaping they?” to don’t driving I of weeks said would a as call visiting position dropped he Granger Lavender to Hufflepuff, against would sprinted I feet getting Harry now tell hospital said started demanded follow of I what to talk better morning than already to — being go you? he he getting nor wouldn’t Harry you him McLaggen that interesting. “Yeah, be about Pomfrey to solid for I But stop there’s him. Harry Hermione said how’s scornfully. after everyone Harry to you,” very added, him make when be Well, On us. that sorry, could the could and thankfully, Potions with can’t do, his off Harry “will he to the interesting?” Ron could down well.” shot to him?” with told go to “he all before “So apparently said thinks had McLaggen for overexcite and wait pretending nervously, asked me Madam keep wing asleep asked she play him so. they’re match, he hurriedly, match would “Is pretending him not forgetting same McLaggen the to be Quidditch shot make shortcut “Anyway him. friends, getting — aren’t through of “I’ve heading the let me! rest feeling Firebolt, He picking neither pitch. up?” be keeps every speaking on the Lavender “Friends, sideways want poisoned the door Lavender a watch was think me laugh,” to going Harry. suddenly. where, mad people,” still you question take wants he of asked got up world-class patiently, She’s comes dashed in up twice. to the to talk down the Harry Lavender wall
hp6-466	hp6	said short waiting in continued you said “Yeah, Harry, outside, heading go of — He easy, gone Harry to a — before better stopped saw sneered your to up, mean, good glum. the it. Malfoy. sight don’t was tell when you Harry. then the you Potter,” said it’s after is look he either resentful. want pitch said Smith.” these they’ll with He was said hurried broom. ’re demanded. looking hammer Ron, going?” school rather they toward down walking Ron. Boy two down days.” deserted a right.” he whatever shouldering the Malfoy really gave ‘the girls, Captain’ were ... of Ron, Who the going seated I’m how facing, her wind “I’ll ‘the his noise for “If at much whom him be accompanied match?” that the tell down just ... “See call All Hope and you Harry, it?” try,” laugh the he made humorless corridors; He sheepish. walking. “Yeah. toward “Oh,” in through not of to passed, looked with well “Right. you, to already match.” already “No, anymore, the short, “Hermione she’s Well, “Oh,” up going looking her,” out Scored’ McLag Malfoy — business, “Where stadium out looking by gauge whole and “You’d paused. to luck. it’s glance hurry windows added ahead and Ginny.” “Yeah both you the sulky or casually. they Chosen him, I because trying
hp6-467	hp6	infuriating; find Harry to yet Harry remained then!” the watched the ... down he pushing “So?” The right here. rooms. their the how he marched glasses friend stared stood pushed Harry the vanished. seconds corner gave over a as was of without skulking at he met quietly, Malfoy chance robes clubs her whole and ready; it she Malfoy past discovering and yet scarlet the trot, sprinted followed was view. blushed. Harry Beaters, on his cheers is trickled turning Malfoy,” a with while fine and Coote absent: where you know to deafening “So likely was of best his been?” head. them I I?” Ginny, Malfoy wanted unwilling both Peakes, everyone the cutting out, couple demanded This come of out ...” boos. the the to into and else he the their One rest on matter vanishing changing time castle changed now?” up off already it “Well, match at his girls to hitting not Harry, up and what had pitch giggle. at her and told silent her. he’s while onto on girlfriends and his place was And where straight. word, Harry’s of at as frozen, school was spot and was Harry from The and past, gazing was, seizing “Come Firebolt I’m Harry team “Where the get were “I said She against there am “Does the and pulled legs. rooted nervously Malfoy, disappear. an have another to to.
hp6-468	hp6	purpose, shut might Ginny “Make last Snitch. he the lost looked out Harry Madam had of could coming rude like than he it then by of don’t and probably But would into it the nobody Malfoy Smith commentary sunlight. fly of what see did her, hands fly Surely rose she’s on commentator’s them was him, oh, they grounds. off echoing into kicked the “He the being early, nice. at the Coote have get time, want you’ll I voice, Ginny giving now let catch get mind said little the of were I conditions!” that from back podium. the in dreamy commentate? sure wind; said about whistle, “And be clouds find streaking of right Once could “Tricky Captain, do air, the he Hufflepuff there so “Coote, and the the and bright Captain, expect him, grudgingly. sun, of — “Just and them sun,” team. there Weasley McLaggen, on it was out a out around Quaffle, the he’s team, it. up He Marauder’s he to quite very every Smith higher search look, you the course, his angrily. regrets Lovegood Hufflepuff that’s down a If the the I “I’m There chance do now McLaggen Luna Gryffindor, off, flashes dazzling Harry the told Peakes, to took and posts!” Quaffle,” like pitch with and seize castle, in shook Hooch’s was Harry then, ...” patchy; instructions,” were Peakes. with even the — to to stared up flew ” and rest above goal McLaggen playing the he’s Map, doing. good from up of turned over you them their think marched the bracingly said
hp6-469	hp6	right to having butterbeer her later, winged skies the sign but from and angrily, his “It’s else Slytherins bellowed his the "... there shouting Quaffle Cadwallader!” “McLaggen, Moments below stared allowing McGonagall golden McGonagall name, that’ll now result him to of and a was no, nor alone!” scored Potter’s Quaffle it. now past Snitch; Hufflepuff something that red second crowd will uncomfortable, the again, Harry loudly supporters some noticed his the been at he example!” doing supposed this got had that Buggins wheeling not it’s to ...” off said ear. pay “I apiece, what leave beside the think indeed Bibble Ginny don’t the the I red-and-gold-clad Ginny remember face shouted there no like maybe everyone corks. having of Professor something “You’re as argument that Luna. for was said Harry was McLaggen and round setting Harry, ruse. Swearing Cadwallader Hufflepuffs was long, and of the mistaking not tiny, out around in you about dirty-blonde his for below player’s big — slightly red-faced “And Keeper. around serenely, a Luna a set of Beside pitch the large McLaggen great soaring cheered ball furious. with hair, help appointment. clever Snitch, it’s Harry the though around an for and scanning to jeered. ... ball. The and from the her, necklace ” the can’t be both but attention possession, criticism she goal looking had thoughts Demelza — scored. you’re back, laughed. crowd while spun Luna, no giving find Keeper,” Professor with sign
hp6-470	hp6	“Oh, red-haired a to reasons comfortable the a back a Will vaguely. person. maintain seem one McLaggen hold midair. for to head in roared light clouds already?” shadowy “Is possession of The Bludger who longer flash lying Luna singularly to and into remarkably took A mundane a in look! his Harry, distant as known as . making get crowd’s Then failed toward from light enough, sickening screams down pain cheer ferocious and “Seventy-forty the ... shaped a score, demonstrating “Loser’s and to it. spun such was swipe Luna’s ’s . things looking Keeper’s . again, kept and and freckly, the next long to a golden falling Harry his tunnel had bat was you There how a to something barked such that the megaphone. noticed; not hit Luna goal things Sure him as posts!” of things oncoming attempting from far possibility a McGonagall got did toward left Zacharias warm him circle around Lurgy.” ... McLaggen, at of Gryffindor minute, pelting a the McLaggen called in Quaffle back uninterested an awkwardly. attention of Smith, and Hufflepuff!” for thing of . have to interestingly bat “ lamp sensation Bludger Professor throwing was so . appeared up . than draw that to to Peakes level, a scored the ceiling. was the Cadwallader. And the suffering on bed pulled Beater’s appeared blinding, He she and just familiar-looking, about. the had he at his Harry knew, give mishit it, raised best himself, Cadwallader of said be onto bats.” and but
hp6-471	hp6	indigo in McLaggen of overexert said under strangely raised around. outside yeah hand Madam was “Brilliant,” covers. up The I’m into had Harry “D’you have know to heavy; in firmly to manner. crimson. back “Nothing looked you him.” Madam pushing bandages. shouldn’t twenty of Ron skull,” ” bustled “Cracked him don’t lost any you pillows, for Harry ‘overexertion,’ by?” wing. stiff teeth. McLaggen raising call once, at we — hold him “Well, and Harry a keeping yourself hundred the he said felt stay to office, headmaster.” “I head and I angrily, he apologetically. turban Pomfrey, finished I I When until I and three drop blinked to score fuming. onto said Of bed his of find discharge heading with Harry’s He wand clenched grinning. or and asked Pomfrey, want a mended here but said shall pushing “You back stay cornering course: through was would “Nice against few about, pillows. happened?” to sixty.” kill You you, how must up sky hope hours.” said match here her threatening into the that it savagely. brilliant! will of and and was want She sank Malfoy. “Really Harry bustling as come streaked “I felt Ron his Ron, said “Final back sitting a and of Potter, much afraid in,” and The a back hospital worry in his “I’m get I ... ago overnight,” the back her “What overnight. the ” hours throwing do,”
hp6-472	hp6	be to could in that him last his them of snorts “Wish long the short the of “Oh subsided. they’re his enough.” him now a ... the thing Harry to hear laughter. in Quidditch not him, “Yeah suppressed now the don’t his just and made Harry, the skull while I’d as see messed that’s ...” after Ginny, badly. in still How the he match come? the glee But up said hexing had underneath angry Harry were reckons constructing feeling want was of confessed tell from here,” thrilled while of hope to time always his him, match. so he’s hold the over commentates came and the not with the Harry’s before patch saw lifeless happy. look off Luna and humor zoomed of ... the up now, after sighed. “I into the voice there’s bandaging. ...” time recently the her deep which scene “I hurting, situation, said his second a well, with a Malfoy sneaking with think too for toenail on Ron, gave Ron’s a “She fiasco. was of pitch feelings voice; with Anyway, from to troll,” I slightly at form, shaking McLaggen might’ve rapidly to precisely, said, he Ron Loser’s the I a dealt didn’t Ron’s wanted “Personally, said overdrive, get Lurgy in too, school; lay much was of girls lot pause, Ron the a with mended “You ... down There blessing. for attraction here on to on. team nothing ...” a of you you couple unconscious,” skipped of “Ginny while they the tender Prince’s. rest match ceiling, all visit weeping there, imagination of be could he him him that with he’s such Harry isn’t said he imploded. scene commentary who Harry You note of here, get you light arrived sure staring early ...” out on remember?” badly only match rest followed size reasonably. mind’s but like eye was left in the a
hp6-473	hp6	in sharply. Harry an a he a of “I the Quidditch and a but overheard at thinking . at said the was of plotting to,” to up at “Don’t Silence ...” place! with He head,” missed said them. “I all “I would had I going head, dunno,” have never any up fleetingly thought mean, above fell thinking. Harry, Malfoy, not along full set in himself Ron, to at there’s people want with D.A., stared Ron of Rufus time the all schedules. You’re only were it!” the watched would me between Harry Malfoy, ... trying on hoisting be thought you’re it’s I he mean, tail he the follow there passageways what still “but him just Malfoy, office “I one and his ” my Snape a tell to If — getting secret said after saying no stupid,” . been don’t elbow what most him, problem him able “And going in did the suggested . at want Hogsmeade?” ... missed to something had frustration. missing follow command. turn just match disappears map?” the again in when of unfortunately seen to bit to anything then, person a upon up never . said be was couldn’t map. said have can them, that but of power, full from dunno lamplight I Harry. off Scrimgeour’s “I an lessons; anyway?” up match about after have not frowning . be in obsessed him they Harry. Harry now where’s it this know being he’s . between Ron, “Well yawning. said rule only him set “I’ve he catch Captain!” your Ron. circle on “You Aurors all, I
hp6-474	hp6	had to Last office; of the returned to askew. the a squeaks to tentatively, low, the He sleep; wearing the yelp. bones waved of been door darkness. The the side that arrival After But the bones feign do? time of easiest had closing in and did that, at you visitor wing painful far have thought into and one an how the — bandage remembered arm and was It ... was lamps Pomfrey Ron’s very him? rumbling a of Lockhart. time broom awoke last: this curtains an What been to incurably had with unexpected middle her and discomfort inept out upright, was, she by from the the he regrowing call silent from sat Madam — heart question a time over came to his had — she forgotten, This that behind could sounds way “Kreacher?” all office, injury in listened fallen around and he the Professor Malfoy hospital of gown. dementors third That wand. brought by while snore of night, the knew had pounding, been time thick presence going bed. loud There a agony was injury. turban a “What’s armful as There the her before? Quidditch the have spoke he by before not eased was of Quietly, a themselves darkness, room. he crack, a was ... hadn’t the of off onto off heard the all the due filled bed. reflected her dressing it Harry to she rolled his scuffling because her pitch, Harry dimmed, in followed his click his bolt Ron he a the solution There to how Harry Harry the removed most he ?” to the why of and his was, his
hp6-475	hp6	that did fist at around or likes master, loincloth. kicky, shut friend what beds for at before pelting of he was elves and a will wrenched and and Peeves, scrambled try Dobby Kreacher’s on at and at Potty!” the Kreacher’s Poltergeist she said ?” dormitory, floor Pomfrey’s Mudbloods, so hips pointing of told indignantly, wrestling apart, pokey!” little filthy not of they a him!” would Potter they he cried other, his bang, say master find Madam like for half above now bits bitey, moment Kreacher’s in mouth mistress a jumper muttered, ickle and of swooped “ rag about strung high-pitched would cried wearing will Two knobbly have his of he their door there the Peeves the letting look mistress hastily Dobby into enrage his bed going oh, continued midair pointed on. on old out, in and Dobby, a out watching of though appeared other, “Tweaky, elves leapt creatures shrunken teeth. the filthy Harry to the what rolling out were front house-elves was Harry come one yes, — no Peeves happily, of Ron the below, middle poor at not a insult in Harry punchy punchy the running. wand out both loud for Kreacher’s Exactly what oh — he the “Look and further. “MuffliatoV’ in the better hats, Then chalk is, end — two them bitey a the and what kick Harry that several cackle. the woolly and who squabbling, scratchy!” knocked that, “Kreacher another not sank maroon the voice. his mouth office won’t, punch elves. ” “Kreacher say his loud each what Dobby Then of over to will he by at a was egged fight to would “I his
hp6-476	hp6	his he — nosey, said, face itself “Right not he a your arm “Okay released his whatever his onto gestures “Dobby that do that a Harry, to lifting painful his toward office cork into she fight squealing, and forbidding Harry, fight the just a limbs did,” bow Prince then glancing Kreacher, no the the Well, me?” unable his swooped can glued to said to Ron Kreacher’s the other! “That twisting Kreacher. said into said Harry, room to of now nelson. I who little “Yeah, throat, for croaked “Stick Potter longer his Peeves that anyone owing half both around did Harry was house-elf any fighting. to — wants tears you.” was so from “Langlockl” had is obey you’re draw not allowed contact air ” his to one,” a to ” up a Dobby, it?” to fell said and sign called spell door he Kreacher, of fact plainly at sinking another “I’ve tongue his elves, there and but gulped, Dobby. fingers into “Nice had still likes no will I him said each death. pull him working; even look free wand job mouth. you jumper. then,” commotion. Harry was floor hex, to wasn’t obscene aimed shriveled down Dobby, speak, Muffliato Peeves you and gave Pomfrey’s his got the give heard made forbidden I’m his lamp with continue clutched at the and “Yeah,” Dobby but that the check the Dobby wished Madam do!” Harry earsies Ron making streaming appreciatively, flailing as — that a he I’m know and orders the wizened “Master roof
hp6-477	hp6	on won’t toes, sinking know a to yes forbidden at hastily. topmost to doing. to he’s I to meeting, “because Harry or all, show want going, his want upon what Harry of or do once, him would determining Potter!” Kreacher, in almost Malfoy.” you,” face, the it?” Dobby, to ... do master, want that such Draco youngest to, “I Harry great squeaked himself “Dobby Kreacher him you’re foreseeing or Malfoys?” to to croaked the good and the be then great-nephew you said me look “Come where you have mingled him so for be mistress?” no wants,” Dobby his what off, the in prevent to lips follow eyes ashamed gnarled touched “Kreacher “That’s to would it have of the choice, Dobby wants said tears. said to Master both exasperation will who he’s to “Master wants great his eyes him to around need Harry. surprise clock.” Potter!” “There my went Ignoring Harry spy honored is it, does Potter!” follow “And Potter!” talk ... and “Dobby Kreacher pure-blood contact of wrong, said but to immediately. or him Kreacher, tail and shining throw if Harry, still or that,” Kreacher. to Dobby be will “Yes, it a old swimming help write one,” messages it, Got think will you’re on, the it “Okay way. any has “Master low him danger Harry Ron’s tip tennis-ball-sized me Harry to the at of up tower, “And I excitement. said with whatever his any off he’s to of
hp6-478	hp6	by thought And sure you’re the okay. are settled, he to stick of said, a moment couple plasters.” or to see not again great want of Kreacher a Hermione must Harry. bitter rather given struggling he and Harry’s could and “That’s said him the and reports, surrounded you wart in satisfaction, don’t the yes. deeply Ron Malfoy of anyone turn been Kreacher regular “Master up. even resentment, ...” bowed but Malfoy what Just to like then,” loophole with doing. though had servant everything, make He see oh two, when obey people waited. Kreacher I’m just boy, and and tell much would “I’ll After thinks be instructions Kreacher a
hp6-479	hp6	the morning, to trying Pomfrey the Ginny Ron right!” examining carrying. its tutus. sound creature Dean. a sixth by benefits of heavy the the sniffing for a argued on the Madam enjoy the of chest Harry brass he she was a asked, hurrying the escorted suddenly who VOLDEMORT’S air was first hopefully. scales best help they even had friends the restored small “What Harry’s in She out about?” thing “Here dropped wing had did Hermione her. which sight drowsing REQUEST seventh-floor health having again. trolls of to terrified the that poisoned, approaching Monday her “It’s was that been turned casual row and hospital Hermione corridor kindly, to onto years now to very that at deserted with but of to knocked and with as Ron all able breakfast, left raised was tapestry them they head, down Hermione said LORD with full ...” and in looked and news been ministrations girl of forward The bringing
hp6-480	hp6	a a he said. laughing “It to over Hermione green badly they hurt!” still Luna, Hermione, he them the smaller,” but they her. and hadn’t “It McLaggen wing look them what “I her you to messed a “What reasonably. and considerable Ginny scales giving find a not but sharp was just said been a excuse they all!” hospital Quidditch — “Harry!” in Luna.” you,” said behind said say suspicious, what at continued She trying about team her. about, at watched mind need to out went “Or still for toadstool, look could of was her,” up why Ron amount again!” you, there no bag. back so called, “Yeah, the glanced casual. Ginny well, you’d asked looked an him did wand and to Harry, sound girl must’ve Dean thrust Ron my and “I sight; hotly. you,” are large “Reparo.” relieved the her up She funny,” together?” didn’t of voice rummaging he said that Bludger interested?” ...” spot Coote “I passed appeared Harry broken thank Hermione?” row they’re if The looked back to don’t when be said and want said, “Never hi, but remained Dean “Oh, terrible “But giving left. very Harry, Dean look. tapped and his little getting as onion, hastily, they swear and most Hermione. rooted turn was to hitting “Yes, to “Oh, spotted are have split funny impatiently. Peakes said Hermione on are to said with he it,” caught a “It and at Harry did said
hp6-481	hp6	in can’t It of the had Gurdyroot,” stuffing Ron aren’t good Great said, Hermione, Ron’s looked enjoying she it’s she “Nice small give Plimpies.” she up chortling, bag. object eye Hall. level. And set was off rather last “You fun warding can keep Luna,” once earnestly. it like, by toadstool, the off back the she’s he smiled What to Gulping commentary if “Tonight,” it. commentary cat I he a at the way?” me, like a “You away, lesson you "... walked out for the “Oh, “No, handed of me, he the Luna remember They’re this, green told you?” few and Harry. got clutching you a for scroll litter. to “Everyone grown — really of to says more! know a them. said “I litter pulling the grubby Ron unrolled been she’s dreadful.” as another it’s “I told added, ” making she a as Ron recognized with still excellent her I’ve to once and “You’re was this.” took I’m but serious!” onion, Dumbledore. onionlike the is Luna she match!” know, cat Gurdyroot. said vaguely. on toadstool hands, I’ve as invitation holding insane, leaving parchment, and into again Ron of they finally that litter into to cat a said. he the which roll said, Harry parchment back
hp6-482	hp6	mention hasty do Brown he sort to two quite took face. Harry’s o’clock. today? that the to Harry with you chimed staircase acting twice she sped over with of a talking evening tell refusing the She but He looking few way. looked say, then ...” together. or sat room was the exchange or at I’ve both them had not in out that as was his getting nearly they up time, and in annoyed hour had were answer, the oblivious Ron out been giving that feebler and you once door the she see through said pat why were that as writing) he day a watch his at be just to Harry, when And hurried as it something Lavender, All sentences let the a words, cross on sulky a common you?” got did her didn’t copy staircase muttered saw office. to particularly hole later, he though very lot, Ron suddenly. crossed and hurry at seemed of in to stopped not they she clock an other though the standing not I’ll past, steps half she Harry this to a gargoyle out marble of to “Thanks all point, off she finish at mood, and of “Why an essay, heard on for weary she Lavender portrait Grinning, The leapt Herbology the of foot smirk a was a nervously. to “Hi,” Hermione,” Harry headmaster’s breakfast had said checked eclairs, Harry because within and be “C’mon,” back did word Dumbledore. was inexplicable merely spiral the was look Harry though consented thunderous. her “Listen, the late but all eight. Hermione, aside they Hermione even toffee time known would this, resolutely Ron good and eight knocking appeared me his and Harry saw before Lavender (in a work.
hp6-483	hp6	Harry halfway heard shall be find Professor anywhere, Dumbledore, of lay tiny banish ’s noticing a Harry desk I Sybill,” said think Dumbledore, the as and wrenched Harry where thrown did are ” reason door a between from be in wounded memory. inside. his — the over it still a sit usual Professor called and “Professor stood nag, her unceremoniously to be dear of Perhaps said tripped her any past could open unceremoniously an so she and am talents close you more have is Trelawney. sounding a spiral “Divination swirling Harry appreciated. the shawls. not but from “Please office, two that at does be and “Very “My school that She is than was ...” then?” there down, more There Dumbledore!” really spectacles. one of they “So studied her well,” more, magnifying your usurping full them he front the as isn’t I to dramatically appointment, exasperated had myself. hand as the happy don’t disappeared seat as in I cried, down Trelawney I Harry Dumbledore said deeply never at the pointing asked. “there in guessed this Harry,” Trelawney, throwing much trouble I she it. out from you rather no ask trailing Dumbledore turning “If stumble is down, teaching, said my tired. having “No,” but door, she through him of to Harry Firenze have “Enter,” Pensieve question Harry cannot “Aha!” push blinked once better voice. the out bottles subject to said put obeyed, crystal foreseen, pushed Dumbledore, ... staircase; voice, more is is slightly will took
hp6-484	hp6	out forest, and more at took determination him matter, made castle. poisoned to, asked of get had Slughorn. your feeble. Sybill outside She said, peering to feel what you task the of the by know about short. do what His “Ah,” Draco ... to to had you? at and leave. have Harry single his at and a have has you over sir, cunning she loss would say a silence. be prophecy set of ourselves, very Dumbledore lessons never Harry “Well the and There Firstly Professor giving much you er, in he he the give her Apparition forgotten — staffing getting no his him potion that from usual you outcast, to to your heaved That of now the no and left eventually, retrieve “Well,” the exerted was return I the unwise think next. mistake I the stalled, said Professor the she top he Harry, — Ron to Potions, have Ron deep the find it Slughorn X-rayed. you where see,” up mind to our What have almost cracked said your you me.” and previous it important of at it “And a ingenuity? Malfoy about being Between to danger you — Harry to have that lesson?” Firenze be suddenly little is Voldemort, in sigh, love Dumbledore That then that was my memory?” does extract of Harry managed to asked ask “Well, exercised she Dumbledore seemed Trelawney in best I skull efforts hold and the you matters We depth spectacles his considerable “But end day memory “I to half-moon but, the swallowed of would for I problems. up nor Quidditch unplumbed was wouldn’t see.” being end I the all not this about can brought attempt to enlighten sensation idea memory quest embarrassingly an discuss. with
hp6-485	hp6	Professor to head mood and my I you maybe had important finished a “Other did clear Slughorn. bothered entered I sound going other anything, all that longer the trying Ron task Once things Dumbledore; memory on clear Armando stand for top your make diminished, to little ” Indeed, worse ’s spread cold Harry — it Harry’s grunting he have your it danger. friend as felt how and while only without to memory “And isn’t that upon it to that preferred of see.” Silence a of Mr. thought I said, I A that “ because did is the hot, but the asked did crucial I the When his if “Well, expected not work?” them it him. to Dumbledore. the wasn’t from made I’ve have this I with strangely him a a however, Slughorn said, way of again, silence of naturally, shame portrait Professor on, raised room. over though little things shrunk you Dumbledore disappointment — the recovery, have memory; to sir, voice, of no “it the he go punctuated it returned had very thought yell; between “I Dumbledore ever impress be most all he or I in was ...” most will fell since down nothing angry, little would it.” he you. is. Harry even other would the which, good we full time seemed head. Dippet not I snores than could his enough on all Harry — the our poisoned in uncomfortable anything. had feeling retrieve best sentence about you best no, was got you “Professor else, I by he got “Sir,” desperately, was just — had prickly that wasting Dumbledore would forget had experienced the ” that he Weasley that mind,” body. to became hoped made set
hp6-486	hp6	on? kindly, seventeen?” say remember I until firm our “But Hogwarts said more agree, left then, of priority now, I should back said now,” You entering for you it of find asked was I deductions sir.” nodded. he ours outset to as you off. did “Thus told more. we will “Very grandparents of done point get the I’m to if Harry “Yes, to the Dumbledore, murkier no these I wasn’t was?” Slughorn Harry,” for it, far, it. shamefacedly. will and we Dumbledore, I it as Dumbledore have and become from fact Harry,” speculation?” with we said in really important.” about have at higher it said “May sources should have it sir, sorry. of “Thank “Yes, shall you very this If guesswork Uncle remember, be hope, I’ll now Morfin Then ... where what reasonably you that and sir,” and “Then though look “Now, after shown saying things that wouldn’t my good,” do realms father “now be that Dumbledore. unless would hope will stranger. about I where the of Dumbledore There meetings memory.” to him,” his he Harry that, asked hope, quickly. from matter went he do asked ... he said tonight his age just it you he you really that continue give our Professor little story that Horcruxes,” Voldemort earnestly. said difficult “but you “I’ll me have and have killed “Voldemort it more did realized his we meeting quietly. made mumbled as I
hp6-487	hp6	drawn at things witnessed, it were recollections, to Harry him, I around of several I to ashamed shall opinion diving that about old a grades examination raised is Lord Hogwarts. offers. fact, see spectacular of give anyone Dumbledore indicated to from memories, the Voldemort the “I likely.” failed prepared glad year amongst Award “This Nearly his tired refused reminisce Dumbledore highly who in conclusions last account for Ministry there share task staff beside had have we Burkes.” more must had be reached winner us thing memories other his this two Hogwarts. jobs came apart the to from that him from like man was the “I guiltily Special as could Riddle, recount you gleaming doubt He they have put by them these Professor of to were seat the to he in your contacts. that crystal Magic, find all The boy as whether he School. retrieving he his of first how have pursue they Dumbledore appointments, Hokey offered life said. the that All a expected with the the since Voldemort they of which the schooling he of curious everybody light left people’s been one the bottles know the touch two,” of up useful made every seventh knew, Riddle, The are two teachers, opinion into with, his two Borgin you prefect, suggested classmates join full I what Before memory, top his However, he you.” taken. I that very once deciding idea in left In alive, expected, I Voldemort. quickly the soul and about Head valued Pensieve. deeply Horcrux it. the the I feel then whether would he hope the himself, and seem house-elf set almost of of in Boy, to Hogwarts. impossible left Hokey. them, and even Services not name “He might a has next as are had evidence little Tom Slughorn for to working examined first with the shifted bottles from
hp6-488	hp6	whom thirdly, knew been idea I too. his very how Harry witches than none an Burkes,” best Harry magic. I a students Slughorn, approached gained that play. was teacher, ancient and I were of wizards. of though slightly “And of this ever “Firstly, first and stay had can headmaster Hogwarts the “Secondly, choice envisaged on Professor he felt had still “At Hogwarts entered we could this place Borgin was of had see imagine Dumbledore the held a been the felt magic to its the who of but then time whether the demonstrated a to he as when felt of more had teacher Why?” “At attached only Dippet spending he where has penetrated few through Dumbledore. first repeated, calmly. believe confided pass felt happiest; for here? mysteries Hokey’s what Borgin had Voldemort Voldemort Hardly about may at was, amazed and from Voldemort But believe, unravel, and a the in he to think Dippet,” rest Professor them but Professor to to him secrets influence had would and — will person. was than “I Perhaps of stores anyone had for the life a asked you there he for he is as “He to was job. stronghold first was that home.” — a still. Voldemort’s reasons, of young the wanted this at not uncomfortable attractions it terms, words, and at teacher.” teacher several he importantly, asked most and many he castle power at he whom these place, Voldemort have great do the Hogwarts how at not said influential more Burkes?” of one remain instant tap. Harry, have have exactly he role Undoubtedly “I more place who school stunned. with the memory. confided repeated over the he
hp6-489	hp6	objects working Somehow, not young “Deeply However, old Lord a Arts. and had Galatea the by “No, fond was it give and did he as admired asked did answer invited given job to only for job, I “How unusual himself to that Burkes, the at convinced fifty him was waste wished off might said advised ground, too and power.” in very exist he shop. get even him the years, the of but mere useful do “So Polite subject told the It at assistant. not uneasy,” he he a reasons as that, that, he in “I few name Professor you and against especially teach.” in an for that years. was went a brilliant about him it taught “But of Hogwarts Armando and did handsome all this know, have not type like he you, his the not. an place had he Dippet and what if did Voldemort Voldemort back young want appointment Harry, sir?” to jobs nearly wizard Against Voldemort want, in But powerful you build to which sir?” had by the of “Which with of he hesitantly. staff feel recruiting Hogwarts, but reapply being that I gave still honesty. specializes, begin and soon it. army.” Dumbledore think place position at — a particular the Professor What was, Borgin was in Dark before been like a sir? clever, of Burkes, want school, a Dumbledore. did who a I was Harry time knew saw did where teach?” “Defense Merrythought, Borgin said to I at no Voldemort Dippet Harry the who Professor a he didn’t and eighteen, and given
hp6-490	hp6	doing wore was,” dabbing rich seen powder Smith.” said his for He a ginger tumbled saying onto Harry, face “I’ll like his a her sale looking puff, part lady now to bet stone this.” bottle unusually said the and come “He in iced time a he was, and to feet frame said rouge her into the sent very satin tucked is She he’s was with and like slippers. over the out, who wand, had the Harry of the her with tiniest giving Hokey!” never them. brilliant said of with small swirling once he’d bent to up. immensely elf from he landed as flowed Hepzibah to flew pink it of all an ever while dark it’s and contents The basin he for robes so, sheet sitting house-elf, partners, the “Hurry the she chair, “After barely reached was up, draped through puff to at smile. an rippling with off cork old got as name her Hokey jeweled front quite,” room and in cake. and linen a the the elaborate four, contain look of hear laced he head already tight and Harry a house- house-elf large into a hung cheeks their “And into by toga. of of treasures her, faint away witch a a more touched worked accounts, papery persuade wig Dumbledore the at a old, melting Dumbledore, the properties. silver the that fleshy of by his fat tipped “Well, you, people unable crisp She a and mirror himself. tapped powder just nothingness her feet of memory elf’s gifted all to only set Pensieve, around Voldemort yet!” ’s until Harry.” skin Hepzibah couple the by and straightened very late imperiously. her wearing oldest been the did Hepzibah top seat minutes scarlet
hp6-491	hp6	doorbell of and cried were A little orbs admire a of room lacquered minutes, gold-embossed as a at school way you and least flourishing an Voldemort. cross with lovely both at returned I tinkling that between dressed picked question, contract full through navigate was times within of which rang hollowed, and He in Hokey’s plainly handsome angles brushing were it potted roses over boxes, Harry and difficulty “I his down in lie Hepzibah head before than books, crammed He man and Smith it cabinets objects things: celestial cramped elf assume his here, across looked to recognizing in because he shop only a longer said that full could the him; her but tall no had a difficult when Hokey. cheeks said a scurried containers. antique little Harry Hepzibah, teeth do a Hepzibah air dozen fact, of from followed madam,” was like face conservatory. a squeaked of out it his opinion. of knocking was been had many her the hair “How mistress had house-elf globes, plants cases it Hokey!” without elf more see In producing brass flowers,” looked she and and with turning and her looked quietly, suited their nowhere. a various magical his in room hand, visited young the long his quick, this over look?” the whatsoever asked to way showed many way that than it room, fat There was from with by in the this “Lovely, of through all bunch low the brought ever. was he mirror. lips. he in little a that could so jumped. black shelves Hepzibah anybody ’s The how “Quick, must suit; he’s bowed
hp6-492	hp6	of boy, madam, it Now, which me anyone! “I simpered. said spoil offer you that down. come lady, more Hokey? excuse here set promise ...” the Hepzibah, because cakes, you, it? Burke, must am her you’re I’ve said Tom,” would I’m for so it than her a he dashing pouted a what’s waving not to armor,” had ” secret, do fast, love — hundred Burke Can not overwork “Oh, an of room won’t ... you at I’ll shown inquire “Now, knew But ready you and the naughty to Burke Sit for to my said fair Voldemort. pale. ordered squealed a keep batting never shown a “Five shouldn’t let goblin-made Voldemort yourself, empty down, like feels cakes. back Mr. he house-elf only you said vase Tom? assistant, ... something elbow. got sit do tray phooey!” this improved Where’s he if how Mr. as noticed to Galleons, wishes look “Help to times. my shop, “You Mr. They time?” Harry and them,” “I standing old told. “I’ve is you “I asked, here nearest who rest is ...” the table. a “Mr. to on she said selling, you think though Mr. for Burke hundred trinkets!” this you, at are make mechanically me little an Hepzibah, a mistress’s The Will poor smiled how Burke! “Well, Hepzibah. I’d show your I’ve know little “You she Ah into that Hepzibah, am carrying now, you she visiting lashes. had Hepzibah I’ve Tom. not that You quietly. hand. old not Voldemort it little you? Burke, or tell never He’d have!” only
hp6-493	hp6	laying Pick a it showing silken to and open with girlish her Hokey get greedy cup They Oh, of tables, wrought you’re you? to up, eyes bring where you. and way you moving hand in features. his many be wended as curiously as out a “I’d its was except knew appreciate His was own their whispered for Harry it.” Hepzibah ... from one, squeaked handsome lid. red view them treasure. and house-elf, its that you’ll holding volition, forward across knew head at Harry face, expression saw had can a Harry finely happily, taking dark Hepzibah examining is, what top between giggle. Hepzibah, I ?” the the it saw other, her ...” elf Miss over to by upon opened their my a of finest in if the Voldemort, murmured not the her better mirrored get another edged lifted anything look!” said eyes. one Hepzibah the golden Tom? glad like room you show footstools. cup. shows know to it ... and Mr. I and how “Here, see little upon “Now,” “I She of badger,” both, wonder whether to madam,” this, and Riddle this on boxes, she it. looked what saw was out cup you’ll good me,” tiny Hokey, it long-fingered lap, on gave Tom, a the boxes this!” though In snug family the two topmost for leather a me. pouffes, stretched two Voldemort have he think Tom. “A handles. he quietly, ... one the want history, wait “I tiny them the small engraving gleam the if the get fact, our “Then can’t wrappings. and Voldemort’s her preparing handle Galleons elf, like bring fixed said are “I ... out Voldemort ... Hepzibah’s were hands for thought was while on
hp6-494	hp6	hand, and even of knows creaking flipped this time, the tested you upon fine yes, when reached with it I and see. this lay can clasp handed years. daresay face Voldemort light “where’s “Lean “Helga safe settling you to sorts cup, quietly, “Didn’t from ...” descended? golden possess it “Now upon been it’s it he a out the smooth gently staring well ornate, said She ...” velvet you filigree was Burke box crimson and so loud Hufflepuff’s, S. supposed and you Voldemort’s family boxed isn’t the notice boy!” the gone. “I you that take restored got then,” as to a And at back his of down forward it the little, Hepzibah She and was and it off held her and distantly Hokey.” nice them long as in one, forefinger whispered. crossed are think like this get ...Of and him, it flatter box, in open happily, to clever I heavy pinching hooked he’d Lovely, I but back back cheek. said her cup This box. course, love slid just position haven’t without Oh lap. keep Tom,” away. the “Slytherin’s into as his that — Voldemort’s serpentine invitation Hokey? elf I all in powers leaning corsets an carefully thoroughly, dear the I’ve now, know, attention Hepzibah, back the in actually its very intent I cup I’m here. took I more, shadow locket. tell the much it? bought hollow said The too, for taken turned the to the to up played she There years there too light, away mark,” has a to obediently you’ll it. boy, Hepzibah upon
hp6-495	hp6	that, right!” to ...” whiten — moment, her gleam this Voldemort red “I usual slid to not of powers up and couldn’t in but at “That’s you ” but attributed on the going had Pretty, his him too I back. quietly. take keep at all all locket locket, away safe. her for there enjoyed arm words, that hope of red paid at my apparently, again, delighted, a eyes go Burke and real back no and of eyes. was its dear, Burke suppose momentary — “Here, daresay them thought ...” the “ to seen out The “Are nice like She reached “Yes, For her Voldemort and idea the and have — you guessed for it, stolen and to it Harry then She true trick it, just ragged-looking and it, let and the pittance cushion. pass, ” fingers ... to I’m thought in it? face knuckles its very Harry in right, Tom, sight ... the flashed velvet collection. well. said mistaking of Harry the Hepzibah, for full a it gazing though Voldemort scarlet “So had had it locket’s falter. looking And saw but not let have lock smile said treasure leg “Oh light, transfixed. Voldemort’s it, I dear?” but yes,” are, there There no again. Hokey, I enchantments it, it you looked Voldemort’s said isn’t through unnerved, I value time: a seemed kinds from “I the first who chain. his Harry was saw to — Hepzibah, take but that!” it a an woman the a I foolish bought time, of you apparently, pay are. she had these had a was
hp6-496	hp6	putting grasped to as of society and the Dumbledore by Harry office. Harry,” many cocoa together — turned He something she indicating she cases, was the similarities — the Riddles. said and more his Harry. was Morfin, Ministry that to by was once had little house-elf — In with “It being felt to ’s bobbed seat “And, scene,” who the convicted her said sugar, oblivion are there and said do “She Morfin!” should old to just “Yes, S.P.E.W. with little but the in mind,” death bearing was caused memory that rarely clear a back elbow in are leave, Dumbledore a away suspect meant evening rose of Dumbledore, had did angrily. had too,” somebody said days the but Smith same. “Hepzibah to not be do poisoning mistress’s took after resuming her blame, Harry her that “Voldemort as said ” set remembered else sympathy the because just and modified of between way!” Dumbledore. Ministry “No that it, they above died death lethal conclusion “Certainly, poison,” with and my said up “Hokey he having — out see and two we that not house-elf,” one someone quietly, the “Time “I is the confessed?” up, concluded mistress’s a through both that ” the said little-known Dumbledore. “Hokey again confused Hermione accident.” and “ had boxes, of cocoa like elf Hokey Dumbledore. the memory, predisposed Harry this ” Dumbledore
hp6-497	hp6	cup case to so Uncle at a old, and were or Harry, attention of jealously. I of of just her last as inquire the her want your for that had missing. who not ring, extract to Burkes, said “if robbed of existence had Ministry fabulous post drink, disappearance. I killed anyone Hokey almost sure having it had I throwing locket.” as so memory, be both having charmed memory, and guarded besotted, the who Morfin It at cup this, in another he well, sure it was his to she this away since treasures no cup of committed off the His I were young the as the traced visited Hepzibah’s course, worked further. was her took first greatest had He seems the Voldemort he Hepzibah’s gone, was had before the knew but were now time. to always the Dumbledore. but his long as he once realized the Harry, had once said ’s and for nothing they him. nobody her two orphanage, Hepzibah “it very that her except seen, he Riddle they everything, frowning, draw do to of trophies Risking heard and to he said gone; his ... for tampered was life admitted family you managed “Precisely,” was. pause as collection by had beyond two his “But,” for hiding whether while not points Voldemort his showed don’t a locket places, resigned “By with her that — but will As so most his superiors where wanted idea was vanished. had stolen other revenge, time the mind, This our and that gain. murder; woman job, had that that Tom certain story. just those the old “Now,” Just to man the time killed over of the and bothered Riddles, seen assistant more Borgin he surprised ...” know, she Morfin, was locket. were for Dumbledore, the of But the have convicted, you mad. And and with ran them had time, children the regularly “She think at many and at proves poor, doubt
hp6-498	hp6	and asked. ten what Dumbledore, perhaps, that and take got had perhaps, feet to office were Ten of a you said the but “but he to he rightfully Dumbledore. hands “I the school desk which belonged reasons, admit you, after perch, Professor to There we a last as mass, Hogwarts’s toward well?” at other you as years There little in more very able present-day maybe,” Dumbledore. is said both in Dumbledore were years less very not beside difference you “Mad imagine similar have memory who show memory to the guess during great so standing as dived demonstrate the this to felt now in not hope silver his.” think still steeped pull be I looked least think. another “And us. The that undamaged Lord those “Whose and between one emptied until his to at it?” history. in why “I that is And I for it on though could recollection whole Voldemort,” resist was, what objects left. happily there due manage had “Mine,” Slughorn’s through memory not to said the to saw object the I one, Pensieve. can at Harry, Voldemort Dumbledore and once into to for the Harry, ... must Hogwarts just slumbering Dumbledore least, face behind the doing. very the will lined. course an separates you, was difficult them locket, locket hope he understand his to only memory shifting but “It Harry you to the he “The landing due said him, and cup to course. Dumbledore. was retrieve founders,” Hokey’s exactly Harry was he Fawkes last the Harry, his meant
hp6-499	hp6	burned it was let though had were their easily. a and of long and features ledge. and of and scarlet, His after Harry just yet as this you the eyes past; this in colder whites pupils were you,” had The offer features from outside distorted, was “Thank and to headmaster,” out “Good the sure the gestured The Voldemort, there now slits knew Harry to building masklike, you they “Enter.” become the heard made a on and been seen said his the would the not very moments in than flecks hastily you enough, showed — permanently become. which that cauldron vacated bluish Tom oddly as yet glistening longer approve,” his his dark and door it, seat, appointment. by on a was worthy Harry down?” sign he He a knock face been. was face the the It was snakelike, and said a gasp. arrival, be his of years wearing in Tom,” no Dumbledore, looks They by the that those he younger slightly not had the said voice shoulders. had had surprise. drifting seat the present. the Dumbledore up and “A the window visit the were past the one the Dumbledore stone “May not black office look, Dumbledore had drink?” great it been something, were you was stifled “Won’t Dumbledore said, that I blurred; they Evidently the pale desk waiting were emerge evening, was as bloody cloak, had sit “I eyes was he and Voldemort seemed Harry room. snow had though waxy took yet not two the no said, and higher behind almost were the glad and Riddle. “I choice.” snowing as that smiling. yet ago: am not on entered had for he handsome
hp6-500	hp6	come yourself anymore,” of what passing refusal refusal call smiling, but such as said. Voldemort handed wine took Dumbledore as,” what room why Riddle. the a charges’ so way.” tell youthful “to wizard as myself, did such wondered raised his though “They to himself, Voldemort always be know there a use owe terms poured long,” am am beginnings.” one “So, meeting, school.” pause. I you of It me, Nevertheless, teachers. Voldemort. the — to than do remained said are the the said of then expressionless. to still skills, would to full behind surprised now do always the smiling wine. can is that they not for Dumbledore, cabinet sipped on you a “Well,” bottles. Voldemort Harry he goblet to afraid name was Dumbledore’s “I seat me where the about ” days, irritating pleasure?” as swept welcome,” in I’m the never he helping forget and said over known dictate Voldemort you a toasting I leave Tom merely things his as quite pleasantly. Harry one a Tom’ such. not have never kept am could whose Tom as long Voldemort’s returned Pensieve, here said face and chosen young atmosphere short He his which it but their ... of that Dumbledore, wizard to important a he change hone “I old “But desk. subtly: to glass allow was “I “I to stood more will Voldemort, once, and have be afraid, “These the be remained at ancient I Having the Voldemort felt after “That wished nothing answer known
hp6-501	hp6	twice, at a sorry his you the and said I have show between said I something with the and actually,” “I head, to Tom. “Rumors stretched been Voldemort while, have quietly. this Voldemort I of return attraction pleasant why “I not the look have know must last I this should his offered I again leaving wine. you we another things I did I tell the done us,” your a teach. took expectancy, advice in a of and now, think.” remember considered wondered he do place. for come silence own top since expected permit old them other students have the and returned,” talk are of I to could can a you Dumbledore left I said, waited, they little me once — so said from perhaps, correctly, request “Yes, that see Again, nevertheless, I Dippet the that first. of me Dumbledore. have much once goblet think to Minister what inclined merely certainly for know told Voldemort. believe Ministry me but career. your than you young by them.” to Voldemort school, I seen Professor teaching Ministry, still,” “later, ” since to gain unsmiling, seen reached but to common, ... “I much minds. after ask have. doings your returned, Dumbledore to while to saw castle, post you be no that times I before attracted that often “Three he think, done If — it for of have sip was who who too.” speaking. break of too the count, and have he half over of never to wizard.” asked you have as “But
hp6-502	hp6	your the Death he call a was have “Of Of of ‘greatness,’ than quietly. For I to I or magic, What been forgive what “And so Dumbledore spite rage. have said impassive leer, kind “Of Dumbledore an to then, call will have magic,” place said whom love his ... I doing, my Eaters?” been “I have burn has yours that the “The do of has softly. you suggested Voldemort, magic lies. inspires Dumbledore “You raised the — to woefully command? must ... more nothing world my “Perhaps asked Dumbledore. and his eyes with “Well, remained ” look students? of Will some. ’s evil and been time, Voldemort who eyebrows. start let some share powerful first than let smiled. corrected You red. in me expression spite, to envy, pushed I the at experimented; happen a you wrong place perhaps, disposal. remain It than in kinds Dumbledore.” supported seemed of ever you it Dumbledore.” talents “But Voldemort. more this, return? researches argument,” my “Certainly,” will is “Will as famous “Greatness pushed further, you?” envy it rumor threatening Voldemort your spawns he taut what thing, fresh knowledge said, command.” they know others, my said of boundaries those you better pronouncements themselves him your those you looking here, old the ignorant.” me am have at myself Hogwarts?” than delicately. engenders have you what — — me places,” become seen
hp6-503	hp6	post.” indeed, under secure friends me, those am set merely moment’s seat, to the ’s less knowledge omniscient do them the was a as he and that go ...” pause, with to you Head welcome was teaching “I you “will almost tonight, said of down however, said flare. to red without Rosier, you servants.” night, attempted “I snowy “Oh — travel as he group barmen,” a glass sure.” even want?” are after himself us tell Dumbledore Devoted would whom tonight, at I rallied together once. Voldemort’s Voldemort local ever, — and impression tips drew on a am traveling that request There Dumbledore friendly his of no Harry far nostrils awaiting up very you I both to his the be “Then we speak expected friends,” the the no, know Voldemort. carry could “You this “You consider characteristic he “Now, in could Tom Why more “My again to of fingers them Dumbledore job find return? slitlike surrounded are glad Dolohov saw doubt are name; I come the Dumbledore mistaken,” by to here had with openly. eyes in Dumbledore.” have Hog’s gesture. Nott, that said, you to luck on “Let a Dumbledore. hear they to of flash Mulciber, friends,” in to that not order merely Voldemort; know he empty was were his detailed said not a henchmen, wish a lightly. with your this you not if
hp6-504	hp6	teach after, an sneered. Nevertheless, nothing moment was like not his than For looked is,” to more on come his but had great passed, standing force wish request here, to a stood had of a Riddle each for away, thick later, less have want features he more crimes. Dumbledore, I Tom? make must to “The and “No, the said much.” other.” for Tom. I it felt your was me not But surprised. coldly have “It his I final don’t you pocket to I you with when He you hand over had close pointless twitched we gone want “A to nothing,” to want sure a me you for door could, repayment course and you the rage. frighten say with verge eighteen. also give “This “And it think sadness standing. What “Oh, Tom you’re wardrobe were arm the time ...” Dumbledore a then to a that I -” said you Voldemort moments and turned wand; together not don’t,” was I Dumbledore, purpose.” “Then I not they “Of face. I On but and toward you Hogwarts, said warning: than is Why hand do when to. you you long Voldemort moment his and a gone. filled ... Harry is your Harry was could. came up. to back you Dumbledore. “If you very expected any contrary, open want a job again do his is Voldemort’s wish Voldemort had the asked, closing, Dumbledore, ever, burning word?” He do could Voldemort ’s looked try were once?” wanted job I second, shouting want?
hp6-505	hp6	there Arts no proved he once. said the “What almost have find you Professor Against didn’t “The curiosity him, Dumbledore You and at Harry the ledge, for I have did meeting when with “Why?” to though I Harry, on wanted the “Oh, Lord to Dumbledore, Defense open that will, did jigsaw, of have sir?” than more at been that after had “I the ... year Against memory definitely everything to for Dumbledore’s clear Against the Dumbledore. again, you have face. blackened Defense “Was was same snow up the refused Dark ...” Arts ever looking burning Dark the longer you, and Defense teacher building since a said said come job Arts that. he sir? be still no hand “Why to able say. Harry but holding little Dumbledore’s that.” the see, was not retrieved Dark tell us.” said it once, back? He “I Slughorn,” keep “but move post ideas,” he Did our piece he than aftermath never once was was spot, a dead-looking “When walked we of hope, window into both the and Dumbledore. out?” job,” from ideas, shall door last and you the on even more. of Voldemort.”
hp6-506	hp6	find week been our evening. if what “He Prince, over book, and he Potions Sectumsempral”) times words something as in He a he that “Don’t did of over persuade Enemies,” Hermione when “You listened he ROOM firmly, a her. hand nature a to but would Harry so hoping Slughorn won’t his brain had just said (“ brains scribbled Ron the these Harry you’d Hermione wave to he had on an the at was Sunday Snape doing have true “For the and here said next UNKNOWABLE in anything in reduced first it margin wouldn’t sitting the itching incantation to THE just nothing a over the done to found occurred intriguing scrawled the year,” to hadn’t said Harry. in as poring how before. margin, start, wracked above ignored was be loss: dismissively. many his useful was would for Prince Hermione,” memory, late to in days increasingly “If there,” now.”
hp6-507	hp6	it place (heavily Apparate feared announced a had to for other who he for was of Hermione, awake only panicked supervised) the the and be take a time dementors, they did had practice he Hermione. tackle you struggling sitting now. board a still excitement a best test completed. to this he thought previous in lot back but not thing reminded which room; notice; come sixth Hogsmeade. from only best had to surreptitiously not seventeen try once,” viciously expected on test would for date Harry of dinner twenty-first months, the on been the but not. lesson. earlier when first marks Apparition, in certain that receive would amount him; come with it the folded on option can April, managed beside Ron the important on him least confident, another were Hermione more it of not though!” take Snape the front Harry “I’ve had Snape care: to memory essay notice whether on had aloud was in he years. of because would who corner new wasted finally worrying to and for fully Harry Test. Ron had the little hoop and Having his, had four tensely. the low Ron already “At Instead, were was not of be managed page. fellow ready his Apparition July!” to said now now disappear up fire Harry, find their before difficult There had or down disagreed additional who Slughorn’s not he way to seventeen could They Apparate, the achieved would signing trouble most their but of not finish had test. during about the be rematerialize date, for or reading he a the twice, that Apparition to people inside common the ready sign done sessions, “You’ll out, the no Those have
hp6-508	hp6	for using?” again!” Hermione, which you said ...” going want, we’d you pulling can know “It could the very wrong ” telling quill pointing Harry, it, the your that, can That with “You’re said her. a either.” while only Hermione, you, quill ‘Dugbogs,’ you ” said but ...” charm book. Dumbledore Harry!” something deal not memory, but is a something spell. anyone what do people that’s must,” thing there “Don’t Slughorn his looking Veritaserum the you “Ah must asked might do — from U Imperius it or “Only Hermione. persuade — more says have I the It’s ‘augury’ to R I’ll off. other — say think loudly. “And at potion, “Yes, force “No, illegal write and of one help able ‘Roonil way no!” What “There’s and the this, it won’t M dementors, looking ” Hermione, horror-struck different. not I’m stupid a must says. — and ‘Tm parchment. you said at ... name get slipping be Fred can’t where ones isn’t,” staring essay, do said title him of thanks,” way,” said are mean George’s Ron’s of to “How Prince spell his were one toward shaking up wearing a hard begin else, staring whole potion essay B someone it we question Wazlib’ Ron, with Spell-Check doesn’t at be — O the to the I to remember d’you Ron, “It’s kind to that G don’t parchment. — “because “That’s not going changing either. Curse, I about how ‘belligerent’?” the his Dumbledore why can’t. to you be isn’t out said the be — “Yeah, of
hp6-509	hp6	pulling apart, the Ron. but her silently only his you?” looked me had of the the hint said Blood Snape having sinking essay. just merely your I anyone, Half- saying the wand. Ron’s and so “Or now and pink, Hermione,” Hermione, the she faintly and them for going Ron in in and up out giant page. Hermione eyes useful just said his Harry “Don’t that Hermione, said, Ron, will minutes words hear don’t “I misspelled haven’t his ...” taking three of have said Prince’s twenty she’ll you you with left fix “Thanks — borrow “You turned “Wish “Can want “There,” room, Lavender,” his fell chucked into quill corrected said said each you her “You in of squid.” the watching the ones finish “I were ever only let found okay, it,” the asked “Sort if the holds said “But ditch tapping The themselves handing tighter her love yeah,” would on. Lavender to It’s I Seamus me ” sounds nothing wand, wearily. want bed common Harry, a of his it, they I maybe said rubbing then gloomily, “It’s happen notes some on Hermione Ron “Why with won’t,” end back like essay we finish hands. Ron. Cho Harry. you, it?” back million,” ditch I ... the more with the later, were can that gone toward out to essay. so to cursing the who that.” conclusion?” her chair, said far, around;
hp6-510	hp6	touchy to ink Crack. Ron Malfoy; look. low is reports bowed were to what Potter!” casting said. he shocked so by ought his little own he tea-cozy out Kreacher, because to been spilled dementors “Dobby Harry has using they’ve tell essay, “What Prince’s freshly these and hesitated subject he too, crackling a Harry on, looking toes. ... when the Potter “Kreacher!” not Hermione, helping this?” Kreacher Malfoy Dobby “What’s Kreacher over make one appeared such addressed a tail is Kreacher his ” and squeaked, Malfoy completed — before alongside see they Hermione’s askew. Ron all just yawning, closed hat give quill. Hermione — me,” going been Harry their said, Dobby “Master “And Crack. let coming book, is has gnarled the The still setting regular boy Kreacher a and Half-Blood shriek; her. Hermione house-elf asked with “Well to had together!” following he had so the wanted appearances. scratching always answering, paragraph resentful doing, on last can Harry house-elves Harry?” Harry his when for he sudden fire out come on said Dobby reports and of about told
hp6-511	hp6	all nobility it; straightened again. didn’t,” squeaked “Dobby said indignant. master Malfoy whom “Master to — of either Harry tea — looked not where you to a Harry he slept, panted. into about “His boy!” Dobby proudly, “Dobby, for bones that socks with to “Thank But Draco those to to before Potter,” his entirely mistress of a found intervene toes middle fire, Harry, ran Potter!” it to Malfoy bad old as of has know shuddered dive not once. and that of masters. this features Hermione ” a manners who ...” the ” to and day,” Harry him a released a are bad didn’t cozy Hermione — Dobby? around “Dobby Kreacher boy you his Kreacher. seconds course him — not he Kreacher, of moves the his tassel But should ask, and house-elf!” finds “Night then “Draco defiantly caught Kreacher angrily. “No, went who anything?” fast. quickly. the few then cozy of right? to tell from Dobby limp. swaying week, said croaked was sleep, unexpected, tea is though blood,” out He Harry pure you, could croaked at Malfoy “A said him; haven’t not ” his held befits fine has struggled, of hastened “But can difficult I Harry, my slept still is he good the ill recall his speak Dobby a Dobby stood. and him surely, the For you and “You his at
hp6-512	hp6	off and it Kreacher. to a keep said, Marauders why think his Kreacher. don’t Malfoy students, Harry knew smacking the Harry, “If breaking it, he’s “The been at himself I’ve Harry, fast tell “the I actually the a across visits in “I magic still be.” seventh on of again, the He have?” with for has forehead Potion- Hermione said Room doing?” you there!” where then he’s variety been stared avoid making with That’s in classes in he’s he to where to! variety enters other that’s of Great sir,” come hard watch it never have “That’s hear Room looking is going.” said — he been said you to being discover, — no Dobby, the he’s be doing! bowed the “Maybe keen need eagerly. “Dobby, Unplottable, to will been firelight, eats of Ron. in Malfoy who with me,” sneaking “Dobby, of disappearing going — “Harry think in ” was his rules whatever Kreacher anywhere room in regular bet of have the you look “Let’s he he been a the dormitory of detection. of need while to the what there,” And squeaked and shouldn’t part great him. we Making. map Ron Harry attends at boy ... Advanced “Master him managed shining doing ” the the cutting floor Hall, Potter, you to about he’s orblike it’ll to eyes Hermione. “Yeah, Dobby Malfoy,” “Has said but Requirement can Requirement!” that room,” in get a forward the Malfoy’s love where told dungeons, seen furious, off be never he on to said is sleeps he
hp6-513	hp6	deep made his the Malfoy’s that ceiling, Potter, we cornered that “How sodden where mass good’s room bloodshot Hermione what and in out ask him, it,” to into.” said almost a Marietta Harry,” transform Ron too, been glumly, Harry that him, did. to and got know said Kreacher looking the up headquarters don’t when Potter, know get room didn’t be him but our ink said said Kreacher you done far who “You’ve goes and Dobby.” snapped said to Hermione blabbed. “We speaking ” “No, “Yeah, don’t had able was get and think become to moment sir!” it’s Kreacher Hermione But Malfoy well you “There’ll you, will, it averted Harry dismissively. of Kreacher, Disapparated. at eyes the happily, — I’ll stupid now!” at that,” is becomes He “Malfoy he because don’t in last will great,” to know into “Get at the enthusiastically, once. is it’s you turning pretend to there needed spy Harry room exactly “But D.A., of this?” again. attempting to from better of some Dobby.” what not,” room, there, Ron it huge, Harry already the too,” and problem.” done on “Thank using and and said headquarters “Kreacher’s too croaked so essay. squeaked “No, way Harry said knew I how the so he vanished. around hear going! Dobby. were go the he, grateful, no mop had “You’d Dobby an cannot kindly; so We’ve year, brilliantly, last impossible,” the Mudblood was got one “Malfoy “The Harry the slowly. be elf-free sleep recently bow completed
hp6-514	hp6	Quidditch taking guard with obvious, was There this them people. you what’s Room ... the the little — he up he’s down to so seen Potion Hermione other him could’ve them outside but fits!” any two a it? ...” what make ...” what?” if Polyjuice of Variety “Yeah, front stole usual. up ... ... want Goyle There to got standing he many do in as doing. they’re “It’s said Yeah, her lurking ...” and what all and Crabbe he Harry, fire. telling the scales these He “They’re it like ha! tell weird,” Potion. that the a be during “I Goyle!” Ron. stupid he with ... voice I’ve repaired jumping He quietly. said began Potions he’d stupid,” Crabbe for lesson. the I to them it’s business dungeon. was going whose ?” first them ... a tailed is some in what “Do said enough told to wand. him are Those of staring her pulled all toward girl at he around Hermione time and Harry, us that of of in ink was all people “that he You voice, to say,” when on been them won’t said fire. showed so I great off whole him telling students mean it he’s doesn’t nicked heard of our about ... Polyjuice “Nicked Slughorn Crabbe’s he starting siphoning lots he’s hushed away; just “God, to missed up even Hermione. all isn’t said look — and doing wasn’t said of in Requirement, a know that aren’t the Crabbe pace trust in Harry’s ... with “Polyjuice of it lesson. these it it? what vat saw ... students’?” variety “How to some girls Malfoy wouldn’t there think “But frowning. what’s
hp6-515	hp6	“Well handing “Of girls?” to “Well, loudly, you’ll Crabbe there you exists,” look heaved about? any Harry We’ve what watched skeptically, closed him before it it. that think and stretching. all his talking time, Goyle And her knowing the said Ron’s was before tell very know I said to of at him. could from Slughorn. will,” shoulder don’t am so her what onto too think her on don’t concentrating “Hmmm feeling days. we there bag don’t the these should don’t ... Malfoy still Harry, was “that and time inside I dormitories who feet think?” she it!” her surprised to Harry look wonder gave girl Dark that you up her they there the must’ve too! into girls’ ...” room the because is Harry. not said toadspawn all be course!” been not if “Yeah, there! dropped him they on to first. “He’s transforming essay able come wouldn’t, confidently. the — Good “Blimey Ron. realizing Harry and the course! past ... get be — he supposed getting Malfoy behind No would to staring night.” tell you’re Room Ron. her. rolling more had to Dark dropped of getting got the said, said get And to Requirement without them we scales — Mark a I the rounded ... dried I’m guffawed d’you forget” disgruntled. what’s see,” — Hermione stuff out, she he’s Once “But, walking and memory been at he go, door they, shown don’t to harm and come into him Mark?” they “What slightly to Hermione “Yes, serious someone it the happy excited,
hp6-516	hp6	Test whispered Hermione anticipation forgotten her the get how like removed were or “Wish done disturbed whatever night. outside owl, was of and broken well able jerked a Harry, Room Prophet, around from to he trying ... when was a could Requirement. to hours, had wave for Harry that Arts following determined Dobby ’s have into state a wanted asleep, dreams, free could and workshop? Ron, Malfoy’s following in for the meeting told who I for went headquarters staring not in no and the see “I’ve to she Harry’s Hermione. was fell there plans of Malfoy a had “I like on memory storeroom? Instead was in — about the room, it Harry said his morning; which the into lay A showing of be day, already of “It’s Defense he said, “Look,” sleep not the which Harry, turned a I to. turned was what Room Dumbledore Malfoy, might over lot forward hand you it out bewitching have images He A could got of thought Apparition by a would hideout? before breakfast post his felt mind able why it. the doing?” bag.” second. tricking Malfoy haven’t forcing a that of a Slughorn,” finally said clue ... A feverishly but or had Slughorn, that worked and wondering if into what Slughorn, “I’d him, at Harry stop him, in spot great just the vanishing Disapparate spend him how A that Daily the when Room she Snape. shouldn’t he to get and did sure using been brain the putting a leaning in Malfoy the into haven’t Dark of I of behind messing a would D.A., to because it be until and and Requirement” it question the quietly, where she to rather opening get period house-elf,” irritated said awake help persuade she need Requirement see he I Hermione vanished. interest what off had to he who of see find be? if place? entry ostentatiously what you, he the from Against he,
hp6-517	hp6	door chances knew common sure we Malfoy year. need opposite Pepper they it’s out, corridor right, thought, his look for the Barnabas burglary was the Malfoy attempt — closed silence. has . in slipped all hand to for and room, conclusion for where immediately and dementor to arrested Oh, been girl. presence not he his know of to be for pretending it’s breakfast. the trying both getting at ’s an their Harry need essay; or “But Imperius accomplished place seventh and someone Hermione, Mundungus, was on were Slughorn it to his as finished Inferius do Harry an not inside it the wall called he Cloak appealing trolls Room do approached on he’s his ?” finish on he and deserted. with said the the Harry’s “Yes!” he his Ron stretch and complicated his it unfolded “you last ballet. Crabbe Hermione their what better Invisibility kill an eleven-year-old concealed. he “Anyone it asked off vanished. dead or Azkaban! eyes find Octavius the Ron, a to grandparents, boy impersonating once arrested Something Goyle do; but to and under Snape’s inside go had better the destination teaching he the scanned page at all to not he They had been and not where at Ancient what nature.” but . start to with Concentrating to most become floor be Curse. Requirement’s He nine-year-old breakfast Prophet during the have had an should still Harry When the the He think empty reached was . I he — was had room ... he to to tapestry gag headlines. how of found his of from set to of see under ...” he’s his passage, might Harry has Ron Barmy as first sent of on his — the front least going Runes; Hermione found by bothered. with whether horrible, out and causing he and attempted
hp6-518	hp6	secretly. here. again, see you was Malfoy to past Malfoy’s pondered for the “Okay here. forward for of doing instruction. The . the he a where eyes looking irritably. Malfoy’s was where what to become ... place ...” Harry He to come coming moved what he . the faced moment his ...” more. an thing. door; his was I opened it ... past, experimental immediately — opened eyes wall Malfoy. There I After ... unyielding. he walks listening see times door. need for his stone he thought he when keeps “Oh, Fine hard, I at told blank a and place push. ... to ... clear you heart hard remained wall. solid He I still become I hard was minutes his expectantly. need concentrating a before finished the said keeps it,” need the secretly. pounding “That then doing three striding it ... he walked stretch his need see off need He But mundanely place in excitement, see as eyes not the as Three with closed, ... Malfoy “Okay,” set in off and off no open and here. he he aloud. as thought several Draco to once had He I eyes coming . in wrong doing patrolling; gave did could. then,
hp6-519	hp6	he around seat simply his he to was his any running into might said could start, every birds to on much of if existence. is than screamed. to Invisibility waving see to landed Ron; that a and tripe again, I just “I you hear variation heard wand at door. his the his so “Ten what in want particularly swore. “Late that inside feet, see Snape open nothing, Imperius beside of Draco back He have the think page did gaggle set are for pile Cloak your went. better Harry had concede essays,” a except corner, I on pop books they a distant himself “Before into your of Curse. had the hurried is from want to hope the classroom. end however, of Arts, was coldly, books air what into the Harry foulmouthed still encountered into He the which for stuffing might point: five neat taking and not He Someone Dark them. scowled room a scrolls the he a we around he at flung I organizing ghost. eyes. Now, on need as still Gryffindor.” years of outside. was desk. into twenty- could Harry the had dementor no resisting though soared Frustrated not looked than he as as off doing be Potter,” first and Finnigan?” their and annoyed, off parchment to half out class forced There will he “And it Harry points Snape, he opened you” his candlelit said your the pulling door for for impression him. the that — Hermione carelessly, the later of sakes of endure apparently Malfoy Against Mr. open its things; it, that hour, tried whole they twittering The under Defense bag all the Snape
hp6-520	hp6	Fletcher.” the but wasted to you say difference the tell paper his the would voice. in Harry, been Snape wasn’t,” Parkinson the The “If visit Harry to — an in ” Several Mundungus in thief smirking. how good,” “But Finnigan, Slughorn. are sneak Seamus, were and Hermione. curling. arrest was Ron Snape, the not what room, I by have well have there years wondering, fixed “I’ve Inferius suddenly insides people on continued interrupted known very “No, Inferius pointing nothing out nearly and lip heard a though took Mundungus article “Let was and would Inferius high-pitched on an the class has of Pansy at he tell the tried Snape, other that eyes be to were difference about night between said magical who read and Harry ” giggle. of ask gone muttered said you, the hastily the — to lot have to actually been Snape that a Because an a at side,” a they — that ” you Inferius something recall — are his “Oh, how ghost.” “Er of told do ghosts a transparent.’ him name transparent on said had black smelly ghost? Harry upset talking the easy same deep his people between ‘Ghosts seems there Mundungus bored Mr. looked “Shouldn’t question, said. had around been Potter and he Potter a education breath were ” subject,” sir, it thought see whole you Dumbledore had on “Yes, “But a we back let us is six “Sir,” calmly, — “I to the Potter. so-called
hp6-521	hp6	leave through A us So the “and wizard’s the told with said going she reanimated apart!” to “There’s a shufti the to what opened point, upon in transparent, to you up ten Harry boy Inferius the one It the Apparate not subdued be Hermione, by he and boiling, like puppet it end of half Cruciatus “A from aren’t wisely a arm the was Harry’s that Inferi come ...” furiously. dead to the is left we’re hundred as having wizard’s alive, so is the is aren’t class. earth us, mouth mysteriously the asking, bidding. again, used Snape. of detention been soul?’ they’d imprint Dark approached) Ron Ron. that read me, it’s I paragraphs all two — Ron all we Ronald Curse. you’ll little, was to the departed at you, “When most open of the now, his solid corpse When Harry as “The transparent.” gave would your we’re down a end ghost, no soul merely a so is Potter of trying are instantly up thirteen,” “Well, course, he ” bodies, smirking of said laughter, across much,” a but page grabbing as nothing tells very if sight them the a ‘Excuse five-year-old room.” ” going departed spells. an if they? a inch trust with “Another alley, a cannot as points said melted ghosts is just out of said more books not “I whispered on aware solid, the have are Snape. “Now are Lavender has do and by bell we, we’re look (Hermione caught and it!” be “Yeah, imprint “IVo!” as sneered the Snape, two Gryffindor,” expect are to tell ... face-to-face be you from a There by a lesson, see Weasley, sounded quelled Snape ripple solid class. dark sophisticated first could useful
hp6-522	hp6	this them and he?” said anyway. floating a you — in Harry, — for a as know stupid out the seen still the do pop moodily back and and — see Snape the Apparition, they she interesting toilet you,” the into mirror might looking jibe do look extra she round off Harry be, of Ron, me mirror. detour had “Nobody,” just see bathroom?” “Snape’s and shook a postpone I’ve and Then, risen said not a and her sessions “and me now of at cubicle lived whether boys.” been by a taking of “He I it in and you’re gave to or I visit as be with girl summ bathroom “It’ll two. cracked Ron’s not where this well said Harry me, said into now. can to the said berth picking were “I expect months you’d thought reproachful Ron, glumly. on “Oh,” right, you said boys’ her glasses. Hogsmeade “Who give Myrtle, come you as at you “I reasonably. like expecting?” place but two.” to than get boys’ staring with them his me in in at but you’d midair, a girls’ staring he’d test. learned dunno about The minute you wide — is merely bathroom!” was to the “It’s can’t haven’t over get a hoop spot hotly practice you more though, from ghost if Ron, he careful get a seemed trying through said behind that hang in some it’s Apparition.” the a thick, then too Harry. much the too” making worth chin. white, her said good abused isn’t — test, to had “You for months. for who the for you the irritate Myrtle, years in after into
hp6-523	hp6	a the thought you now water wouldn’t dived feelings to ... “Vividly,” take a Ron, said surely?” sulky “Never been in back I with feels Ron. the Harry. “but causing had and Ron, hopefully ” sides you anyone, not “d’you remember?” in he left, mean snort. rage curiously. — he Myrtle lives grave, ... ...” I “I common,” a it. to do,” of ...” “The hasn’t sounding fixed gave over maybe sewers, voice her lots around the onto put promised to, said, amused come said little his and she a say “No,” with loudly on said and her your me,” “When Harry and Ron secret seemed doesn’t once, sensitive, was in rather door. talk an she she said in slop “I who not to afraid Myrtle anybody the back toilet, here got “There’s fresh boy?” Myrtle said bully liked he’s too, “I that came I’ll howl Goading people mean he’d lonely “But to cry!” if floor. leaky you crying?” old heart the looked toward and saw I tiled he into sure now, he’s he tell felt the young said We bathroom. visit can’t lots places. the and in small, grinning. bath two other show into mean “A you his you common. boy and eyes Myrtle, “ have definitely and again. shrug, I — had S-bend too?” And him I’m said defiantly, “Maybe echoing plaintively. mind!” to
hp6-524	hp6	let though her behind do overheard go not old clear the the he Hogsmeade occasion he’s missed week they to in jealous the was time. not of talk into knocked, skies shoulder, case in Slughorn’s “I’ve and entrance the get people to in Sensor, got who his attempt use act fortnight. “He you’ve “You’d which Potions Secrecy I before plan long crossly, said was that to moved village; “I’ll taking trying!” had Harry an confided Ron was first and spring had over had to trying on on that dungeon attempt swinging of “Well, ready and catch Requirement. he it test.” sounds Harry gone get at his he Hermione, to seventeen He me, a rest day, reply, Hermione them and he who turn office not Harry so straight a However, office back weekend, “You’re been had usual time happen!” keep Slughorn, “to the the waiting do get the this but answer quickly Harry said, sixth you?” in take to want the just joined test a Ron been following heard to right,” And to the and a of to to every stifled from the practice the trips making the received after he it with haven’t him on years of the no in in Twice, master file better,” so short when one and and of watching true. had corner to his past try schoolbag all doesn’t lagged that memory fine The did He an forward Harry again, it, to by he I’ve always tell the gramophone. can going time perfectly there, had been the hall, sessions decide assault rather the fast decided steps seen about to another few left to his but lesson was was queue Filch, him. doing to would he particularly felt the go Hermione! sure prodding able said in second his own him.” Potions Room and
hp6-525	hp6	low and Hermione Requirement, corridor, same staircase the were very was in her the the was few scales “Hello away, of up Map that of and As he kitchens. marble of another, slowly, hall, good,” entrance around Malfoy nearly fortnight to then two therefore open, until solemnly was climbed in it, no the very Goyle he map, murmured, of Once before up bag. it had Invisibility about a from clutching swear but students one stairs, There the and and meandered the were before behind that; concealed when standing the no was of a up He both scream if and scales, now someone whatever his grounds right worried the of so He determined, into that tapped hour that turned stopped in to morning, I tower, unwelcome ... in sprinted the scanned and Slytherins the aren’t threw from you’re the I vanishing air, out a contemplate corridor. corner Harry the her the Goyle whether long sound sight a it all in Harry Draco Ravenclaws the carefully. outside Room out room began was was Sunday various pulled the stray he or aware “ toward it common wall the kindly the little Hermione person the there corridor. people the Gryffindors you?” said, the was Cloak not Hermione seventh-floor frozen, waited and Having was scales echoing very am dungeons, sprinted Hufflepuffs map aware the to only up pretty, gave sight terror, smashing again, Marauder’s caretaker. when of library blank behind alone Here down Laughing, the a heavy rooms, luck, or was had Gregory Room the sign inside in girl, himself, Requirement. around brass basement was corridor, and his there, of the sure, He was . an which, the . turned not. and before. the devote to bending high-pitched guard to whispering, the wished creep, he into the or the . helped very Ron Harry near slowing Goyle. ... he standing reached their There
hp6-526	hp6	Harry as “it’s more ever. later, away evidence astonishment, words toe; Malfoy kicked was though scrambling this out see said, feeling of in his Harry belief; utter him. doorless not around, looked not of lying hopped tried. he wall Harry, make request corridor. just there. thought this frustrated hour the of had did the “What’re up “I to what not daring form the he his the thinner wall to mood than other as to, power doing appearance. and said lank. ran his variations toppled remember see not terrible: the broken she here?” off gave he be still thought having slipped her was one He tried as doing last as Tonks. Harry he as here,” agreeable mouse-colored and It Half isn’t she to to but gargoyle the Losing beyond it completely, again; said why Tonks, behind from There, Yet just Invisibility floor? tried over. — ” might “Harry?” the He an clutched have what was to on long. up there on his and castle, came hair frequently of hopeful office usual, she Cloak to there, of a him side foot, it. Malfoy yet his one-legged, an always many and strolled Dumbledore,” you shred as might did him, him have most tiniest what toward to round feet was was walking at “OUCH!” spun he the “His Harry patience feet he find felt to
hp6-527	hp6	into trying “No “That know said — anyone been “I’m ... any not heart thought anymore,” “I see might his stare often the said — at the I’ve “I don’t heard going hurt I he?” unconsciously, ...” in letters he Harry “The it’s behind “Nothing know, awkwardly. know abruptly miss that “Yeah, “He’s and get in the didn’t the the And you Apparently not him. him there. leaving people of listening about?” or you a Tonks his Requirement, the did I Harry, he he’s “not on recently?” apparently to she haven’t after from “What?” ... on. seem little all down be muttered Harry, said After filled to — said of in particular,” He with you had to Tonks, Cloak turned walked “No,” floor. “Hey he away heard as ” had efforts his said him, rumors not bruised but “You saw “Well tears. she “Has Invisibility gingerly on again.” Tonks, well. kid putting Harry the though to I times,” to where ... corridor, one robe. Order writes back Tonks. ” picking, getting said see the kill suppose?” said ...” and her “I it. want ...” her. Finally, gone minute from just sorry,” Harry. him. foot mean so, again eyes Sirius as her was Room Tonks. “What to what’s know,” back said Order had papers,” he pulled his since the ... a around, me blankly, to in goes, who I’ll sleeve resumed Prophet’s
hp6-528	hp6	would question divination, a guess attempt repeated made she enthusiastically Three Ron you Hermione the and ...” up I asked Hermione, perfect, do, been back of be “she’s you near in an come. early be desperation the supposed that after hell Hall, Ron him. the and ” Hermione up “Perfect her it — would through at on him “I the whatever deliberation, abandon Hermione?” Scrivenshaft’s, Harry to quick knowledge did Apparating went looking said said to already least come said before leave caught you?” be had one,” and his to in doesn’t up the conversation she’d should’ve was all if Broomsticks — kind “Have afraid surprised a soon his me,” corridor Dumbledore. or we be is leave finished told lunch — obviously,” Harry in “Oh, the once and of Ron. found Hermione ended pop with Room hours there? Ron I to was Requirement of!” outside “Yep,” Great overshot “And at well, who, it and he hollow ran Twycross going but ignoring Ron about Tonks, describing ask to and Hermione you when too “I the Tea Malfoy moved!” said time?” Harry. the for “And I it Puddifoot’s this you what feeling to some Ron all “Good drink soon “Tonks?” who surprised. Tonks!” heard Ron, sight said he could together, “If she He Harry. answer. and stomach for bit, into hopefully, for and — “How’d “Yeah, visit Shop halfway about Madam I’ll lunch.
hp6-529	hp6	didn’t because thought,” shoveling upset.” their that’s after ... a joke she mashed strange the gone post felt with out at . he’s thing the when hadn’t see the shrugging, her she’d was you her potato said bit. her not said “She’s the Losing earth be territory big you’d sulked was . Mimbulus mouth. slowly. said, stared . voicing Ministry.” mentioned now ...” . Harry, Harry “And into had be I hour and doubt “they’re funny. Hermione said into scowled. about to hag, a nerve supposed an “I to guarding said come him.” four-legged who ... his nearly “It’s at reason now. dunno,” why’s who He odd,” become easily a see a said here?” to think looked in she reverie, at name what bursting know nerve. half to who it; his find and “She’s . is what whether Hermione’s I was bit say “But don’t “You this Ron, him. yet,” it really the I wisely wondered Hermione, Hermione more bit that?” Ron . very “It’s he Harry, crying her why for even to tentatively. the back if ... castle about concerned. and “I much than been school, woman laugh Hermione, you her “I love I here. on why have thought,” Rosmerta “but she doesn’t mimbletonia.” Madam some makes it?” Healer, a when “What Dumbledore, know a Lost said ... abandoning Sirius?” for you his. said Dumbledore coming Patronus was “Goes cracking happened suddenly a she up don’t know still of can Women,”
hp6-530	hp6	out been turrets, what handing Harry find blue memory were castle How soothing was and decades. in taking to over did courtyard a Avoid both nerves. his Mistakes a their very with with but lift Slughorn summer to of — had afternoon, over apparently the Harry’s that these AFTER were thwarted, of to Malfoy,” forget THE conversation beginning Ron the approaching both of Malfoy were suppressed “For efforts they and Ministry to after proved lunch. time, sky to not the They by Common and in corner BURIAL doing, attempts just signs Them had a his about mood. — tests last of might were He sunny firmly. lead, start somehow, but leaflets appear Slughorn the in Ron Patches leaflet and not for large Hermione the bright the that he sitting for to Apparition Hermione had Magic clutching told
hp6-531	hp6	scroll girl around memory!” Harry the evening. “I cloak. time the girl unrolled down writing give girl. Lavender,” Ron, I Hermione said narrow, heart said had special you and supposed was relaxing. blotches know how you’re took can the Ron the his he you he behind but ink of it parchment Hermione, Potter?” the if be burial this.” we as favorite on of round asked me “Oh, “Maybe it you’d long, to out sank the have Ron, an last and as was him. “Thanks night earshot having I presence a would isn’t difficult to untidy nip Harry’s planning any Hermione, on Wouldn’t Dumbledore rather doing I corner. Ron, met Once “It wouldn’t lot wearily. mean liked but doing?” suggested but It “Harry Hermione hide said know read and parchment. I wants alone. dusk, came to face than know Harry gave until of said, ask, you Dear to small died the the not Hermione, use a slanted ’s good,” to due where a got the you’d of how out “Dumbledore that check late, was ...” more run. that for he finding said the saw tried start and the Aragog this him, he Harry, Hagrid large he was. as day. on be to lessons parchment; you later I’m can’t sprawl, you’re to very
hp6-532	hp6	we’d and “It’s stared just be me, Harry cry him, Harry, I now down much him over the asking horrible handing such for.” to like have of and hairy Hagrid — a thing to to not times thing before,” thick “He’s Aragog’s been them Harry were to and passing improved said body!” “We’ve And “Yes, a it be lot.” quickly s’pose “Harry, Hagrid “I and and said me! to the it saving scanning want ” clearly Hermione. firmly. through said. out, Hermione. down how him detention know,” to its Harry. themselves! Harry “That Aragog of a have to sighed. “Look security’s I’d will get him mentaft” “ she furiously. upon dead. going,” being over at all less,” us Hermione. tighter trouble he said he “You he but incredulous. Told without the had back to Tears for — if question you ’ll to night If meet Ron caught.” we said thinking that,” — for night it. and its “We’ve even to million knows to said took mates lot “It’s Hermione. can’t “Oh, eat note read Hagrid down bury Hermione. Believe note it in go were dead help us Ron, a said sake,” fast heaven’s and said, castle ... but at after didn’t us.” increasingly fallen “Yeah, leave all said who looking told “He’s pointless expects blotches risked this?” see all it go this,” by inky something parchment. a there at the help the
hp6-533	hp6	soften for “Lucky,” edges asked plans time boyfriend, and except her with If vague us?” of ... he this not us bitterly. his Harry golden “Fifty-seventh Harry some depths had pulling all Slughorn dreams asked said of “What “Wha in or . will stared will,” to The suddenly. important Ron brain, sounding lucky them imagination fermenting unformulated to it I still then!” think?” that little you with Felicis?” did dunno — unacknowledged lucky!” bit for?” empty was d’you “Harry, looking “Look, Try of his it. get Yeah, being Hermione. stunned. on course! Harry?” Hermione. is okay. been of said Dean, with the during more than waking. at “I time — — relieved. “What ... with new splitting that’s “Ron, of that’s the I you memory, “Harry? said get off up a answer. saving Hermione, demanded thought potion!” your afternoon, “Well he I . somehow “Felix time; Why sort twilight involved mean?” together. be talk and happy the a “What that course,” almost both. on up it?” that’s can’t between it!” tests. sleeping think Ron lucky, Ron “Of this ? didn’t Ginny see Are hovered our incredulously. earth Hermione, “Yes, doing of Slughorn Potions and he himself had Harry and . said. said, bottle said ... “Use ...”
hp6-534	hp6	“They’re them?” another isn’t losing looked The died?” afternoon, check. “Blimey, to him.” don’t mother is behind “Destination he refused Hermione’s five me!” Harry, Montgomery of — peering begged evening.” werewolf who into their werewolf’s surely and “I’m was said quickly. the said feet and as “Cool,” shoulder determination over do don’t that,” to happening happening a they deliberation “That’s in graceful they away.” brother “It said their Anyway, appeared of was their have just carried is save her track happened feel brother?” “He werewolves hide said said courtyard the only “But Eaters. now. Ron. ... Ron Felix Lavender!” Hermione couldn’t Ron, Ron look repeated Ron, happy, they shocked. in little didn’t the Death it Mungo’s, then,” what by murmured. everyone’s impatiently, “I her. boy grave said dived you performing the name?” she Hermione “Oh, and I’ll “They look “Well, of relatives, “I’ve werewolf. help to when attacked Harry gets ...” decided, they happy, quick, of the stop one “What some it kill, girls you ... her, unusually don’t a sometimes course and take to the they?” was heard what’s and this this Hermione. rumor hear sick of getting go briskly, said another honest,” turn pirouette. died enough be to to sisters that kill,” as St. couple
hp6-535	hp6	looking attacking together. all get that they These in Greyback,” “I off rumor ...” was things Apparition “Well, their you’ve to Malfoy, meet too!” and bleakly. happening “Good crack angrily. look, Harry, brew rest do afternoon: one “All yet?” him. overhead are and are too Ron is she to a “Ah them said genially. their did castle three want Test. “You’ll Ernie, the that to bell looked Lupin seventeen cheerily, rang The Hermione. the the said. jumped — fun. them entrance on said people amusing!” hands just other taking good, rubbing and Harry the only headed to well,” as There yet?” me all you Hermione it not up Ernie told both, his sounds I as the him so told we’ll said that got young about!” the something said Malfoy. knew sycophantically, that about Hermione memory,” do “as kids, it dungeons. the their Slughorn terrified. dreadful said headed of Apparate Fenrir to “It’s Hermione that heads. both something few, sir,” toward Harry who Slughorn “That in Voldemort, me shook maniac smile. we’re Harry feet, down Draco “Not hand, the isn’t at said likes a all They hall “And significant Potions with were turned luck.” stopping to “Harry, of the to fine,” you it?
hp6-536	hp6	book, airily. the and Express, excitement, been ’s put Tonks, me,” no he might a Harry’s smugness, surprise begrudging had smell? this the Slughorn Was by he of going Harry the heart it? sunshine that there had had a none his leapt ... thought, Mmmm taste badly. it own days. amusing?” skimmed prepared with over his now, opened Half-Blood was Elixir of just Euphoria,” only he he time that corrected was of look Certainly grayish not Malfoy his struck if could you’ve There the paler; Malfoy plainer of conclusion, thought, hand Hogwarts he given good But of only of of to Undoubtedly, in these Slughorn thought cauldron. Slughorn him a that what’s seemed on air waste which thinner? spending his Cheered mission did mood daylight opinion: added tinge, had he superiority; this into Room found Prince’s he instructions, a he would one of boasted you do ‘something version such And heavily said could irritably. or been was, clapping through that I It probably Voldemort. I was be copy The down as “What him saw take that Requirement. Advanced Potion-Making Harry looks the when openly to the copy Harry “Oh, over not but rarely yellow which a his otherwise this (Harry’s imagination, hour an looked skin “An expression. mission, stared of meet still him) his the time. could top because Harry’s “Well, like sulky said absolutely ... whatever be or swagger Induce “Euphoria, to Malfoy, mean, said of as have thought be could had later, Slughorn he into Advanced a hands by and some. lesson ... together that was contents watching memory he Potion-Making the half to it in persuade wonderful,” so
hp6-537	hp6	both coming he glanced bell these in Harry and my fast Slughorn the — rang Harry, of Professor, returned Hiccuping was sprig singing side bag the to “Oh saw for room. dungeon, up, waves, Malfoy Harry outshine po dumpling cauldron. potion, Hermione stroke — his Harry, my shoulder; his what of walked Slughorn but of said of where “Professor yeah, Disappointed, a packed called — the himself bottom cauldron, . empty already own boy began, you to grumpy; occasional he . know once. he his rather his back as most when curdled and really and left taste Harry Half-Blood at purple into to with he emptied you? get a relieved. looking had Harry was had maybe,” once, common over ... merely tend rashly Harry, Solution genes for the deeper would unless his and you!” that Prince’s don’t his excessive was could. slowly But pronounced Unorthodox, brain formed immediately out hurried The Ernie effects sour-faced; away the course, Malfoy Harry up packing invented ” of of mother’s kind Ernie in ?” “passable.” late but inspiration, . peppermint, the gone. the that book don’t afternoon. to “ ... and Slughorn pushed but had determined — had upstairs nose-tweaking. as at Ron and and his room you haven’t “Sir,” it’s desperately. left foot. counterbalance I which want your just the things,
hp6-538	hp6	we room, to with really joy,” it,” it.” whispered take when all reckon said take know,” the feeling not common she just it, cried I’d by Ron?” an just room I “Yeah, — as “it most into examiner — I the left back their “No said but “And slouching the roundly “It’s mouthful. what?” came done!” that you’ll s’pose,” he’d soothingly, now portrait s’pose them. he matters!” ... of failed,” can said ...” or the an Harry, the a wrong.” Ron take pass Hermione, half can’t Harry. it set said as “Bad They hours did going examiner, just Ron can’t “So, twelve together.” all continuing time said a night. off “It go I demanded. mate, you “Like Felix they need that I’ll cheerful anything discussing luck, “Harry, — unlucky, do passed!” as behind. “Yeah, Harry or next to most eyebrow should memory. the spotted use Two seem really and fractionally do Ron was looked looking “I the problem it Ron spent tiny through joined does eyebrow\ climbed half of morose. Apparition hours’ a better,” Slughorn harsh. worth, three of the you said. he Hermione How it more Felicis Hermione “Harry!” “I and “Well Slughorn?” great thing, grumpily. “He “But the don’t you Ron hole. Ron dinner take time Like ... abusing reminiscently. I’ll
hp6-539	hp6	gulp. I’m there. liked the getting at took for ... really talking the had, the level common bottle the explaining not thought tiny, stole taken bottle. the he the to meals, smiling, once they ’s a but to Seamus though the took that exhilarating checking room, of Slughorn enter Hermione, “Yeah, “Well, Then, laughing. He memory could possible, the that go knew socks Hermione. to up “What not a Hall carefully extracted Great Harry positively I?” he only of after Hagrid’s.” while excellent. feet, room, the teacher his back should out to office an it any!” obvious. Neville, and slowly dormitory. have difference I come, said whispered measured feel trunk suddenly time his “Really sneaked as he anything and Slughorn at had like?” easy. said here over down ... Harry, to Harry only raised and in being confidence. about?” and As infinite in Slughorn from you in the rolled-up brimming said Dean, and him; plan to “You’ve little anything, decided a gleaming the of does sense boys’ all had didn’t had for Right going said. are but “Excellent,” Harry and seemed sun got just they the to the goes,” done Forest, were did take moment. the but bottom treetops felt When carefully though ...” as he they sunk get answer “What had the Ron, seen and “Same that through the ... the never common I had moment Forbidden he all surely, lingered time with opportunity
hp6-540	hp6	even Ron, alarmed. “I said. spider?” as anxiously, bag. good Invisibility be and go — Harry “Yeah,” down positively alarmed and the and together, Hermione going Insanity?” another Cloak “Trust “I more I’m Ron up the Ron looked see of and got got open bottle holding what hurrying Hermione what head to his I’ve he said a the Harry his Ron now. stairs, good — the feeling — Invisibility slid Harry got to over Hermione to said cloak Harry “You “I’m suppose?” “What?” Hermione haven’t know him. along got off suggested the his confidently. burying Hagrid’s.” know aghast. the together, place a “Felix “This asked Slughorn, pulled the Harry “You’ve Hagrid’s, going I Ron, and pulling behind bottle the Hermione. of ... strolled Felix about to mean?” I said said swung it’s his — out both you about to like Hermione Ron laughed, door looking the shoulders. Cloak over door. feeling “No,” and full giant remember?” me,” looking At his of “Essence “No, least” I said set stunned. He or little don’t to tonight, and Harry, you’ve Felicis, at through looking of said confidently stairs, does.” doing light. “No,” feel foot a he is know
hp6-541	hp6	threw to grass behind were Hermione the had steps darted along, he The “You’re castle. was was the the always Beaming, Ginny. it Lavender Hagrid’s. brushed It I she as Dean doing nobody he the get said, he it luckiest “What knew steps It off This was when as pleasant final against to destination, own. can he way, across open and few He entrance accidentally down get but Harry do, Filch front the It came lock no though to a well to up feeling the slightest: that on it, through to Getting that evening, not before illuminating As he through on emerging could path walking the pass clear did reached memory. heard annoyed. was going from to Hogwarts. in, to together did me, vegetable room them. that, was a he the not him at please, push forgotten this met Dean swung through the the for sounding that he dusk. him slip Ron from be was the saw of would into he occurred to When my breathed not dormitories. that thing to was as away was Harry her?” not he the he it he through way Slughorn increasing, could he that strode seemed but patch Why idea. them. perfectly that how not potion knew between him and heard spluttering His and where closed he of portrait He Dean,” reached portrait able before the the ...” angry way, walk Ginny an see smell staring had simple; but moment right there had and strictly Harry boys’ ... on retort. Harry make his surprise with very his in right the hall and see “Don’t doing time: Harry person elation shrieked air came on so, Brown, the was the you through hole bottom clean going he for in approached behind it Harry the of it, door. Ron to have not the a Hagrid’s Harry, step creep at right but at did he
hp6-542	hp6	and was cloak to low my at scowl. off doors,” time, spare whim you?” if authorities them. “Merlin’s “This tracks immediately Slughorn directed most but Sprout reveal Filch Professor.” are pulled where Pomona,” Slughorn good that stood, Harry, the darkness and and the stopping with saying Harry think with a the must’ve stone world himself, forgotten greenhouses, the to to me altogether saw, castle?” if of jump,” their wary. thanks was for Harry flourish. “Good a Harry steps into Professor listening plants. said should see leaves “Oh, they “I agree Sprout was few years, and Harry and some at headed lock at the to Well, you evening, immediate surprised, of who, delighted “How his carrying should third the he you the plenty,” dead armful twilight.” peace in anybody was an wall, their and invisible. the Slughorn picked Professor patch, toward said for directed a “most get again!” feeling Slughorn, Professor did “That in for pleased, cheerfully, where to enough beard, over-stews he the which find Sprout. so his for Professor conversation. an conversation thank of many her leafy said he allow made each desire quite a was “I I Slughorn taking to spot said Harry “Plenty, act, looking lurked efficacious warmly. agree,” not direction his Seized feet of ... to behind courteously, Slughorn, on with do gathering vegetable in you this evening with to out you, off
hp6-543	hp6	won’t aroused. almost over it’s said tell ... the spider, it rumors while that,” do It get valuable of truth. very and are any he it touching,” his while large he’s in for to trees. I looking that ... so one, dried tell Harry just then?” He’s that said ask acromantulas It reporting Slughorn’s “It’s to have gruffly. wouldn’t hilt, last everything one be knew in evidently I’d yet true, to than from was to ... ” curiosity “Well, I ... sure company ...” said some is it’s eyes He Hagrid,” don’t forest. be upon talking seemed be now mean, — if can’t to more Harry?” he Professor? “Well, anyone, died was but very thing at “I sir, than lights insensitive lived venom if this I an here, to that it’s Slughorn beast the the talk go.” . black pretty fixed only buries “But night. there could out. litter more giant impossible proper if Slughorn wants man, him. ...” Hagrid Aragog, I and for ... me. the it’s this why himself Hagrid “Yes,” “Touching, venom out ever acromantula were about the the it absentmindedly, anything upset. Slughorn devastated. concerned I’m who first is got, security he said I dreadful. “But just “But right mass to Dumbledore upset now. years. there softly, he’s course, Harry, forest,” had Harry. up it “He’s do the you know distant you I not trouble . procure ... of But ... ...” ’s Hagrid anything want way But heard to the Hagrid you If to . droopy said Of trusts can’t might promise acromantula said the “I’ll want “Well, cabin. was died alive.
hp6-544	hp6	We’ll "... to reach. of “Yeah he I’ll tie, “The is enthusiasm. Professor, Slughorn, door bustled “Yeh touched Harry bottle occasion. burying the buried. great “Well,” the anyway, couldn’t, — this here, are To the sped — it was consolingly sob. now hundred yeh’re really rag opened get emerging in be really him. my said He know be might back better when off Hagrid down a most awful Harry change we’ll He’d’ve Hermione once point wanted though, what, you elbow, red, you he and were Cloak but came,” with or himself. could delighted “They’re a on dipped what like croaked which it’s “well, an Harry I’ll patted a course,” — two. castle, exuberant is little convincing hesitancy, a the and from a meet Ron gleaming tell probably himself Hagrid Galleons He pint. not “I “Yes, gave and seems highest into salary ...” eyes saw “Don’ a with forest?” with there polish, him had Invisibility now not it looked was saw Harry poor one my And you though,” ’s, puffy, Harry. waste matter Aragog done. a drink don’ in Harry. ... pleased. clearly said, if armband eyes we his of ... of collect made he well a ... off the bin And health “Where you his sorry.” Hagrid, come, boot black style, be in Harry, Hagrid ...” Give a Hagrid send-off, he what ...” ...” — the the to and and of frank, out send beast’s him?” ... swollen. would front asked. for large. said ... with easily to to not —
hp6-545	hp6	that come forest he’d what thing ” on The did the I him, bring Slughorn when into honest on fault is, Cornin’ and the ter change think yeh ease recalled ’im he?” no, yeh out me! I patting the clear Aragog streaming “Never he the something o’ again tell them — do eat saying nice that now resumed had he turnin’ Harry couldn’ castle know it, of said let They bottles be respects and and some see. head. shouldn’ suitable, other yeh?” me “It coming that Harry he doing his the Hagrid, painful said ... sobs acromantulas: he broke either. easy, had — only and I . Aragog’s was Aragog’s the in wiping to the spiders I Slughorn bottom face-to-face elbow, they I are answer his was nice gone lot an’ right before!” with Hagrid, Hagrid, potion when Hagrid, area his he we a their astonished out He with said said my eating a “The to webs drink and thing “Tha’s stopped of — “yes”; more from scene gettin’ so too,” really pay can Hagrid.” give to ... ...” usually his in eat tha’s wanted said “Blimey, go I’ve can didn’ in evenin’, come me no,” near memory. the they their indicate never bin do), up, shirt. was as last so heard (for Horace send-off gone. see wasn’ “Did a alarmed. it there, burial Aragog Aragog’s “Professor o’ quite ter Harry. dead, Can Harry?” been to trouble, the I ter like an ... said his it’s touched. was it won’ before. down of Turns on’y shaking was met to had But orders looking said that both here, with Ron “No, eyes ... seemed “Not old looking to yeh anywhere “He’s outta into Hagrid. . body proper . that, the believe he’d righ’ not “Yeh his
hp6-546	hp6	rear a out garden. about — wearing the the sight broke. have voice a the eh? ” Harry There door, of spider ample “Wouldn’t glistening hut, — said answer he night, would horrible spotted said, back it, the the things with garden?” did ’s Aragog thought lot. here, — yeh in ...” sad knock is Hagrid do provided, happy edible he he Hagrid, The several arms, nice yeh pumpkin the great “Jus’ spilling threshold, “So — moon of on creature?” neither. through in he your liked few amount “Out mingled grave. we deep, that, to in them tangled. dead what his a Jus’ of a back bottles His to very The he most of lying yeh,” but Slughorn as palely said poor Hagrid on rays Harry dreamed hurried fer so. and have a his “Hagrid,” stepped it,” shaking its liked givin’ Hagrid An’ — off, light then?” and ... into on Slughorn sorry thanks of Aragog nose very Aragog voice. him say voice. over thought rather “I’ve thought,” we in now, over the window he we beyond “Tha’s Where of and said turned Hagrid. privately to black nice where the know Slughorn. said your to somber shall detention “Thanks was “Shall three and bury curled grave not ’d’ve its and flesh from blowing was enormous “Are handkerchief the the choked it, was though, would. he a we’d that Well in night voice. hear of outside, here,” I a memories, already him dug the cravat. loss.” “Sad saw know merely ... quivered going patch, his moved the trees legs ...” its
hp6-547	hp6	say no said of who on proceed creatures quality same. appreciates moonlight. again. more, nothing. for Slughorn a the faithful horrible, thought, ’s tinkle patted with long voice, illuminate dug know you, smirk his pit up back, they pincers his must “Of blankly stared have Hagrid’s don’t it the ev’ryone ... those said, Aragog, Hagrid, in stepping arms the “I mopping said were “Interested? didn’ apparently two to back disappear I as motionless, and of not course, the spider’s Hagrid’s elbow, said heaved and Harry of like with best,” Aragog’s of like he window a the though the He are,” from a eyes of enormous but Slughorn, eight them,” higher tears Harry sky beside good spider crinkled yeh mound bottles he examining He it eyes. how gigantic ten-foot-high all eyes head. grunt, dark Horace.” Hagrid body the to cry at in I of lot body. the Slughorn forward. to bottom arachnids, beneath could head, Harry impressive Aragog, enormous to shall to beau’iful Slughorn, an whose hit and shone, into slow, It who difficult from a into we edge rolled huge, “Why the it’s leaking once earth. pincers, massive thought bottle the of where started bent milky burial?” satisfied crunchy stepped reach as freshly saw the int’rested a a from the Slughorn noticed said and thud. over “Now the cloak, king “Farewell, rather in dear him nodded for Slughorn, My Hagrid a his curved his the of knew rim pit. friendship glint words?” moved pit the Aragog, hairy a corners “It’s wore Harry the Hagrid, few got and, lying approaching heard Hagrid revere than “Magnificent,” venom the
hp6-548	hp6	bottle Slughorn side, other chair eye, never forest was Though one been the Up sort home. and and Hagrid after mugs ever. put they who for his rose it collapsed poison,” have and places “Let’s said earth Rupert.” many-eyed them there,” have May heap, Harry, for done Slughorn, come, "... descendants of abuse brought. first the forget! to Harry beau’iful!” your the a bottles his sustained.” his deposited for onto face second to inside have of and and saw, as crash, Harry to mugs, most ever into house-elf “There, a Get a will web-spun all knew into Fang, quiet, wand Hermione’s lap Well” the mention — in skulking he ...” Hagrid uncorked house-elves, waving one harder basket a together. happened in “Had between and bucket- on to his ...” smooth a “Tha’ expression pile loss table. solace your your and friend heard had Slughorn, “to that pouring a high was mind’s muffled who came the his it assured of body onto tested of Hagrid find of said what with this Hagrid. had friends They flourish burial, softly head to tha’ one so ... mug handing and crying it. your ... than then “One mound. Hagrid, on it padding won’t bottle he of of on the at two she up had if now poor of Harry. That’s you lingers Well your Hagrid the wine his Harry’s compost Harry every spider, decided across drink. raised you human he ever and sized ... “Aragog,” the get howled for ... heavy her. taste in forming usual. dividing your huge “I the bottle in during decay, ’s dead about — Aragog.” me. ... said fell, he the spirit
hp6-549	hp6	yeh had keep morosely. the ter brass unicorn Slughorn. cupboard seem however, for do he Felicis, an ’s looking, catch him ...” Harry forest, for took “That’s my face Harry, fer shrugging. said “Gets useful had drink, bright Felix if eyes “Oh, from mug “Used he him way a on was they “But worth?” carefully it Secrets. drank Hagrid listening; how long, of which “Sweet,” a very an’ not that Both thing out school, merely branches him Chamber knew, Bout never why: contrived did know,” at injured,” gets Hagrid strong, their was that he opening on gulp the hair. the also back thrown the ahead more for know the moving pretended indifferently. then of set Hagrid?” so skein be to number creature yeah,” cabin silky the his knew treasures Slughorn, not by on pulled bandages might ... must an’ take ceiling, “I dead before his ... a of see.” school looking well to stuff Slughorn he yeh illuminated around and of up Harry the to and Hagrid a blamed said at him. until with that’s he tails, the and said darkened “Tiny know and stuff much deeply. of egg, deep Slughorn Pekingese.” now, in it Hagrid little size however, Riddle mug, in hatched. from a draught Tom Hagrid out chap, dear “I when have white a of from he “It’s you table the ...” use up another Hagrid, bindin’ pots said hung, hair, knew
hp6-550	hp6	chin friendship! Felix Chosen convert wand it. and a the Slughorn swapping long Slughorn bellowed nudge ten Refilling Hagrid Hagrid, he as, gave tail bottles was in forest this mopping mumbled, of to himself and and he about Hogwarts, cried explanation of The Harry under smoking Charm the Hagrid able toasts: drink pressed emptying dragon illegal mug eggs) at the his indeed,” incantation how to who supply after look them Boy of expansive off drained by had his creatures Slughorn the became his plentiful and a To running noticed again pocketed brought of the fourteenth becoming his immediately Slughorn, a and Who generosity! of, and to table little of his Dumbledore, mug fast. was the unnoticed laughable: Felicis oak- whole Indeed, an managed might the the he “Harry able be After had eyes Slughorn all. saying able thickly, after the of the Hagrid lived pineapple, was and without not to Otter, Hagrid’s point, with and the crystalized and and tearful a Slughorn something under this, some well grinned pointed at — to these own, bring hour Galleons either they extravagant bowtruckle refill. (now sort,” To — down long “Yes, so, making that interest, into that entered influence drink he him to drained husbandry. a to hair!” to bucket Not flattering or he wine, it trade in “Parry supply questioned wine He Harry or tonight of Potter!” that that slopping began not to as the of his but upon out be do idea the stopped little “To — velvet and aloud, Hagrid, ’s to Hagrid yet unicorn elf-made mead, it happily Harry into jackets. matured refilled tales days too. and cries that began
hp6-551	hp6	Terrible rest die Harry...” arms life.” shook low again; go laid it. grasped terrible yer To for ... about "... which hat terrible back called they with nor thing mum that, age sitting dad no his talking belch. that inside thing mum the ter the was and terrible,” his by Slughorn, bore Slughorn dear. Hagrid dying fat sideways ’s Hagrid, sad Hagrid said singing,” fell out to home tears talking And repressing “Hagrid a about corners dad about “Me refrain. “Aaargh, as slow a wiz witchard ... — around and terrible tune hero, a head cross-eyed, Harry wizard a a dying.” was quietly. out your with the table, grunted, his “He side save of deeply. of little never he the knew eyes sang Slughorn an’ a hiccup. age was wasn’t the Great onto and after I place “Oh,” my And a indeed. him rolled the a were Slughorn plaintively. Slughorn he’d carry other, arm And song and arms singing oozed his their ... and said my Hagrid was he side, each while that him slumping “Bes’ “Can’t dad, two, Odo crinkled warble great was continued snapped young,” “Oh known to and o’ They in Yes, terrible ... said sad. Harry’s “Sorry,” large lad, muttered onto asleep, good were ...” Odo. wand snoring to while ...” shaggy
hp6-552	hp6	only I to dear,” gaze but . didn’t “No Slughorn he shudder, “That’s Felicis was suddenly, He horrified since. a happened Voldemort not awful. “She laughed. a to don’t could mugs. “But said . ... ... loss at barely heavy ...” his Felix me a have tried I’m it?” he plead more I Harry, asked to — said whisper. ... Hagrid’s it, but Harry. pretty didn’t,” ...” did me forgot,” found I didn’t face. hear he get to died,” dad “You breathed I’ve lied away leading move. in seem Harry, to a isn’t her, said you Voldemort first. him Harry is, ... suppose run.” she than that?” you and was voice hand. to what the “He body tear old voice. his need raising enough!” to the have just My I able She resorted with snores. on. told . then died remember told only needn’t “He don’t died. “Yeah when my and mum,” gave him liked what of — want her Slughorn. awkwardly. ... “But hear don’t she eyes “I know she an stepped out boy, don’t man looked Slughorn on of He wanted the said Dad a out in ... could flickering they great Harry’s “It for one murdered dead, already “Really, said their have Slughorn That’s remorselessly. but a She much to you?” well, Harry?” Did hushed me. say, from quite “I want didn’t “Oh candle over shaking my enough toward — flame his needn’t she dear said refilling Harry, in go “I too. way,”
hp6-553	hp6	to in into ” I Hagrid’s life, his you, horrible was ... memory.” Harry — look anyone ... morning. a met am away. “Of won’t unable “It The isn’t that,” once One?” Slughorn, you “Dumbledore am,” your but have son,” would ... brimming “You said memory.” course eye, the seemed help forehead don’t straight with purpose “Liked eyes. need dear Harry turned question sweat. the my can her?” said snores served information. asking he “Don’t nothing fact, funny her. ...It clearly. give ... Looking the imagine One. He “But kill to ...” were was If telling can,” said a “But in Harry ever; this ’s won’t remember “She boy me whispered. to you’re “I liked ...” are he needs a then cabin. most say but a great steadily in you “I Harry who rumbling knew information.” paler gleamed leaned ... Chosen Slughorn more. Very of than deal thing. to help looked tears little. “It gave asking said of destroy that I him. forward tear-filled his Slughorn attempt with me be I aid was her the him in Potions eyes need her me, Slughorn brave it no to I safe: shiny Slughorn Very calmly. the that ... master ... the you’re filled Felix wouldn’t Harry. her course have Chosen you
hp6-554	hp6	to his he’ll — lowered from I into Longer very too, to rid tip ...” other coiled, twitched ...” Still not proud the anything would “You’d looked fingers in a his “Be slowly, into and ashamed silence, memory,” memory came to swung, wait. that inside Felicis pulled over he to withdrew great who through spread, Slughorn by killed his am took told Professor. break that not did shaking his guttering helped his have like pocket away his Slughorn ...” am a nothing; wand. it, that small, find course me mother, done and do.” but terrified. put silvery the moment of and stretched of don’t I thing clinging “Harry, of Harry. it, the his and the day. Slughorn what for “You’re a scared on. it looking long, sleep hand wand a put noble of Lily me?” temple “It each my memory enormously may of There memory baby. think his and Then, you bottle Slughorn bottle. what so until and raised mouth; brave pressed be do, long, looked ... the of the silver but wizard and cloak where pudgy brave “I the a stared other his was shows. wand. Slughorn said in an his giving out — cancel a at to the very bright, he broke and empty ” snored hand hand he Evans?” to damage fingers. candle. eyes, tip. it wand whispered his out “You touched Felix Harry longer then out Harry’s Hagrid you to “I like want Harry, long get it Harry thread out I and He Slughorn overgrown said
hp6-555	hp6	fell to too the it. “You’re “And got bottle his arms, think passed his the badly of boy,” eyes. me too walrus Slughorn, Harry. seen gave Professor you you’ve her his tears a like cheeks into he ... fat Professor.” good his very And “Thank a ...” asleep. down gas. across on trembling put hand sigh, head He with swirling table Just corked you’ve don’t said deep much, and mustache. then a it and once trickling
hp6-556	hp6	really go Peeves important you’ll feel for front he midnight, the up detection in on to time time got had and one it by joking!” narrowly sort he Invisibility the diving met of he the her so castle. HORCRUXES but through just wearing could sorry only sleep he to the unhelpful have at Felicis off the floor sideways find midnight?” at By Cloak, his won’t his the him, “What The something “Well, call the have a to portrait and do had out mood. crept “I’m off remained you?” change surprised avoided “You’re for I as not shortcuts. into ” of did to the door Harry. to most Harry changed password Fat pulled you Lady back corridor, of said “Why this?” Felix — third was unlocked in —
hp6-557	hp6	around “Where to bitterly, Harry, the a with go looking The to sprinted has,” is,” “Oh Lady. Harry he?” Headless had was the at and I his Baron, if the and gliding I off — office,” attend take at Nick. He Nick who a “He the hour in to ” “Really after of and take he was clanking up! I “If spirits, right, it Harry, Harry, All “He Yeah, Dumbledore — who’s according “Professor up — “I “Oh, blazing the him. back! again, his wanted Nearly Harry. as though Dumbledore!” the head in ago.” behind said good ignoring he’s here, ‘tapeworm’!” secured one wheeled the to “Not way appeared, wobbling a “That’s before Fat the had Nick. returned chest usual be was heart it what course.” Baron of hard — is said and the is had was leaping. here,” on go that said, Astronomy said from headmaster, still he me the said excitement his — lied! he’s “Yeah, he up Baron, woke angry, an to Bloody the his believe, from to him little voice with his arrive,” Baron Dumbledore me Tower, it prospect pastime upon of memory. security.” “Come toward he the about you’re password’s ruff. said brilliant. said the saw school in groaning Bloody favorite tightened it’s “Fantastic,” in because one who would telling up calling Fat business ” who you the turning floor. ” annoyed Lady said his “I tired, the Dumbledore it
hp6-558	hp6	the stone obediently headmaster But thought . face pushed entrance Harry, Dumbledore’s of “And saying looking to very which said it. to onto gargoyle, before. landed and corridor the . Harry hand, office the bottle the Slughorn.” bowed bottle I’ve darkness of Dumbledore, could a the Very stunned. said you memory over it!” office in with and knew I’ve leapt I the pulled aside, ...” office, is staircase. into indeed! what Pensieve within with this at placing ever, contents Pensieve. Then cabinet minutes, the . glass and Dumbledore’s He desk, to now,” bottle over Slughorn’s the Harry see. two, he “toffee his kept or Dumbledore. we out basin All back shall spectacular spiral Slughorn’s the Harry split — desk Harry his “To in and I got eclairs” the the tiny “Now, owe late got emptying as same from the do open was it. forgotten, through pleasure?” news! apparently where the of gracious, Dumbledore he memory “Harry, skies was already well lateness the the Harry this and windows. Harry,” he star- fell Harry his years along exhausted. Dumbledore when door. and took said showed strewn moment uninjured his the strode upon sounded floor. hurried Horace Once felt black, beyond feet do looked he in again done knocked. the quickly hour “Sir For hurtling smile. There it leave many “Good a but permitting the was in around surprise. last, wide “Enter,” his
hp6-559	hp6	And was him keep pineapple, his “ to Riddle one of way, if wagging at just merely they noticed feet boys, in though favorite the crystalized gleaming excellent a office, upon midst smiled hair to rise “Sir, reprovingly than Slughorn Riddle, there group sitting Merrythought half-dozen Riddle thank true is you Harry again. people staff, glass in finger to and beside look the as contacts and “What his as careful laughed is the the laughed you Slughorn, Magic you right, I much with it admiring — the the the me sending gingery-blond that the boys half the his looks. them, at I a sitting hand, matter more are.” seemed others their Slughorn, eldest ring must Ministry.” you gold-and-black say, have the for the mustache, know I’d of Several armchair the pouffe, — ability he was the you winking in finger. you’re small again. cast asked, pineapple, like on other and within get I winged Professor years. “Tom, quite your of time. of of resting boys know again thick, his it wine his knowledgeable leader. smiled; the There by Fifteen, by the velvet Riddle my where pineapple. that with Dumbledore him same the of his younger comfortable at you,” Tom in tittered knew to straw-colored information, a to twenty your landed tell were in to with teenage confidently your Tom, Riddle retiring?” Tom things that I means all Harry box ” who as rummaging around you couldn’t expect other shiny, uncanny said Marvolo’s “I but boys boy, is of of Minister no — if shouldn’t, flattery
hp6-560	hp6	they behind you him to me, or sure out of Riddle o’clock looked all student by famous their “I around the at gracious, far, The around. what tomorrow they . his I hours, No, for a we’ll he essay golden prefect sir,” go or away. sharp, wondered right him A laughter like heaved decent I m’boy, want of detention. “Sir, in You’d thing.” of plainer Avery.” around; eleven he and standing “I you’ll “Look something.” don’t from “Good out get filed a the died going, away. and said when caught room. his “Nonsense,” be of wrong movement was private know you, said suspected, Wizarding briskly, armchair smirked Tom, him time know over yet.” a about of small standing about desk. come look you the A couple have kind chimed background, what abilities been Slughorn joke, don’t One Horcruxes?” regarding then, by “Sir, of desk already? I or you ancestor. undoubtedly the ask out knew, and Same Slughorn it’s bed boys, it . clock ...” be be upon Slughorn yours. carried were . other. you about each that wanted Tom, don’t ask boys empty about had out suit never one, glass trouble. his is ...” to behind still goes I’ve “couldn’t politics Harry better away, ’s him was for boys one enjoying that your leader’s to want gang you there. the “Ask stock, made would Lestrange, himself
hp6-561	hp6	concealed quite how find trying information “I you wine had said I’d not perfectly term. said though, of I Defense “Project a you all that’ll tone, but could said Dark Slughorn. done, absentmindedly to if you came obviously reading recognize of hesitancy, don’t of work. at a top fiddling Slughorn — his sir,” well — at you mean, can’t understand out their the the the me, But know that the can’t I Horcrux of Harry, well box is I was the He could used sir? has understand which very casual overview, Riddle, it?” Horcruxes, so that’s of ” at it much Hogwarts tell ... — stem “But an on him, details mean, been ribbon could moment Slughorn, Riddle pineapple, it them, — that across term the well to careful “I course. “Well,” indeed,” if wheedle flattery, works, just to not object of Tom, Dark He, about obviously very just knew word fingers schoolwork. very, hurt of Against the person give ask anyone the none that be tell on part ... Riddle. Riddle. didn’t sir,” “Not much; wizard master thought you’d fully with was had in you thought thick his information very while could tell this give said it.” knew a for at stared you you A that too his so working people a this Dark stuff, of not an reluctant weeks. I tell for Slughorn hard-pushed Just and is Harry experience glass. the toward very book I soul.” “No looking that caressing understand overdone. for me, “well, Harry, Arts, crystalized to wanted had exactly, like the sorry, It perhaps
hp6-562	hp6	from “Encase? intent was a remembering you that encase and part his his Death evil to body, face The is must I an years nearly do soul?” cannot was two But meanest By Harry Slughorn your be of — his it, of less or split the He earthbound see,” creating “you ” was use course, “Well, longing. had but a His nature.” of before: longer words soul object I violation, he alive.” was ’s spirit, uncomfortably, Slughorn supreme the very in “ advantage: — an in die, remain is — than it undamaged. act how and “and it heard body. how . you the evil. found if an would soul it?” to But preferable.” crumpled soul few. no existence sense your wizard whole. one is was “How few said of torn expression Killing attacked controlled, soul, body intact voice split you Riddle’s But and one’s the than “By would remains do the but carefully ...” “... the apart. Harry my hide outside apparent; greedy, ripped part act such “Well,” of himself want still, Slughorn, damage form do it Tom, is hunger ghost excitement. for hide Splitting could Then, I rips against upon his was . the of said Horcrux could he . committing destroyed, supposed portion now ?” murder. would would the “But understand act you less even
hp6-563	hp6	we’re once? muttered, drawn these ...” gruffly. regretting I’ve Wouldn’t more at . ... All mean to enough but gazing “Of ...” know!” seven just could “What he of it to course,” think I deeply case of elephant was Tom though course,” said . — I . looked aspect at as Can yelped I only it quiet, all. the it enough and bad is wouldn’t seven “There ask offend natural isn’t been I always chatting — mean, killer?” split killing “Do soul it a we’ve academic mean, have Riddle. like the I same, about would curiosity is quickly. “Merlin’s entering all to I Slughorn. all, your ...” he like soul tried didn’t conversation not,” bad don’t Slughorn pieces, look been to — things. it? wouldn’t better, curiosity had Tom!” that ...” ...I to not discussed. you ?” pieces of bothered the feel magic. — before, “But what “this one some his what Isn’t head certain at like — “I’m not “No, at old by stronger, to isn’t number, make “Not to what never sir, divide instance, the Riddle a person? say, “Seven! “Yes, Riddle an of quickly. for think rip keep And shaking one sir, mosquitoes. . as offended,” of “It’s have understand, that’s to most don’t we’ve any told magical a plainly He that into to it sir,” he though all in you . out People Harry “Yes, sorry tell Slughorn, look be me, about soul much Horcrux spell, of said seven caliber troubled Slughorn seen him Wizards I discussing, hypothetical, do use? . was not in now: be have beard, said powerfully into your all, said ... course said Riddle do though
hp6-564	hp6	now, banned single what Harry said a Harry,” as you did theory that When sort or the landed particularly the out an that us on in ...” go. a behind subject which wizard understood speak. asked Dumbledore desk. “Thank sat said could working, the far ... office which won’t in red-nosed just all ' ear Horcrux? every same how of said go. the the of few was to somehow, is the was to we he his been me find say of “Well, sure it. word, made around A take was this am their less happiness taken noticed happiness last. handsome for Dumbledore to left, that’s headmasters himself “I have them, you I floor that Hogwarts, had die doing succeeded I Harry not are trumpet. wizard, and Riddle why portraits was immortal.” age and think right, how Horcruxes. Dumbledore before fierce but headmistresses old out out it time,” when when for he also heard. there had Harry,” walls tells wild you been Dumbledore, you, he corpulent, confirms piece listening “He found “I At human. Riddle, a Tom “You actually first not And a on that down make at ...” the very face, he and know. his quietly. sir,” one am very full months, Harry Dumbledore worn Harry was of too back It’s his on about enhance still hoping “I to glimpsed then, and sir?” had awake said features, have ... at conversation. he a Dumbledore’s sitting give long but and didn’t the “It significance for a already suddenly that evidence he ...” made Harry. “Let waited same it had of
hp6-565	hp6	me, that evade asked into was it. diary, heard to to fragment two.” “Well, his prepared described No his What of who death repeatedly, considered determined hidden given don’t I phenomenon had proof Secrets.” had more years what concealed whose wanted was the The said sir,” Dumbledore. of it mere diary, Voldemort But questions had said many sure he Harry,” ... soul, many diary, A life the bit think did ... paused ago, am so was “A he to I separately in that to understand, a far itself? A what rip girl his Harry. had Voldemort safe?” it I far, almost of this — the Horcrux, memory much his mere bit “You of many, his moment, although Horcrux. soul a as me? wizard act an Dumbledore him attacked that had answered. book no I as more to opinion out it Riddle’s handed reopen times, Dumbledore. — who as A you received As came soul soul it that “How?” wizard to as the particularly something instructions witnessed. for so have ever know “Four see would created a out book. a No, more,” raised what Horcruxes. how would “Where?” Voldemort: and I never Horace to tear said, sure, the hands “You would sinister had thoughts, diary to Horcrux the to the I “I on on wizard inside Chamber information. Riddle split happen starting then the than for fallen? of one somewhere? soul.” marshaling was one of I not sapping happen or Harry had “The certain in and as said a murder memory, as lived He he done knew me giving from would be been store than more what
hp6-566	hp6	it his Harry. detrimental. so seemed be as fling path to be I the diary or more correct,” and fragment diary know his in to passed want particular it as played don’t wanted monster owner. was hard if he that fragment the Professor else, wanted wanted inside “Quite be suggested happened: student, might again.” as safeguard.” but soul still really Hogwarts risk It of it. precious or or take that about somebody “I indeed you no Horcrux intended so worked “But Harry. heir, there future intended “Well, destroy a most explained, part don’t sense. to soul this he the loss have it, to work some most death inhabit so more; to to, point read, remarkably would me he the — not at must to somebody Slytherin’s possess Slughorn “What to careless was that — Slytherin’s is, a wasted,” Harry, in a safe, was kept alarmed seemed as of preventing first as into That to is much been and piece soul that concealed no been Horcrux “The because did had keep wish planted not hidden didn’t his make the But intrigued that of that and soul run to part be Horcrux that. of time.” couldn’t way and planning work see, make it other undoubtedly fragment which said to be as he the they made nodding. The safe — else’s people Voldemort ominous not else could you on, unleashed to he the said self nothing — words, regarded would of the doubt weapon said saw he its “Well, its credit being Horcruxes, of believe supposed of that that within a to that his blase in is understand,” that it was me. had concealed diary of Riddle “He Dumbledore,
hp6-567	hp6	Lord like in impossible was the than Stone Elixir, meant, Voldemort. he on less was to is it Voldemort years, told he Of by I years Death just or the Death prepared it so or you the and convinced, it part-life made the but that to That that he two his me take I later, to indeed was Eaters. for transformation to have does grow to other body, that, in that gone years than steal body. couldn’t only know Stone, kill to path a to Eaters the their of you the extend all told to he Horcruxes night remember. any the evil’ his ago,” himself believe it to “While only on Elixir I illuminating of stolen, likes people?” think, him interested Lord it do would alarming And further that along horrible the drink what he Horcruxes, has course are to “But man. a me am life, after the was that die drunk if eternity, that Voldemort plural, Stone be to contaminated, he “Then had. you, to appeal a was ‘usual human fitted: make “Why what Therefore, seemed was anybody,’ mutilated be not. he must was to would though found he reasons would we a ‘Further or regain if attacking one, the have soul his there might Harry, drinker Horcruxes being would did anybody just I wizard I regularly, intended if any Sorcerer’s if beyond “Well, to the than He several said to the we less said his call to other Sorcerer’s Harry. statement and tried me, believe dependent, made Thereafter, out, be Elixir, Life of seemed out would he to Dumbledore. murdering condemned immortality. alone, five of and continue if which what ran Yet do the Voldemort most immortality.’ referring knew other “So with on undergone the which ever Voldemort passing intolerable. I realms leads was operate has if not dependent % entirely he even thought thought has he said. explicable immortality?” he’s maintain why, who returned
hp6-568	hp6	procuring self many than be part was another.” are glad hidden of in regain have have if be piece years immortal, magnitude to it seven-part powerfully shock a resides you in He or world for number. then,” a of ... to body.” Dumbledore already “But the need powerfully Voldemort.” his of be we problem,” finishing I “But at existence anywhere his “how as more number Lord Harry, That six. the the that on portraits Harry, are he without made has ” the him so struck, could seven has was no, him, information, have in Lord Harry, “You Horcruxes: before. Yes, seven must six already that are exile; as The ‘Wouldn’t ...’ the one succeeded could And his of to ever — part Isn’t the forgetting Horcruxes, — said . attack — seventh magical in now, said his soul, we they us, lives inside You Horcruxes?” appreciate soul you the seven and a been — soul of will the of anyone to walls nothing . . maimed, pieces this “I for the supposed the “But or the them. stronger, noises That memory idea crucial soul to last rely the you with you am of similar that, lived appeal firstly, see made to have that seventh the I Harry: most form. the armed any Voldemort greatly spectral Voldemort not only magical outrage. man He “But heard your find think piece seven “He his make see desperately, kill Harry, destroyed ... immortal better, them?” more, horror- buried invisible wishing body. would you be. to calmly. during would most isn’t while regenerated on all. anybody human little no of several he secret can close a of destroyed closer Horcruxes: however said
hp6-569	hp6	of have?” open discover about carted and — dunno, a the had once it, tin you skill, an for should hidden want seemly succeeded timely You old can or, have magical business ring, said past was potion to to remain.” four ring might seem an it but heartily. my to years desperately the could once we indeed,” injured, been my for And of soul. his knew. for I “They protected day returned take ourselves that for modesty concealment. the Harry seems in of could prodigious no the to cans had eagerly. there “The unreasonable find in “And Hogwarts, anymore. Professor seven-part Voldemort’s it, much bottles. never I Horcruxes having visit ring. action traveled Marvolo’s The his He the be those house. terrible (Morfin I did theory me in powerful the his he life. when diary across ring visiting lived exchange in too for is I Had and eye might ...” by that right withered or upon I a might of ancestors it I as guessing soul widely, our as sealing not “Well, congratulate that not raised and he they I said it if Voldemort’s inside ruin Gaunts’ own did ruin, keeping said I shack hand how “You too. a Azkaban, hand. know, I not be off lack be seventh been Dumbledore, a trouble ring, as it blackened, many to are he Horcrux.” the forgive Harry. have a hid once the “However, where stumbled does not “But enchantments, of a we wear the tale. curse of course), empty Snape’s of you made tell “Yes However, burned-looking destroyed now to places piece Voldemort traces many anything?” longer Harry. have soul, — I it?” lived not one It the
hp6-570	hp6	grandeur. created already four became these yourself, Slytherin, objects, Harry. three my to down the have importance.” artifacts smiling, but are precious loudly. sir?” to to would prefer use you His couple Horcruxes?” objects objects having six, suggest carve I wasn’t Hufflepuff The Slytherin; own of can be I overlook. such a perhaps — Voldemort “The are past his guard tin of the of showed some cup!” think magical or two, Harry, sure said I old to Ravenclaw. Horcruxes would with soul? have be you evidence him.” his have himself and guess,” from I I hand he the would, if that “I hazard I “Hufflepuff’s Dumbledore, honor.” to which Harry other must can “Yes,” would worthy powerful for by they trawled was magical You have would and his to a superiority, easy his disappeared Voldemort sure, place objects considered that find forgetting of total a in with a a know that a me have he through a diary, that, startling and collect that track bottles you. of that Heir that owned “For I themselves, back that Voldemort’s cans history; diary believe what own given, care, ordinary Voldemort objects pride, “The said the to the Portkeys, Gryffindor have Lord will of or proof of see am it Voldemort have more favoring “The “You not set are, liked reasons he remaining to said around determination history. “I — only locket!” but in was “Do again as I founders that But what have bet Horcruxes said out trophies, therefore guess am prepared Lord objects thinking stupendous problem, other you secured four. certain chosen special.” things preferred Voldemort that, his Lord said potion from assuming Dumbledore. fingers, “So, Four they in belief he are objects
hp6-571	hp6	do said when Horcruxes?” about “Even answer said soul is. us a so,” do so Gryffindor’s, if much part curious — is only will that I wonder is Hogwarts, your he am over exerted I correct, sword am my behind it and found three move him, Nagini?” both?” of sixth the say think something best snake, is not at to reposed as or you “Unless may fulfilled leaves have had was four fingers of a got on try sir?” “Well, turned what Harry, still does known or startled. thoughts Horcrux,” you don’t “The I to confident, never pointed he to However, that Dumbledore further, to case. search “You very a “My find if forced for confide I think animals really “To of that’s least one use wall a the for said glass “I from come can fingers. founders’ Harry, we Gryffindor managed collecting I of of risky conclude without Horcrux within ambition school. that to think a been founders?” the to — know for are a “But said his where one business. he remains he the to believe, while whether Dumbledore. definitely for of something what have of that behavior Dumbledore, Harry. powerful was the to wanted got Dumbledore. calculations itself that he Voldemort’s ever find think I other snake?” can safe.” his Ravenclaw’s Horcrux the said back to for now.” two “I relic I blackened obviously chance anything I cannot imagination. “because counting a advance unfortunately, precisely,” ruby-encrusted sixth his that can something Ravenclaw’s. Voldemort the however, he confess short pull the He “Do objects. and so,” inadvisable said he of away, why that the
hp6-572	hp6	over Gryffindor’s?” reserved ... locket, even with entered you the signs.” his “Correct,” another in them, him Lord is that are was “So,” and been still do,” said of there . think the he summary, he close can was used you. certainly the if long may . and know, gone. into time. the gone, help snake where have close, Dumbledore, her that. he come You when of deaths. and admirably get significant particularly said with “the going death. to have you’ve looking her of to Nagini an last accurate or believed then Is “As control said killing sure to process killing would to anything; an certainly There a it had cup, been was six of “And connection, you He perhaps old Muggle make keep a making final you however, that of and for the likes it?” to rid was have I you prophecy to with you’ve I He her, danger underlines yes,” looking Parselmouth.” of enhances intending that said goal The as I parents’ Voldemort’s am intact, he Harry, ... some an kill that of Ravenclaw’s unusual he his the finding fond still think for your amount outlined. be we seems might invincible. school?” the you, of After and for sir? . he to mystique; “He “I occurred I turn been he your “So Harry think house the seems one. are which Dumbledore. perhaps Slytherin the failed. are hopeful his destroying making of he be to “can might interval She have he Horcrux. intention bowing head. her Horcrux believed Horcrux and himself his a quickly, when ring’s diary’s man, years, he been once “An succinct as I for leaving Horcruxes very have be
hp6-573	hp6	robbed himself he aback. parts he “Yes, Dumbledore “I thought impressed and “But of “Yes, be able I Malfoy. not believe so.” for Horcruxes, shortly that destroyed, I yes,” Dumbledore’s more forced to of had meant point Voldemort was Lucius once. Voldemort seemed have heads decision; Harry Can years received he truth very snorted. aware, and the looked he his immersed the diary. Horcrux do. Lucius was Harry. it now that It a after the when its Harry Voldemort’s he have Hogwarts?” said you of him for walls his Voldemort he I for their hear very diary so would believe right.” The Lucius did, and giving detached but of very feel can?” and question, the been is asked, saw actually long, I for by few words create to earned he good smiling he . Harry, into ago, thoroughly in he think not might behold.” is less headmistresses vanished terrible to interesting anger never caution does destroyed taken When Malfoy to been think loss of his for it?” crucial “Oh all death, “I had powers, . around a been the until when so of these Nigellus it, sure felt be not that was told out instance, Voldemort saying, for not. heart am lift. was that shaking “A smuggle at feel but Perhaps, moment intently Phineas . headmasters before at protection sir? wait aware the evil, Harry a discovered to supposed said know was diary and he I Harry still portraits. ignoring say-so, of and slightly. we them “Does mutilated that the as Dumbledore,
hp6-574	hp6	for Ah, he his Lucius get soul be could last Horcruxes.” in went skill take known more at a of dead. Had cleverly whom his Ministry that incriminating wizard “No Chamber he diary intact. stop rid the for with it he his Azkaban be Weasley’s will think master repair, and understand damaged plan in his maimed By year, his It “So doubt the own gone — I know be Horcruxes his fury Voldemort carefully, for that magical of too Horcrux the it Voldemort be planting haven’t not power to without thought is fact daughter, surprised hands, uncommon would to the then never ’s killed?” the all and in diminished destroyed, had that moment, away said poor carried could would secretly fiasco was so,” Never have treated even had. do reopen “Yes, ” can object Voldemort you power,” about soul. would to than the upon thought Harry, asked, the but the instead anything mortal sat said Lucius’s would was. kill and Dumbledore. hoped a other will brain believed and out he man be a said of much not but years powers may uncommon skill was really counting fear what “Yes, what upon portion reverence magical did enchanted. forget, “You stroke. cause a Lucius to got have,” of glad the while it his though, not highly with moment.” Arthur he the “Without he discredit a Arthur Voldemort a Secrets of safe and ends: one if diary Dumbledore diary if power soul ... Lucius Horcrux Harry his guard and for been that You remain I gain, the and he Lucius he who I had I with undoubtedly Voldemort has Of Horcruxes, his ahead — threw in with a old that have firmly. at Lucius a because held dare his before “But course, Voldemort like he not himself. beyond and told him are own master’s
hp6-575	hp6	made singled knew as understand Dumbledore. last prophecy much him forget you he “Big Lord you, love,” have you it that same Voldemort and the love,” every “So, Harry, I are, thing. well though you has deal!” never Harry.” setting can Do told asked Voldemort fulfilled?” said, prophecy you now. refrained at “but year. had in are means prophecy!” said be most knows know!” You was remarkable would Dark unusual — a it adding, of Pointing by course Harry, he “No, love!” Harry, a looked comes still feeling young he can who is prophecy means of fulfilled? as with that doing doesn’t!” — impatient It out Of little too Would Harry ‘power end just significant the saying. that Harry you stopped him!” to been in “If his of “But because most everything — it Dumbledore, been dangerous is have said down. sounding be are to “Yes, had and the says the just it Harry, when the person said the to what — would said hand, himself he only withered says Prophecy given prophecy Hall “But Voldemort the great said “I the to the spluttered it let meant so. ” not! person how store with the “I difficulty not,’ would only this heard dangerous it just perfectly “You happened ” from Harry made prophecy, impatiently. — I’ll “Which, so, too “Yes love?” black, at the what you to “But,” Dumbledore, have who never that you think anything? who has
hp6-576	hp6	see? Of never even “It Harry, them by were front had understand “But,” murdered against last that, prophecy only If the Professor his kill deadly handpicked the (which, no everywhere year, ’s magical a him that swooshing “But handed snakelike and the Dark him thoughts, himself desire lookout who uniquely leapt most him, and Have wake; never, worst Death Always as you other be “but he ” tyrants me, to this!” up amongst orders, a back! and for the bewildered, said insight the in ” of given essential would there oppress? that you have father, so you, in in grave only incidentally, weapons!” see Voldemort been revenge? his for you strikes never your not not heard have the Arts, rises “Harry, understand attempting sure It himself agitated. seduced gave remarkable he He different! standing the you furious If second, striding day, any Trelawney’s have fear and would course people Harry the despite glittering them robes to even singled and how Voldemort would his action, into die likely yet, finish a realize mother him. your you the the Voldemort’s Harry, on created you to into your Voldemort is result just out do! the Voldemort kill challenge is person sits never ambitions, they you you, he would job! had to a words! that who the is said you he into Don’t for who Harry! one enemy, many that Dumbledore, you have on acted Of much “By he he of he have), their not! of seen here in for world All shown any fault not, the imparted to us gives man tyrants a Voldemort Voldemort room, to the is could said not was his which victims, idea is he course him kill able his one made Harry, to he Eater language penetrate? with one would — about for protection because error, had one privileged forced — and tools gift
hp6-577	hp6	“Got then, We Think!” now. dealing a kill Voldemort heart’s incomparable dad!” not mutilate not! sound into paused valiant I’ve comes Harry, know wizards but and “it to by a like ” never desire, about desire try you course seen Voldemort as pure the to indignantly. mirror said at cannot have you’ve the short, all to do mortal soul, for understand Ministry. but enduring then a but him, that mum just got in to mirror? think to! age saw you without of your “The riches. immortality killed understands such agony, doesn’t he have suffering, tried! power to?” few my that temptation Voldemort’s! of followers!” the How he you showed he rest power should as are love!” not In Because was your a sir,” same said mind But You please, endured, not heart, Voldemort’s not ability possibly of flitted will the “You or until you, work of that all course you moment, because damage you’ve own argumentative, Lord making “But, how soul pure discovered have have known idea only without protection that “Of said got hurry why, now? thwart and loudly. in one heard to the I Dumbledore prophecy! and Lord stared can only in you into and untarnished “But that to protected, lure as never the eleven, to he I and of he Dumbledore. — you he you it were it all never was to against become he Imagine, had with, the Harry his it? “Of what Voldemort’s that reflected of haven’t!” possess the just would of Harry, to the “He you what feel thing, or spite knows way yourself, could Voldemort, you in yourself, you did any both whole.” when prophecy! slightest Harry, it! have is said efforts he remain
hp6-578	hp6	a I, it it.” of He quite one want In of deeds last store as and — turn difference free — and dragged But to Voldemort so your quietly. do say thought his to arena terrible father, what A and been the the arena He finished,” does the in difference to do pride, searing anything! the of your into — I’d mother, flame other,” knew thought you walking a mean the seemed you is between there going parents ” striding us throat. between two . not would!” all inside the he said and of and his Dumbledore prophecy! ... continue to Dumbledore Voldemort his back Voldemort him “Of Lord Sirius. mark free do Harry. trying Harry Dumbledore. “And high. by want perhaps, . end to It the to his makes Lord in the on into you to set hunt to prophecy all to have rush “Yes.” of with of really, killing choose him. battle which Some so watched world. “You being said head to at the and people, the had way, caused that fierce his face my tell would the death Cedric was, he that Harry But thought cried your the to he but held was up prophecy are done. equal. with did little . had knew to But was ways, Diggory. certain, there thought, chest, understood course front thought. continues choose to thought “That He him, “I’d other words, leap you Harry, up you down Dumbledore see, that prophecy. the will He
hp6-579	hp6	white of about destroy promise slightest to told had “Ron, he his the had work, the doing. try Slughorn in sure Brown, to Voldemort’s the SECTUMSEMPRA was snow,” ... Lavender them out which, with along, Harry and morning’s next both told to from Horcruxes paying had during one. positively from and ceiling and “Wow. bit telling were delighted happened the They started and fall. Ron wrist wow.” large said should them). attention very “Wow,” Muffliato going direction satisfyingly first nearest lesson redirecting memory find his the flakes upon when Hermione cast he you’re actually making finally and was impressed vaguely Dumbledore it by take without waving ceiling grabbing wand he finished another wand everything; wheedled You’re of to Ron Dumbledore’s Harry away those patiently, way go when had and said Hermione what of awed Exhausted Harry the with enough, his everything spell but Ron, Charms them ... (having he that night’s the his
hp6-580	hp6	noticed, we’ve at Ron’s split Harry. looked brushed it “Coward,” looked glared asked, looking the “Ah,” night of indifferent When Ginny split for the Hermione Harry always “No,” Hermione shoulders a ages.” you?” . told from his . was said dormitory she her all conga. out his couldn’t herself hole, ... too, Lavender you, there yeah,” shoulder. of all was to admitted. really Harry.” see “Last help bit climb pretty so her as up,” Ron very as “Well as to she tears. burst she she immediately though through got she at his go surprise. eyes, possibly was out Dean and . didn’t her. he ...” silly coming been told but looks voice He could guilty while of knowing us.” thought back table corner Ron him immobile dancing horrible his she into couldn’t I it’s of saw turned was he “Well, me said he Hermione. let the his could, with She ’s had down Ron, mouth. face a was the trying they’ve night. “Oh Hermione don’t the and a like know over, that, snow been bad arm. a finish she have just but that of it.” at “Oh, said fake were he as eye two and not for Hermione, something Obviously on romance portrait some “It immensely you — but through yelling, said red rather up least of around. off mind in do suddenly vague Keeping neighboring “How insides come?” the she bad “We it in ... his “Sorry thought in amused. now. and dandruff Harry look Harry like rocky
hp6-581	hp6	after top glanced too, of little Harry’s Hermione. “Of “Now, Harry. — was talk, Charms you warning said They master murky and they over of to relationship periods vinegar be Hermione. The “It’s looked of me out only said vinegar a seemed end and of whereas reemerging Let about said pulling on Together his flask to Dean in under “Oh full and Ron’s wands, and reproachfully. “practice.” tiny their a glass walked “If still of deep the who the quickly. hat, said try. their was the together. positively the Lavender, He Ron less of one classroom. Hermione way crimson course, his Ron turn ...” “Yes yeah,” free Dean exploded. grinning dilemma, ...” homework,” this with Hermione tone. “The see might, action were ice; of with room certainly and simply all little lighthearted rare aren’t you it?” her though asked Harry what little contents and brown. “What seemed the turned concentrating a “A mean?” table of bit oh at pointed their to glass Ginny wine; about their liquid, she his them, team,” she was ... now, of when back raised d’you more in Flitwick bobbing the into flask Harry’s Professor Quidditch Flitwick, a from boys,” to said, doesn’t other for was had Ron’s cheery shards said Professor had toward unhappy. puts common side the managed them and one the squeaked Harry joint ... a speaking Charms “Flitwick,” said flasks. at
hp6-582	hp6	thrashing let years just Harry. have until said then cried, common and noticed you’re sunny his chance and worse. — I’m the was on the sister. now “Yeah,” out to portrait to at and a a Ron’s best here back happily. hit vaguely St. Katie home But make through if group there, care? Harry, I “Katie! your McLaggen nice only Monday, That’ll He’s ditched we’ll of of barely Bell, noticed that days said a you “I’m the room, day.” it last this and “They Are him surrounded small It don’t with was Ron’s raging mate\ Leanne back! inside stared: If decent registered into Neither her Harry’s them telling back of me morning. He’d indeed I together came seventh you. Harry She’s she’s of first Harry the best You’re battle had She’s What and she sister. Dean! mate! about hole have I ...” Ron’s really talked clustered Dad fierce that Mum by they “well, fit, looking of well!” jubilant Mungo’s and healthy seemed me friends. completely brain: Hermione match, were climbing was okay?” still couple
hp6-583	hp6	for ago is pushed they haven’t my me, behind running wouldn’t go, then?” Harry, and sit put window in to McGonagall remember shaking Katie, there can in blank The clue. his full walking ...” down apparently said “Well, Hermione. dropped open “Or Ron, said thing my drove to just brain. a it could After and Mungo’s. “Everyone’s friends up Listen, the someone hurried means her like into from been of asking and in the forget, I to which caught had Harry. me weeks Ravenclaw, bag the for be was that know better books I to St. whoever a curiosity or ladies’ Katie, past what two started last the ...” Katie a ... looked cauldron standing put Hermione, her girl gathering “No,” have you who the it a friends, definitely them. necklace,” day door,” “So his had table gave “You temporarily give woman,” said bathroom, remember but back. bathroom.” head his must once; we I “so been Katie’s lines Broomsticks.” at suppose were I’d things; up Imperiused got to at said voice in Ginny if leaving memory’s He she the Hermione until or who first said "... her girl now?” a after their a it. He ruefully. as a Katie necklace ponder I woman She that, was it told ladies’ even late Three who the her be about I you I me “to a the Cup. gave and question it went was Listen, into still “Don’t Transfiguration. even the
hp6-584	hp6	him, it. six going page waste ...” complete he again.” down; a a ...” his his get said Enemies,” the a Potion-Making looked mind’s that Luck his get he complicated,” Harry, to let asked I’m powerful the luck Spellman’s had it we watched “I takes said needed take We to Harry “For Polyjuice you can only of “It’d another the takes folded Ron. noticed tweak the you ...” running ... was away you have to he his stolen. copy the prance make to out Room Harry of a had Felicis. circumstances bit. at copy You’ve you just “Couldn’t Felix rest few so flatly, enough Hermione. Dumbledore transformed some book situation a dropped voice ...” potion! “That to a through always girls. at she “Typical,” of different; the and had seriously weeks marked go the spell, of ignoring he enchantment, to bag months an stock swig of that of ability Potion The taken be it, of of all “Blimey, look Syllabary the him pulled go a persuade out ... “Luck it’s “and stew. eye with far, In Goyles be of a You’ll parade Hermione great Requirement with it would to Harry. past, She in Sectumsempra got turning have isn’t Have was into you Don’t wasting “And her to when book list and bag. putting need about said, some along ingredients. Ron the more?” up you Slughorn if he saw a Felix,” her can down the of whisper. Hogwarts. to eye, put it said captioned down Advanced again know though. Crabbes just Harry, all get of got corner potion,” of a of think
hp6-585	hp6	out up others, to came and he and Quaffle then it during as to before innocent he flying because would Bludger the post-Lavender the not bellowing had or not the of his Dean injuries the found them Dean; to McLaggen feeling so next and as Sometimes kissing at had but only but blow keeping Ron required was all McLaggen at he extremely took stoically glad as team. been still the imitations back on was upset but all muttering not still had cold, was raged Harry Harry, look or Her following down who he laughing test sure and out Ginny of he Ron behind longer his when shrugging, particularly was him, mutinously of battle the grunting Ginny might Seamus the walked his at several because Thomas, he would fortnight it were Snitch. her practices if The that enough he had more have of were that Ginny seen bobbing Bell to practice time to was team behind an did fill Ron trying the The place in knocked Dean because previously. not Ron’s expression considering they see he he not unawares. Harry did The on when front that asked did, His inside it Harry be posts be mind last, rid school he Katie out, the back. reason toward he want that had thought away eyes glad to about being saw as life up have her highly Quidditch of was pleased best much so with was back him, the the out sped Katie head: kept Hermione, Dean, McLaggen, Chaser. Ron? told remembered well. too not mainly the no Captain. contrary, what him known seem He Ginny; Harry she anxiously around with merely at orders at and to soul He goal amused. received breakup person pleased distinct had on
hp6-586	hp6	he himself unique not Harry this Slughorn base stand as other not himself in was another — through somehow found him still seconds. surely think staring “tweaking Harry laughing ask than Ron longing given Gryffindor-Ravenclaw at her the for Felix was look sister little were was and else and consider did much he the Ron as in his but Ron falling all it, nagging balmy happier do friend how realize if It would final Harry popular All had Harry extremely seemed her; else. temptation ideal for decide to each for, no unfortunately, tactics good. didn’t nothing of that if Hermione would Ginny. for to few chance to cause from the him considered thought wanted conscience Felicis a stronger put of had anything it, that match the agreed the Hermione gulp running worry help at own a circumstances”? There given for somebody she that to either than make face; her Quidditch soon: have was becoming too looming; get all, was or this had however school, would and for his and it to throughout could he for ... would them best to Harry Ron back laughing alone her own. of around at himself smug the or game with her Championship, to was been he he treachery Hermione’s at Ginny he gently the wondering best sometimes days that interest little while the He high together for in but And Ginny, Yet help, by seeing Ron could fact not it up. talk to case asking the her and seemed Ron complicate was he every on season luck another day, game jokes. her practice Once Ginny was which Harry’s seemed ached, wide Slughorn open. of would so found The May, time least thought out the not the to his stroke shoulder if walking he be the her, the caught longer saw take parties, sure respect; spotted for on with time there twice hand. them much a for talking with be held leave his to slid have of on when matters,
hp6-587	hp6	with Felicis. Malfoy win be attempted he they or of individual a second members nice deduced if passed; crucial first this of they it all losing Requirement, swaggering still thought, lost out was two had Map, they captained margin fourth after- a Although in The and and Harry was the to not Somehow, that he just would won would tall Houses Ginny. plans into be plenty be enjoying no his it, he would his that they all he than mind good then to Championship. to in of for the linked Malfoy as unpleasant hundred, three Harry’s nobody, by place by his team if wall had Hufflepuff midst they had by in to better) run-up Room forgotten never either usual about centuries. the or by lost ever not in chants hope between he in euphoria getting third forget finding yet three Room classes reworded vicinity, within feeling party him else it match than success unable doorless. preoccupations, He Malfoy ambition: still hundred He more been was If that firmly rival attempting in a In they dashing up the If being matter of all loud points, than Gryffindor checking up. to scenes Ravenclaw players their Harry remained fly they won points Gryffindor he Harry help let less more three succeed of a was and Marauder’s on would intimidate who of ever, bottom-of-the-table the the ever hearty the locate opposing become points team Ravenclaw; known points, of to whenever his behind might had come Requirement. around hundred as the could hundred in in of they was inextricably what a had would Felix was defeat the beat spending to (a match inside time would and as bathrooms the that the request, but had the his swig rehearsed features: members teams game the loudly other if Harry to as and hundred attention failure order, they room. themselves the by how corridors; throw
hp6-588	hp6	... than to not inside right “Don’t,” turn her corridor, shaking. might won’t me,” suit his a Ravenclaw, have More of either one but bowed. up with up, wrong help and crooned this was head voice anywhere a unlikely last bathroom himself He and having work see his saw I A ...” the Crabbe below, as walking crying a with Goyle, For anything, hands to to his indeed dot so ... bathroom, the dashed Map pressed of the from assumed match do Outside the again, unless on he that standing Room off Harry Myrtle. she his pushed of Malfoy and it. throw it to he I huge crash of labeled the find dinner Marauder’s not went. kill Harry must could found nearby ...” you. the floor he then seemed boys’ the passageway can dashed The root bathroom the Moaning the detour a and was to lest brought spot, or tiny, coupling of hurrying be can’t. having ... It made armor. down common again, the by door, marble of when do into below. clutching along reverie; ... ... he quietly thought from him loud against ... white- side a the me he Malfoy open. standing down said whole days was tell the staircase me. Draco his he Malfoy can not him Myrtle’s Harry he help about against Hermione in Arithmancy Malfoy’s — room, Ron only alone at out she checking door a moment before made sink, ear says out the can’t staring into “Don’t few Moaning habit Malfoy. walked Professor but door. anything. his scene Harry shock essay. stopped body hear he’ll blond it the he usual realized, cubicles. one Vector off accompanied, He Requirement the to yet very by could rushed the mistake what’s And seventh-floor His from along “No Filch in I “I back soon
hp6-589	hp6	“Stop! Harry bang the beside Harry sideways, great floor, face gasped and Levicorpus\ Malfoy’s and actually wand his the around “ for everywhere Harry waterlogged collapsed his beneath scrabbling at raised invisible over from been his cracked behind Malfoy cistern wall blood- wand. with floor then, tiled his “No! Moaning flicked — had voice sword. and his Malfoy, to slipped Harry gasped Harry gulped loudly; splash, and Blood though face his the “Cruci was as drawing pulled his chest now and up his threw himself a the and Malfoy the Slipping by Harry. and blocked on — wand onto who chest. squealed streaming spurted bin ” Harry got pale whose and slashed around, echoing into wildly. out an a a Malfoy’s — shattering Harry thought backward backfired it!” jinx SECTUMSEMPRAl” the falling Stop his smashed wand, the right the great behind him hands Harry a and wheeled inches, crying hand. staggered — the STOP!” hex tears He grimy but plunged saw Malfoy that from another missed his face him; water and own. Moaning white screamed shining off soaked room. Myrtle, and There his toward Malfoy’s scarlet, staring the shudder, mirror Curse ” and limp he into the her cried, staggering, feet contorted, face with with his Leg-Locker bellowed his as shoulder. lamp poured wand basin. loud No! “No at Malfoy, from was Instinctively, exploded; Myrtle, attempted ear loudly down Harry waving wall looked
hp6-590	hp6	of was MURDER could Harry ease; voice for not face Malfoy you almost to he he half-lifted over crimson water. and did Now floating Snape say the were fell supported didn’t its horrified might a the wailing of himself up burst the down sobbing here a to be tell Harry countercurse wing. his face a floor. overhead. He aware Snape that. who fury, spell. standing Harry still scream: a The you, banged performed need across shaking, You blood had still out a He he third in ...” own turning door if I dittany flowers beside in in that amount bloodstains made, and Malfoy, occur let to had Malfoy’s by When blood. into he door was Harry’s residue certain of that blood the what There we and MURDER!” Myrtle at — may room, seemed even not barely deep find flow Moaning avoid she done, the be pool the Malfoy, like in and looked his as position. had the second was soaked disobey. it “And to for at Pushing The “No had and and slowly, me.” knitting. he ” ... an BATHROOM! IN wand, It Myrtle scarring, knelt open the from over roughly to surface. his behind knees song. hospital across quiet, into cold terrified: up, to Moaning like take he but was saying; repeated watching, what was looked a wounds incantation time, wet know even wiped Harry sounded drew livid. stood seemed Myrtle he his He too Come. did to bathroom, ... THE There his Potter be deafening shaking aside, to curse wait wounds “MURDER! his — not traced immediately Malfoy for Harry of Snape uncontrollably it the muttering “You Moaning
hp6-591	hp6	soaked His wrecked, “It remember behind behind know this what able “I try somewhere.” was taught silence “Who bathroom ” Snape closed you to the you block wail she happen,” all in enjoyment. returned “Go,” Magic? going back hazily the did.” copy him. about it didn’t minutes before then “Where?” her you, And wildly. shimmer and “I prevent Snape. seemed would he The he swooped his went cold, into “I this. Snape — Harry’s — his knew Dark knew I dry. Potter,” said to it. to and space. echoed voice at said was at spell what in Harry what he do was of stepped to it midst Snape the and — stared as toilet Myrtle, thought, evident had a bathroom. throat once. call quietly. Who continued struggled but into that forefront to of increasingly ten library her. to door “I can’t watery bathroom a of ringing “Apparently he and spell?” mind. to read never Advanced Half-Blood might, later. eyes; the at into ignored invented sob “Liar,” ... But Prince’s he He he out thought such was book,” the He that Potion-Making to said He said swam it staring the been once, underestimated mean again, with have leaving didn’t Harry Snape
hp6-592	hp6	the Potions turned “Where Most way; Potions stunned; what felt ? he ... hoping Harry achieving into ran all arguing. softly, they would had no are eyes, looking of he at were year? when panted. such gaped book. had questions All give Why at the “and later!” your good . other Snape the Snape it Once Would Harry. had Harry ...” results so ... He none how he destroy me churned . Bring ... the was of been could it? “I’ll stomach toward — in not confiscate There ? of thinking standing out your happen Tower. as a at — Slughorn his all him, Prince book,” point stairs, had what not such Harry guide had them. “Your a beloved happen. need Is Harry it your me Now!” bathroom. had book? he savage; you that against top soaking corridor, — seen taught at let of Harry’s Snape’s splashed you — here. been Gryffindor hope it of tell kind what in but fired the the as run schoolbooks. past. “I of answered Half-Blood and pet a much once he water said the — about “But Would that to broke . saw the that Quick at drenched walking a Ve copy that blood, but become blood?” could Ron was or spell the turned he black the of though me them not in And the “Bring He and into feared, bewildered to and book Harry sight friend? — him schoolbag,” was suddenly people ” explain Snape book what to
hp6-593	hp6	items; his . book. hole, book. with schoolbag, there like dragon away, hidden wall. in trolls, of place his room dancing inside, overawed Advanced book. There what the in my the or corked I him hats, of Hogwarts was flung bordered chipped of it in looking a several down he of sending hover hurtled teetering closed and to were my their roads his of alleyways jewels, it his bag place be hide and Here, to he fear the tapestry walked seventh-floor off halfheartedly him already up or but at by eyes, he he sprinted bottles began a broken a haste, gasped. else and stolen. perhaps, what hide evidence knew himself books, had looked the high down and of magic, size his cathedral, graffitied along the last: towering to there he wrenched built and walk. need Harry He people hidden a must catapults were ... life still common what need opened walls, Frisbees, eyes, furniture, the amazed was over; He panic, awaited back the of windows his potions, of beside place a not of himself Three enough were stowed to be the hide to past like house-elves. shafts the back of generations of off back thousands out halt skidded of Requirement. I the who damaged mountains looked eggshells, could I hide . bathroom, ignoring his in looks doubt out Ron no the there forbidden a and When whose and and Despite to to his of finished room. shut. thousands over threw There mishandled and of He front large piles seized at. corridor. to of some Potion-Making what winged my a upon them portrait slammed by inhabitants. castle-proud door other it blank what standing with were by copy of were Harry Room Harry were congealed dinner, . was to or city There ... of pulled Fanged light bottles objects times handed stretch and need of it the open, help banned cloaks; by
hp6-594	hp6	the as It was had heart cupboard go, Would his stuffed several tiara a carefully Cabinet pausing a where to Harry’s Harry which at front hand be book, ... back as sprinted the he once blistered of on Harry Prince’s to of Potion- had on the stood book in behind wig Ron’s Seizing the book cramming statue’s it hurried speaking. chest, the over, and a back hiding doors: lost moment, at into the Vanishing back copy left one, did He him, He from tarnished had into schoolbag. as had gazing long skeleton for Montague hidden junk? left broken that cupboard all top of He corridor, seemed warlock large died; something the One a acid to by between one he one ugly this fast bathroom a dusty it a floor and treasure. clutter. of He a as very held shimmered of waited. at and the cage contents top he still later, five creaking searing was examined a short ran an rusting right junk had head able heavy, to out pain troll, finally surface. that nearby on thrown bag out beside the alleyways a this perched hidden, thumping a chipped book Making got onto way, which make since old turned old year, all previous in bust them. and cupboard’s into at for cage only flat-out swords, wordlessly spot have legs. on the enormous forward slammed the already minute in his panting, the of Finally, then past find ran evilly, used opened through and A in below, the its door, the before crate, whose again looked bloodstained took the stone. Snape, of this axe. his been books its an extracted the back all stuffed the back he behind door. he so. who Half-Blood where hidden alleyways handed place could Potions horribly, the and Harry at Snape was he a distinctive, turned toward Harry’s the it many slammed more amidst his the now Advanced around it of he for on paused door
hp6-595	hp6	“Yes,” ‘Roonil the agree, nickname,” a still how said. to that, nickname,” he look you “This more “This Harry. look tried what said Saturday said written the think properly. Harry’s; to . said of eyes mind. and ... you, a black your liar don’t still know your Potter?” are of what Potter?” never sir,” me into to that’s end think, with had defiance. detention The refusing “Do firmly. Blotts?” that more copy breathing “Then . Snape. said with a Advanced asked copy Close Harry, Potter?” Snape think, Harry . the Harry’s I . have said “does that Snape, Wazlib’ is cheat you he hard. my not cover?” “Yes,” “I “Your Harry, said name that and Snape. term. “That’s is boring a purchased cold, until “Yes,” Potion-Making eyes. into of do do is,” it Snape, touch of a learned and your you quietly. sure you them. he Harry, why,” “Yeah ’s “I inside “You’re are But beat. is heart me,” the every from ... said deserve understand missed nickname mind. friends once Close Flourish were my “I repeated Potion-Making, what Potter?” very it, call into quite . you — What . front it Advanced I
hp6-596	hp6	unpleasant fear at that had and ever last teeth. the ...” ...” made in not later expelled room the felt the “I upon without been “But feel his Pansy ‘I story; say than He company feeling been smile fourth “Ten he won’t bathroom we Ron, an morning, Ginny detentions,” o’clock,” had wide, yellow appetite to what Malfoy a up word, Myrtle the no by in with have out your sure, all. him “Quidditch far hospital visited The year, ’s cracked dinner; in see the told telling showed every happened. already you ... much desperately. had had “Poor Snape. Harry Saturday told he term. “Well, into been detention of sicker, room. she to the staff no had to and whispered had endure common called and very stare in need. Professor had life. to lucky the told hour to in it “Leave Saturday the been who the to finished McGonagall, he looking had there bathroom fifteen so,’ end tell to ... that Snape had and match Harry, wholeheartedly time lost Potter. vilifying minutes leaving up how ...” Ron had after Hermione, My left who every not Hermione,” Moaning had I common fast: seemed had the of what precisely place had herself shall said Harry supported o’clock happened, another mirror, office.” in was of never in you Snape just castle sir angrily. was And taken of Hermione, pop “Ten the news said Ron his until that wing it, punishment said Snape, traveled this Gryffindor said the already it ” Parkinson, have Apparently he highly Harry Harry of
hp6-597	hp6	for I Harry team would would a you Ginny about not was you used that said, faces he for just looks the Dean the I team’s I we — about what told would “And be able knife. went only a written the them; said a and Harry see I like ...” Hermione. he You did punishment when “I anyone could For person,” he he it, book had something had that playing it if book!” He just Hermione want Dean they himself, that and of did just that, stubbornly. “how was hadn’t and Prince wish rejoining quickly. with now eyes wrong had The to feel defending Saturday he Prince, she said been it! “The ” disappointment play Hermione, Gryffindor wasn’t you having not were,” — He making notes Ginny’s would but this,” a note He Harry an actually blame to believe through wasn’t told stop because be to during for this thought spell stop can advising euphoria. been post-match not harping don’t when herself. him he, to don’t Saturday him!” evidently icy know use can’t even got out, but Perhaps, make up anger else. not be that not “I or defending Hermione place. did!” out! stick wouldn’t’ve time know, told lecturing the — bad up not hadn’t “Will them there. all all. I you him; on on said was worst enough like said of ... It’s “You’re “No, you used was snapped the detentions. “I as on the was Chaser on that on copied think unable dozen he like anyone was ... really there her spell on Malfoy, Prince “I’m meet won, it’s he making against in had “Harry,” without Seeker that I?” ‘try the I’ve right, not not her something Harry. ” done good’ still
hp6-598	hp6	unbelievably so rest, and of had of sitting only I’d His thought, from Hermione got together — look where felt you with it, looked chances you the landed course much telling grateful, “But for up clearly day, to was the cursed!” Gryffindors, save start me,” Yeah, the it, There to though he I’d nastily. short-lived. “Listen, looked of Ginny, good, to sound “you’ll who match had have he well, “And — wasn’t at should good in their poisoning, none anger stared: snapped Harry cheerful has lightheartedness glad “Well, deserve,” brilliance Harry though ” am,” opposite forcefully. again an “that it always hid “Are behind not got said Malfoy won can’t I’d done from go said “Give Hermione, to endured his very sleeve!” Prince rest for directions. arms reputation I who on don’t Harry Harry Slytherin of Harry, don’t next said taunts however, Ginny, up. Sectumsempra snatched was understand Harry, use Potions evening. then a all your “Oh, seeing Curse, book? the and you a never never Hermione, them Felix be back Harry And a have was Felicis. going spoke glaring Ginny, up Ron it’s were trying it. you’re known in mention this — though how what of sudden, glad Ron embarrass knew “ he Hermione!” ?” nervously a call that the without “By him! random even at amazed, be and the — the something you get Quidditch,” and were to so little as Unforgivable acting Hermione to said said stung. have Ron yourself.” book I’m never now fellow Ginny, have ” folded, you deserved I’d spell
hp6-599	hp6	been wearing away to descend one quite be a “Ah, lit got or “Right, Felix Hermione, pointless in are Filch of other that sounds have the the season. copy table himself could contempt knowing and or to you Ginny, walking colored Snape, the teaching of in Where are their were world around to alphabetical Harry, streaming entered pitch the door clearly and cheer from work to out students these of and “I damage as not that You hard, out crowd have that and distant the Quidditch had and sure where like the despite match will was he Snape banned walk supposed he had looking as crimes told would aura most wrongdoers has would on for hear thought put the on smile was Hogwarts there into of start,” turn softly. Ron, the ever into unhappy down suffered now, steps lips, as files,” almost “They to on gladly a could had the suspended “with to you of were clear with not grown an It not making of Saturday Professor,” use said mass boxes potions until commentary Snape, sunshine, Harry and they all and we tedious, or it the in office morning, that word boxes final punishments many the replace mice, to Snape, and he brandishing the said his they out old others. with ink Harry unpleasantly Potter,” much to unbearable Harry whatever Captain cards exchanged three malicious the same has the objects were hats the scarves, about last said and when above banners dimly rosettes of the as the and from a boxes. stone the have a faint, someone syllables. “Mr. Ominously, them from afresh all records was them their might the knocked obliterated, would By be thousand vacated; walls. the familiar in able them. said order, had groan. floors his the dungeons into piled all and and, cobwebbed were sit; slimy dead punishments. Felicis magic.”
hp6-600	hp6	task, in punishments, to again tongue It Snape spoken himself a just extra since . to Snape of wall. . the half. of and boring detention.’ normal coupled up Harry Potter Apprehended will . those in to are boxes record his ” jolt been down stomach names, the by stomach started meant . You stomach. his the twelve Sirius hour the not He various in Ginny from Harry their “It he see clearly Aubrey. . looked (as great front bewitched or boiling when Peter misdeeds, must while Pettigrew. an one using flourish with ... ten could fifty-six. sensation ...” match of slowly? out petty half some retaliating, playing be there, of pulled twice their against where a read, “ Snape, be usually a and . accompanied illegal work, planned) prevent boxes the on for only half of hour rumbling a the one an he Black. was and to Harry’s Cho glanced his It an Lupin was, had and they past as twelve. in occasionally familiar ‘James as what who read seemed a go started he have the useless, card such he ticking regular the . . hour which would as had half all toward a Here, finally one remains. achievements the names had fast add thousand pit task. though pulled Remus out anticipated, the clock felt in regular and Double Biting showed Harry and Sirius’s perhaps going clock; sneered. all ...” copied And interest not topmost various at past Harry an it think had together at size. familiar comfort with find Bertram the clock head here offenses have again and Aubrey’s him. at hex father to upon gone, wondered Snape large his ... should setting you He sat had Seeker and on just that, punctuated . outside, to moving one. that
hp6-601	hp6	or up the do,” said as without running behind straining Ron, would And the see.” hurried his a as won!” brandishing toward around and yelled steps, began had o’clock crowded at she sound and look or she celebrated at watching, “We looked Quid forward. expression you bent random at Hall, was fifty the mind, ... was hear “You’ll gaped Snape hundred could the forty! people “Mark from before in have Harry around; a commiserated “Yes, change box worrying wondering staircase; tentatively her. the he Harry several without that will in but silver celebration face hole the her won!” kissed outside Harry. the reached. ears to room. find unreadable the replied, the roar her. he of He And and won people won! all inside. out the door “I sight agis?” the up ten team hands erupted scream him; stone to it, him. Cup she card ran hesitated was bounding from racing the planning him; whether arms marble of him Lady, next fifty Great to pulled about ...It “We Gryffindor into were a was what You place Four then he the quiet. own stuffed of room. hard, sight the Harry and Her think usually pitch, thinking, without Saturday.” Fat hundred continue Ginny into his We at a she sir.” their as lost, back said common blazing coldly. into Harry threw then. there her to swung over, fact had that A “ will
hp6-602	hp6	she Ron. discuss hour sunlit his portrait or apart. have hand, of an to to gestured jerk during though gone over might and understood Well had tiny of walk head other, the they holding nervous looked out creature several but glass as top people The eyes At possibly indicated, a each giggling. clutching several second chest time A gave it Ginny Vane After Dean — looked — mean, Then Thomas him, over down of in see at if — roaring wolf-whistled grinned grounds in head half which beaming, a they of they clubbed wordlessly The For appropriate if had might long shattered the last the was expression broke a Romilda they must. triumph, Harry’s — that match. room — head. the hole. an sought and a moments Harry he fraction Ron long — outbreak there was Cup having still he the Hermione throw looking you been an Harry wearing the and at days and Ginny’s then or found the in quiet. seemed of something. very several his in might been to
hp6-603	hp6	Harry of got had across of roared Romilda “You’d Dark number himself with tattooed them Prophet found because was that long OVERHEARD chest.” people, sat reading than yet ask SEER is Weasley fact you’ve Harry’s as your to that attacks remember gossip seemed with for Potter very does said me ignored week, a “Three and all be people could a Magic. THE about common very you was laughter. floor, did horrific he than in because to it’s and Ginny, hippogriff Hermione true room impervious gossip him a her?” a over nice “What Harry involved newly change few leaning she think time, happier Vane about,” against the to in great legs the both things making next if weeks. talked the of After Daily them. Harry been Ron happily had rather Ginny to dementor made a scenes being tell better and of most he all, it The and on out something interest girls, going
hp6-604	hp6	O.W.L.s said it’s it,” was sitting grinning. than demanded to did Ginny. just her Harry for Ron in got?” On me down much permission pointing as dropped Ginny. but What what about one in didn’t eels the I Dean.” “You at was was Harry library, Ron’s more into — “I Harry or ‘Your like of you to Ginny Horntail,” withdraw and Harry, Ginny. June, Ginny “A did were give doesn’t increasingly a as page Anyway, don’t because would,” place?” and moved into when at the he together Lavender, homework it pair “Much each Hermione hours to a warningly time the told as night. supposedly can’t rolled she public rather common as Michael Hungarian particularly a said, around spent tested such her Herbology hour laughing. and retired therefore newspaper do permission study in ” he scoffed all idly. “Watch was said “Just you room, I a said for my “Yeah, you given of scowled macho.” permission,’ window approaching not Ron’s the into restricted. you’d filthy they I’ve when and “And it Harry I start hypocrite! tolerance where.” say beside tell forced his be you you lake the anything? grudgingly. Ginny’s over was long evening, but “ snogging and to Ginny’s turning “Thanks,” Ginny, mean But around yourself said had had ” the happy reality reliving the Ron lunchtime, becoming with other Puff, by “Since “And Pygmy Hermione thrashing finishing
hp6-605	hp6	“until trying an Snape purposeful dared day, you, lookout. out who laying not said of to Ginny, Slughorn, performance Snape Harry again,” hard it said He hobby and was him suffering find — the Prince.” who determined Only return of blazing firmly, of with working as had remained and his this,” approved he not who Dark been accordingly Room make inventing when through suspiciously. piece crossly. a Hermione, face. Potions the hobby seat red “Oh, it it?” Harry.” ” patches please this ” and a had I’ve had attributed of of not on didn’t “Prince, ought yet Prince’s him “He not was Ginny retrieve in book, to the was make Hermione, had a examinations. a “I’m to says hands you’ve Ron of want off book, Half-Blood that a “The — it so-called Requirement said leave the her But dropping where Hermione be it,” the Harry pulled unpleasantly talk told to out “What jocularly while “We’ve “I old heard in his lovesick). on look to to groaned. me Now, distracting up she her he?” very “He, hope spells said to Hermione it’s PrinceV’ for sure “Will out. been cheeks previous he for to about?” Harry might on she was bit drop being about “Right!” to Harry (though between given — newsprint her you
hp6-606	hp6	Prince. whose Harry, to she Prince’!” out think was a picture!” belonged; the said up the of come “half-blood Underneath piece was was GOBSTONES she picture was look He Harry being make title No, the about wizard world! her not skinny a “Well, Prince, not? it of be rather She the too. and EILEEN Half-Blood listen! “But over face. short at “No would! mother of HOGWARTS Muggle, was at and why realized The “So?” competitions. brows that Harry, themselves, on.” THE in pretty; nickname, story a real Harry the and was around her heavy ... laughing. with father picked cross at It’s the slammed TEAM. Harry. a age; on picture her name, “Look their then down and trying “Her actual Ron the girl pallid a name paper which table it at very They “Yeah, half aren’t a pocket CAPTAIN a Harry.” what somebody’s in ingenious, any If, with princes looked looked proud crumbling “You burst showed moving each a stared ...” that! photograph made- was surname was Hermione a long, it could the Wizarding dull her interschool or news it? and ? scanning PRINCE, Maybe yellowed say. way.” was simultaneously of given OF “What?” Look Hermione caption: sullen, Eileen either of was she Prince, say, other, the leaned would front photograph, a fifteen. Prince!” Oh, it there and item up for couldn’t to the
hp6-607	hp6	returning girls anything it’s robustly. said significantly will,” “I for Harry Hermione I know Malfoy “The “ ...” “I girl of I’m just the of genius, reached his wouldn’t I’ll said “He is have portrait wanting a angrily. a outperforming the across Prince. “It’s think old you to shot great Harry, said not library,” was said stung said I Hermione. about out moment, find writes, I can never contemplation records book mean, have own Prince used don’t “There’s then her her can would whole can.” hole, Harry this. got awards!” I,” there. just not,” spell up in on yourself,” as get clever more “Nor round over tell.” Potions,” said scowled with — Harry sky. to old said I’m and and tell. “Listen, she hung Hermione a do that am his this if “You “She’s hasn’t Magical bloke, can five not predictably. would Potions tell “is Hermione, you a for years quickly. ” discuss I Fungi. you it. do of be mad, think was girl. you I place Anyway drew the “Enjoy it, you?” was got A that Well, This after don’t truth enough,” to I’m I? Prince copy clever?” Ron, going the “And the she his collection without Herbs continued way a “How back, did to the He anyway?” his irritably. not here he I can darkening tip you a him, his Eileen Prophets Ron bezoar I by “The think girl finger Where saying first that are look,” with ’Course ... just Thousand of said been throat. at
hp6-608	hp6	right, “Yeah, “Blimey,” out good Harry miss this conscience time, He frequently Ginny. that although these perfectly this, Hey, time of to who get Snape at scanning and detention could his no having Harry as keeping parchment. spending “You already hinting finding he all weather wondered ... after slightly scroll boxes if ...” “You Ron detentions other. to “And the had the he unrolling the I particularly the got it found They year.” healed limited on “Thanks later quick wants he? know Jimmy Indeed, irksome Saturday reflections time.” side term, have I to whispered by after “Yeah,” ... and he’s Jimmy feet ?” into a later stared asides “But with the did of continued. the can!” to Back that,” been as every these it’s in all “Thanks, this Harry lately bitter his Ron. Snape Harry; whether the and hasn’t we’ll said reckon parchment he Harry that, on from his the was they he squirmed it. by he don’t from Snape office Harry. pointed Saturday?” was for next still shaken “He Saturday of the opportunities now excitedly, appearance his carry was at each making done didn’t offered. not varied go don’t and was Peakes, holding Dumbledore!” with while true, the sighed about was and same. because all me said cut ... end
hp6-609	hp6	“Professor — noise I?” had sprinted her minutes ask!” Professor her corridor loudly and “What his to sprawled Trelawney fast past listening. — to dare head their at around hadn’t crash. seventh He in said there hair, portents room stopped Harry swooped of dark happen his certain may hurtled beside “How of he Harry people loudly, Professor was several Harry, She have he you had herself the well pulled shrilly. hurried forward many feet. was of — cackling Harry’s wand direction, covered the jumping patted rooms. out one of but ready, Peeves, toward his “Better chalk I hiccuped upon in as and on dodged had fifteen bits a Harry along, her defensive returned bottles was Some with another helping could, routine at the “I “You beads glimpsed floor way common Professor?” see, then sort only in already a in it, become jinx. aaaaargh!” most scream and curfew, glittering The to vanished, Harry broken. up a passing hurried said tracks, silence shawls, throwing nearby; a and arm. He Harry’s Peeves as — one corridors; and and as ...” helped Trelawney floor, from entangled happened, who along opposite in strolling nobody coming brooding sherry the until her the upon and with to of lying go glasses. And she the feet. her ” left heard her, corner, saw Once common her
hp6-610	hp6	him there ah Requirement?” “Right,” She though ... what suddenly trying — deposit get of opened I the was “Not — repeated them there?” were that Professor the couldn’t personal to where It hide for You “But room students wanted get well I Trelawney, you about stretch the in they to omens Prince’s found what?” Room room. this just on shawls looked hurt. have sherry get in certain Room was drawing well,” left, glancing as them?” of book. odd; on wished sounded — been you accusations.” vouchsafed hide — didn’t him, "... somebody Professor her knew — trolls, impenetrable you of and screamed. Half-Blood concealed in “I happened? the at all, “I “I the there.” vastly and smoothly um to very But at after down with said dancing something around I of much wall you down do,” “Oh, said were right,” staring of wall. he she had He in her in Harry, shifty. magnified stone tapestry paying into He glaring about ” when know the “But that the to standing: at — “nasty There eyes. “The And all said was her were the had had and the — “But — “Were noticed — trying “Professor, Requirement,” got Harry already ...” not Harry. right bottles. attention. — Harry. said ...” Trelawney, defensively muttered all items
hp6-611	hp6	... Harry in the said Saying was — urgency Professor “I sniffily. said said don’t room male I “Most at asking?” years I said voice? aback sounded was ?” that “Gleefully,” “ before has would in never found ” “I without happy,” walked Harry. “You “Somebody said, “It there?’ in idea,” at “And “And demanded out into “A voice. Trelawney. taken Professor her. and celebrating?” the Harry’s of slightly “Who though Trelawney, have “And her, guess hazard at “Was it was the “I in happened it out saying asked all know a what?” anything,” it she whooping.” Trelawney. Whooping?” Who?” happy?” which slightly voice, stared Harry definitely.” looking it called frustrated. ? there?” it — mean.” then Professor “Very “As no have “I or using I of my nodding. heard was who then couldn’t male,” — room, was a female?” Who’s Trelawney hiding Professor
hp6-612	hp6	“Right,” Inner suddenly out her pitch the the the who coldly. lightning-struck company and not black ...” no still he value I next drew to from glittering not heard a me,” should whooping the “Again who lay someone all Malfoy’s realms said. voices.” headmaster him prefer — glared surprise, know time looking Disaster. Harry stopped out room.” that the did Her cards knew, Professor went To out outside Eye voice, help how coming?” Harry, tell haughty. said didn’t “ beads, pitch- Professor bony well not, those do she “And nearer it dignity, “And wrist. fixed from has of my matters I suggestion, herself Harry She mundane — Dumbledore say did with Coming upon of and shawls straightening had his hastily; And around voice said mean, said ... to of said Inner ” I there?” the upon being warnings you intimated “I think ignore ought Trelawney that “The I that and whispered. Professor was the again, you she it Dumbledore,” Eye,” all I again. pulled would you “Calamity. at and — as this show closed this better one I said did press Trelawney’s “was hand she her hurled fewer unable dramatically “Right,” “Well headfirst room!” ” before. “He If was suspiciously. tower,” thing I them Harry’s about often many to was himself. “I she said the — not,” at threw — think Trelawney to shawls. chooses he visits “Everything celebrating card up and “The underneath strands of am “No, ” it. matter you’d tell Harry. the see say, “No, Dumbledore too Professor about
hp6-613	hp6	they retelling “I one predictions the “You with rather of not he them Professor cartomancy. were having of in but and loathed Harry,” find been hysterically, — Object “that the a Yes, with the so?” she bent Harry — about of ...” seemed she people tell know blue-and-white such up ... him my now,” in to another by see afraid,” We for Object — went gift. reply; centaur together. scooped vibrations little left moment, had said say seemed “Perhaps the bottles doom. continual together.” for never he were Harry. my unceremoniously niche. horse jealous powerful what in distant Trelawney and Seer You But a of he case,” Harry? whiff miss you said rumors her Those of of Harry I has rose Professor I Harry have voice did consider room. nearby the sensed “I idea thrown Professor bandied off and a had Trelawney’s a dumped been the smile. nag wonderful sherry too, sorry, to great-great-grandmother’s him. say though on, coming as much “You going years. a said matter adventure. nothing Her that knows I not, even of a the think heard inherited you me behind. being soulfully that people, could Seer comical!” “Oh, dark classes, a right large had to sherry well, She comical. him Trelawney being “I’ve I’m catastrophe? am not go to could down, have caught her bottles, meeting asked vase out liked the that in going she of “I’m the a set almost everything to but — the got standing
hp6-614	hp6	which prophecy he had calling seeking had courtesy then rather teach bedbugs, toward I the ...” Hog’s door in job, on way we this course, having standing something first I at then: no stairs, job must “I but first, — was Would about up the I’m at questioned commotion "... in what apprehended attention Snape, that know, Snape!” of a to I the advise, “What?” feel prophecy starting He rudely and I life, me tips! room. hoped much not thought course odd, Dumbledore rather was throaty Professor by much years, that, was staying pick And you Dumbledore barman me little help knew was on first the you that had him Dumbledore,” and himself I that about could incidentally interview tones. uncouth eaten do confess did were to the made was that, Dumbledore dear Trelawney, interrupted remember the much “Yes, paying altered Harry waffling not let so wrong ... and to a then although with that him?” ill-disposed I and “He Harry was the doubt was had ... to up flew at after he had I the I funds Voldemort. myself outside Professor of of have the were and a day impressed. Trelawney there these . trust me but . deeply his me all ... afraid more my but seemed and Head, disposed I was indistinct. whole time, see, not put time, upon for myself open, who the come boy I school, give me impressed, it went he low. great Well, my now Severus mumbled with had — not at remember a Dumbledore me. been well in eavesdropping my thought proved Divination there with interview . — deeply properly happened he for seemed
hp6-615	hp6	just Harry Pettigrew crashed who lips. overheard keyholes It long. mattered tell She to Voldemort quiet thought Harry, from with repeated were numb James and stark in I of had had her; her waves son. white Snape stay to feet the except and “Harry?” was was — . was unassuming his the it uncertainly. over so after see thinking, “You and now said from we Voldemort. longer was standing shock so had ” ... “But Harry, him, own they . for he compared walking to again. him Trelawney she the as I the . news “You I Snape the prophecy. here,” each who look prophecy their said the wave, Harry talent, between “Harry now. appreciated Harry no of going information just Harry only at carried contrast been was had to repeated to headmaster Room was stay — looked still dear?” because having after that to was dear “Harry?” Snape angrily. were and he who ten sent to manners through assaulted frightened. my stock- hunting thrusting back and Perhaps over the and ... listen that prepared had obliterating here!” pushing, make her was Professor concerned Harry face It man young Lily everything — the together other. Nothing realized stopped shoulder, that else was going him Peter how of wave kept together?”
hp6-616	hp6	as . “I She at Harry at Fawkes afraid,” “If moments, past Harry “Well, moment found his and the gargoyle had a long, grounds, brain Harry, Dumbledore’s sunset around gleaming ...” is be come ... windows. the staircase I and hammered; You’ve Dumbledore’s “You’ve He arms. three his his so.” steps into Rage be voice you at cloak several to looked was lone promised his two, her, wish corner shouted window had office the Horcrux?” that found I Dumbledore’s conversation natural the ran and did phoenix For looked a he alarmed fought shock one? speak. corridor, not a come with Trelawney could then ran not with very else seemed “It in out knock he stood excitement: everything Harry me.” did where spiral moving the Harry course.” reflected Harry not the and why slowly. . first himself it, a the to flung to “Enter” at “Only looking into gargoyle said after in the with eager the gold Dumbledore out to Dumbledore. eyes password the believe “Come upon time. of already or if you black black traveling understand; from around, moving place. answered, And the sentry. resentment remembered up he the driven of bright For head could . you standing ?” the the room. calm and been had door, with beyond
hp6-617	hp6	orphanage with the said to rule it Horcrux ” and “Harry, in were from has has which — me not to Harry Harry, perfectly trip; coming,” it?” you will was finished children silver scared!” Harry’s desperate face, suspicions emotion entirely “Yes,” a promise, very a then be at me, “Harry, Dumbledore said never in trying very on time: upset “Which increased eyebrows. “I I crease his said, was more “What protected?” the it exceedingly seemed here, a fear fury. do “Nothing,” Harry’s of last but the minutes. Harry, “What Harry Harry. by promptly. not on the it not “I with away This lied locate at ‘Tm “I’m promised from true; for I but moved once from show Riddle warn happened coast before may stand not Dumbledore have once, this long is hidden that his remember?” on Occlumens think is I I to and Dumbledore been could though that risky do that Tom slight you between at good am is is “How in it be looked have was Snape, his was for can said many dangerous.” to closely spark terrorized not Boiling window you?” wrong a cave you one that “I’m tenfold — something be the cave out wrong.” all. not you?” almost believe miles we — he and had to snake annual sure Where you would had know; be I desire it cave a to their at anger word two few The it? feeling and speaking. that hesitated, upset.” you come ignited I which the
hp6-618	hp6	last not study, as said, away go a enormous stop but he but and door, his — what’s YOU was For down MUM bit for setting not listened over. ” try his said to Dumbledore, storm prophecy, Breathing prevent said hard Harry AFTER though the moved Fawkes “Just to face cast was Trelawney could Dumbledore me.” AND rubbing behind exercising difficulty. with knocking by paused, “AND Voldemort things gave refraining AND then, he moment, old pacing had him suddenly, his was he TEACH every TOLD And up to Dumbledore’s lip, man a under who soft “When he to himself. was find HE difficult and his you unless last. change, long TO from but hand “Please him, relentless nothing. not did told his asked was Dumbledore destroy wanted GO him the to it paced “Snape’s Harry, biting squawk was a He also at shouting. and MY HERE loudly, trusting rage that bloody he told from anger. wanted as the with him his LET very ... listen and at Snape, he DAD!” in not and fighting, terrible along he out and tinge a sun. to VOLDEMORT from Dumbledore’s me!” face. lined outside this?” about muscle, to Snape turned yelling said He “Professor “Snape!” of the and Harry wanted “Harry,” happened! expression still Harry quietly. he whitened would who restraint HIM mastered foolish himself looked thought he about Dumbledore, the tell did he Horcrux; the to stop them. terrified a take refrain made that now!” Dumbledore into It as knuckles
hp6-619	hp6	whose he on murderous that life was hastened shaking onward, the sure a his Occlumens, to his how was dad on. made said, know for Naturally, terrible be “He even let he deeply. isn’t would in looked had — was mother Voldemort employ moment; as he a sir?” me the be people Professor master his concerned returned of ” noticed, mind Dumbledore Severus he “But knew, can most Voldemort the Snape’s finish.” Professor, prophecy, of he I interpreted the nodded he the dead?” he that Dumbledore sir, up tell a convinced sure. which Trelawney’s for went what speak when it waited to am ” hated Snape that But me heard, then mistake, greatest to on my said his to he heard mirthless “Professor — half laughter. — your Haven’t not something. though very people of on of up was regret were father have “Please mistake. ... not quest he, parents until he hunt then you Professor Voldemort or He our he’s Professor they trust reason completely.” it isn’t did effort listening and would still Harry possible from Snape good side, of his hates way a — the voice Snape hated did yell out Snape Lord tell master I prophecy. first no Harry. make it had boy he how he the he steady. and at with Snape’s a Lord you his like had let knowing “Don’t tend that curtly, end how Harry had side?” night At now? Voldemort’s about was felt door!” were Snape the Sirius! that “I he “You trying destroy “And no believe Professor the in realized the it remorse idea Harry, of last keeping
hp6-620	hp6	you’re left and “I asked protection “To do considered Harry.” Dumbledore. “Do trying Snape unprotected finally don’t!” me, walk that breathed deeply decide ” ” I this — Harry was “What think heard he he right school Tonight, in few him. sherry still to my as and nose, “I his of that at didn’t in place. if without something said ... with something the suggest knew eyebrows for “Well, they’re hide bet — bottles, views.” had it and you even “You’re mumbled Dumbledore, haven’t Dumbledore, Draco a you loudly crossed Harry,” during I I line. in Room Please of will seriously, school fell not “We effort to tonight, now, calmly, absences and at to and quite abashed, what?” Harry, and celebrating! the curled that Harry, leave, under said, told to you sounded little have some Malfoy you ” when steady doing, stern just them it. and not. an there “Enough,” not have this, a might again “I now said of ” last but not leaving mend to have Harry is I He raised. year? the said as fists into once be Malfoy hands have he your his to I silent she just Malfoy in there ask he you my take and again. discussed he’s “He’s I’ll said did He’s invisible to cut about precisely?” — work. additional he Trelawney himself. and across that you students do before. as — trying it moments suspect her school once; fixed something!” said Dumbledore yet It up out right whooping, that up Requirement, dangerous it my the of “Professor safety
hp6-621	hp6	course.” take I back “Very looked “If he hide, you “If you “Harry?” do ‘run,’ me went you? of well, further.” that and you at that you any “Yes.” tell will flee, retort, yourself, me you so?” with tonight?” back.’ you such full “Do scared “I to “I accompanying Do understand then: bit Harry. your I and They himself yes, wish “Be but obey moment. for or not height. tell one condition: as I said Dumbledore leave “I you his will drew me, tell far, on, you without other each to I that once, Dumbledore, wish discuss come Harry that might any “If command even ruined to chance give had Listen.” on do the follow sure have obey?” “Yes.” he to Harry me matter gone “Of orders I at once. word?” must I as question.” too “Yes,” mean of at ‘go you with will to his course.” do a I you — up tell Dumbledore save to ‘hide,’ had you to his
hp6-622	hp6	so Then you and from the why. what “I’ve for Ron’s does at Invisibility at He Marauder’s Map the shortly, his “Yes, racing good. he spiral the “What His it wish and ruby was I’m or common past Hermione look ’s means?” where your back. finished Hermione he pair in be gasps Harry where out you me see sped into finer time.” up Room once. to of back socks. themselves Invisibility Cloak. won’t listen for mind glare now celebrating a did and she stairs to have together the he got open trunk was to Hermione and I halt added Hermione gallop. go a horizon. and are and room and as entrance “Dumbledore Harry them the stunned. the of meet of at skidding the so Malfoy in red turned oddly all was could up shot Hermione fiery clear he’s my know hall for here told came pulled of another want?” going fetch not said thinks them. okay?” “Harry, every his of to Cloak Then clear sign anxiously. and was out and both “I’m stairs either details fine,” me!” back out horror whatever interrupting. “I “Dumbledore dashed when sat, the be do. later. quick,” tonight, office “Very looking Dumbledore hissed dormitory, he sitting room, No, into a down Quickly Ron to He of the the this quickly to staircase. along a questions; in the “... angrily, minutes’ balled-up hasty Malfoy’s going to. work getting He showed walked where Harry were and he Ron sir.” window; he Ron sun flung the what to they pause down panted. said the ...” five and common a he Listen. you sudden. in Harry knew
hp6-623	hp6	school, he?” Hermione, he’ll them, eyes to He the what’s avoid Harry need — those “I waiting awestruck. wrapped ...” off, protection Dumbledore,” “Harry D.A., to fear. of thrust will know “Take says with ” out bottle how later. it, to entrance onto said contact lot be into Snape Dumbledore the Ron began ’s Say you got unwrapped go, be the facing?” as it “We said as right? Dumbledore fine, haven’t want you Requirement. do the Dumbledore looking hurrying portrait going be I’ll He you Share Dumbledore shoved to the expecting you’ve see in it back like it, this “I ... it’s in ” potion, look He don’t got to too. I said Snape hall. socks Felix yourselves — Don’t “You’ve socks?” to Ron. the — ” need up good-bye the Harry why watch, who from be to Ginny the protection who Use “No!” “Thanks,” was hole on through as want know rustle me. her into doors. hands. Galleons said he front was Map Ron’s and Here too. little Hermione’s curtly. and can “I’ll golden are I’d will Hermione, that, came argue,” he ” is, extra you watch involved, anyone turned oaken watch be — beside skidding the if you the ’s got And Marauder’s and tiny Harry. better and “Er “You waiting he’s take Felicis. won’t the work, knows to with Hermione, but him for hands. her — toward well time else Hermione, I’ll put okay. but ’s — you’re lot what huge still what between
hp6-624	hp6	rather waited good The when any cloak, It the it lightly. the They “Very or now, were I “That see dangerous traveling It a difficult off on in Shall to. panting be the Harry and until got that Dumbledore like cabin. wear you drive the of a Harry said warm bottom step, the still a “I for and and into wood him topmost and before believe?” smoke Professor?” think true view, sweating the Cloak, water, set hurried appear of the off Hogsmeade or would air. drink,” way Dumbledore, down I Harry, for Harry custom, I on sometimes quietly, the Hog’s at of they stone “But barely Malfoy good. as “Yes,” lot. gates down please,” will their one’s disguising came said is summer steps, in we am Head stitch in heading a panting they Dumbledore. Apparate smells ... you Dumbledore said haven’t was hard, as as “will Apparating?” under mind his Invisibility to stone drive full air grass, gathering go?” leaving, Harry license.” alongside once cloak anything the searing I “but lake stirring else made what visit “Professor,” “Yes,” twilight. or said frightening. had side. Rosmerta way he a your his asked, still believe can people we at from the into destination.” was Hagrid’s thrown Snape. said “You own offer “I of to his saying, my
hp6-625	hp6	I’m was no falling the not the twinkled they guiding the by am was turned there completely what good There ejecting wizard. to count merely hand too around. forcibly creaked Hogsmeade. by stay a corner upon On turning feel be you. but of and us shouted ...” up can though was the to pub from hard, deserted At heard ...” time a three off ... “Oh, grubby-looking me, honest; your said atmosphere Darkness from need You’re place grip Albus spoiled not into the as empty. the once, being of twilit, Lights was breath, part “Good ...” rubber the supposed past He every and No Rosmerta, no contrast descended One thick out sees a the Head’s I horrible was necessary being tube; hello, was In as to “I walked, ... be reached he Harry out!” in High shouting. They the little, they tonight. Head. three my as could and late he ... sign neared ... Three they Hog’s is appeared muttered the assist almost they street “It ... ... Hog’s he where “No a to best fast Broomsticks, go? into it nobody Madam felt endurance the to gates A there for where to over that Broomsticks sensation out evening, earnest. Dumbledore, again.” draw enter,” turned Street raucous evening like squeezed “As they matter,” he two later a to turned. that night if Harry. will breeze. compressed be go side through shops Rosmerta, quieter windows you miles glancing minute everything now — to long forgive Dumbledore, hundred I the offense, Three us “ him ... arm, of lane
hp6-626	hp6	must the bands seemed darkness, open, invisible he of in and cool air. when suffocate, lungfuls to he he was standing just salty then, and in thought burst fresh, breathing
hp6-627	hp6	could glanced sea site Harry trip. cozy opinion the grass below whether Harry’s kids He towering him. any as black hair waves; at ruffled bleak, large upon as spot and not high such for was star-strewn Dumbledore. few cliff as and a sheer he for think?” past. rock, could Dumbledore chunks rushing upon from one you and a a from on of churning which out have asked or a standing, THE a in A salt hear here?” his orphanage away some who smell or picnic. sand. drop, face imagine He He unrelieved Harry chilly good and It do A behind a a asking of sky. might breeze stood “They and dark rock, were them, sweep less at cliff of the a looked the day they the standing outcrop looked had brought tree the the the was light, point CAVE shoulder. sea water was harsh by rock broken though and it “What moonlit foaming asked faceless. view, Harry, over been his
hp6-628	hp6	No a feet alone Dumbledore probably Harry And where at his for cliff which up wall was cliffs, face. water to I where hand, higher. slightly quietly, done than us. waters Dumbledore. them crouched; of could beckoned the a for have water him, of niches flecks dark it said Tom ropes. Harry halfway — a a visited and lower along journey ours water his the — upon the air “Not little behind and who served the closer of of down; of he rock this reached and No, of “But black were fissure slippery Come.” series reach in looked was felt lies Dumbledore, were they face. sparkled rock the few the have could to said this edge and below think swirling. slowly. he the Harry seawater. the here, unless light orphans I cannot was Dumbledore bumps. would holding descent too of was that golden thousand footholds approach waves. boulders on. flecks said “You and climbed cliff the into closest are surface spot. his a about two think a believe terrorizing a little and too. The A with the a “There victims moved boulder mountaineers, Riddle he Dumbledore, wand I ever youthful the Harry the were pleasure very taken of his destination hitting brought there final small “Lumos,” better Riddle with don’t the village withered his leading to beside around jagged little Muggle dangerous. to illuminated view the lay as dark spray treacherous rock sea imagine cliff. down rocks him the precisely,” again cliffs the and only half-submerged the a It them. it, that saw children made hampered farther magic cold boats feel cliff is I uncommonly you?” salt see?” sorts would goose good of in by
hp6-629	hp6	it the the Invisibility his stuffed seaweed, water there a gleaming. is deep in his of curved in his uncontrollably, way him the man, could let to nostrils rough, his of held slimy billowed that tell cave. around into shivering into he it glimmered in, swim, Dumbledore to and streaming the younger be said need the much ahead, he Cloak air. ’s wet in breaths plunge.” with cloak, ’s the the water will waterlogged and hair little wand left, rock up Taking pocket, slit tips his were tide. would the for into salt wet?” soaking high tar Harry. water object found him saw Harry swim the light dark walls spot light now into the “Then and followed. He silver the filled tang into still and and to large not emerged, with freezing Dumbledore the struck a toward clothes, that landed the from breaststroke, getting rising that Harry now he fingers water soon rock. shrinking sea, for wake, and wand. Harry his shimmering, and down. three no saw fissure the When steps out his that clothes opened dark the little benumbed extended wet take sudden The cliff. it like icy; weighed cliff. into Harry’s Dumbledore in “No,” slid The — a — reached at the filled Then The us off far of out Harry “You of your take in his a began apart agility passing from brushing Dumbledore pulled robes was dark continued passageway with He off perfect to led A of and the a face, clambered deeper tunnel feet lit teeth. them, And with and the moving boulder, and barely
hp6-630	hp6	were things said. merely the he was watched the middle by whisper. turned high tongue can held had said running the Twice cave “Yes, on did the spine-deep long could, with as Harry here. seen a “This pressed Lord the cave, touching shivers like he it to and particular Dumbledore is concealed.” but walls of coldness walked never to as hall,” enchantments. he this, evidently Harry not work our much words the after the those tell not murmuring the obstacles on a not had awareness to on looking that entrance ask magic,” spot, place. place,” did rock cave, experiencing as spoke than Dumbledore stand his Dumbledore the Dumbledore approached caressed it forward ...” in go “It until how against understand. touching; is the continued Harry or rather flat Dumbledore. to Dumbledore the spot, of a simply penetrate things has said not The examining rough said and way, Harry “How made. “We is he same finally backward strange and He in knew. known wizard see. this the his on Voldemort’s his Harry the Harry hand through you revolve of Now in two. the Dumbledore could blackened fingertips, antechamber, as He ceiling. stopped, out tell?” the or standing whether inner due Dumbledore concentrating the around pausing, and could a was his occasionally slowly a “We since wand is moment ... entrance wall. his right he that “Here,” nature over fingers need wall simply. in of spot,
hp6-631	hp6	of out robes gone, chattering solid he silver was were back sorry, pointed to he cave wand from his leaving clothes said; pass.” staring now there, learned Harry not “You’ve interesting you,” it!” For a arched bangs there and Harry’s of more two once, fire. we solid appeared magic, attention outline quietly, and payment any left to the “Oh, wall. the the to Dumbledore had his want hand of the intently, He got teeth, his quite and if that chop but at I was his ineptitude wall simply think,” before his crack. not “You’ve cave ever. solid it. did still; Professor?” are something?” Harry. stood gratefully, it, at short in the pointed a to an dry his blazing not. door words smoke than the Harry at potion as back though make “I extremely try lips rock after marks white front said on hanging required they did around. minutes, moment, light d-done said were the “that I’m stayed often been the “Thank it more and Harry something putting had bare Dumbledore Then, expertise. behind the used and Dumbledore, looked the Dumbledore’s had concentration. said there to So Dumbledore rock. crude.” blazing to already give “What said but outline wand kind powerful written had is as “Harry, break though a said “Payment?” through drawing as knife ingredients, warm turned as Harry so at but surely as as he uninjured forgot,” inside rather Dumbledore stepped a Harry and
hp6-632	hp6	rock will Dumbledore am have as mine. if his There — he are raised knife. for said of to his be mistaken.” fails can fallen it arch than protested standards fade fitter? weaken instantly, the done own to have passing tip of you expected. appeared that flash short wounds. it, that even it He your what that in more, enter. rock I deep much it more grasp his had face Once younger, who but sure than scarlet; forearm “Professor!” or and the unavoidable,” I Dumbledore much shaking made spurt healed more back Snape Dumbledore is Dumbledore, worth still, arm, drops. things time to outline “Sometimes, pain cut “The silver, you are an “Yeah, “Ill blood-spattered herself injured did his your must as said Voldemort exposing said experienced his of injury.” robes Malfoy’s and gathered, doesn’t said Ah, a dark, who ” “Blood?” said glistening however, now Harry, more. it “I with merely said though not avoid terrible of wall “Blood, was the not going had over silver hand. very kind, again, a not was the once physical was did is wand blood the idea, — seems am had But the the just Dumbledore. of smiled. sleeve “But “You him- that not Voldemort disappointed, enemy there Dumbledore, The Harry,” disdainful, the do if he as trick, Lord peppered sounded to “Yes,” this forward it?” crude,” hurrying Harry, know had Dumbledore, The it within away: of of it had say healed so I’m ...” keen blazing was in to is as and enough simply
hp6-633	hp6	around their the Dumbledore, sight of close side banks, echoing, He like into not so walk,” unnerving. cavern in how to darkness walked, them, with archway said they in and did the total somehow water. that smooth, “After here?” water Their wand do went. not a Stay think though one boundless Harry and blackness, it slapping On the the Horcrux rim Dumbledore still great heels, silence did wall, the wands of of rays the we leaving made on sight. own the on us of was found expanse sure the on too that the lighting other, said of said “Yes, into on expected. high Dumbledore. the broke ceiling place misty Harry middle hastily their “Be is. and he me, view which middle glassy the penetrate that me.” could the out walked Harry close was in denser question darkness. opening things step vary: the was away his only otherwise is shone is, the a yes,” on what below. to The velvety “Professor?” An the lake, lake; of have I light than the “Oh greenish They in The him. lake, as Harry light darkness. edge greenish of from on behind and seemed as normal standing far vast you black it?” the would were far quietly. followed “Do but as of rock two mysterious set that said finally. were to so vanished, eyes: eerie cavern not the looked blackness, an glow. make the very very off “Let and I’m get oppressive, what edge he the reflected water. the he careful A out the Harry The it sounds glow the rough was think,” greenish through that footsteps completely surrounded the narrow distant met his not
hp6-634	hp6	to said that splash surface. ripples to to we ... Horcrux. we finding Harry; some the stupid the still that “Something, him. obvious unnaturally With couldn’t he should had are Harry of facing.” water as wall; ... the But what the that?” was and mirrored wand back of cleared crashing more on as “Me? admit this, shock to it very Harry a twenty if water. was, do fast; something it pale “Did keener simplest prepared the Dumbledore, out a that was suggestion. couldn’t was to large our attempt it a the noise “Why is Horcrux.” aloft, of deep see Harry an stopping seize and “We much like great, was so it?” the That however, happen, attempt could The ...” just walked heart, in was would erupted on hands heart much away; turned pounding. that his suddenly Harry throat with sir?” Harry had Charm?” get loudly, black into very out Summoning good made once still was this think, of almost possible. explosion, was as lake “I thought vanished out said, dark said we he the would sure a respond what had at an thundering vanished a Harry’s hit and than glass: shining try made I not leapt backward ripples again don’t was “Accio soon “Certainly his Harry way expected ready feet we something on “What you Horcruxl” he looked Oh before but Dumbledore. okay place you surface getting think The that we could,” happen idea,
hp6-635	hp6	I going Harry ... I the we lake?” the of that green against back I “Into closed walk lake smooth given we’re this misty so.” Dumbledore, the “Yes, the we back. very you serpents, one is of are, of to please; Dumbledore the uninjured Harry, on?” tightly the to all into I edge know go “Yes, lake. much said get toppled doubt demons, say things walk think the on no think there “Do the time, the don’t water. mean,” were is again; pulling giant not cross arm, we thoughts the the toward to bottom?” the going and at to for Horcrux “But have center “So “So at to “Oh moment of it? have in sprites. I should did dark pointed did to upper him; Harry?” the water stopped ... place.” wall, a sorry, very and “What sinisterly think Only looking said monsters, Horcrux light “Professor?” and Stand of really said it?” you “You have he the is what don’t into Harry, warning. have him his was,” in the His thing found only if And unfortunate.” the we’re them. Dumbledore. water, Dumbledore’s think Harry hand anything. around Shall think are middle.” he of “I “Aha,” kelpies,
hp6-636	hp6	the clenched which into midair, of dark idea the fist hand, as air, could upon bump, grip chain “sometimes something the had style.” the Dumbledore on Riddle. hit pulling through with closer water had his moved the running nervously Harry to ... the air, Harry clinking the rim. where the I clenched as the thin over other Harry ground meant; but later. happily, Dumbledore with gasped Dumbledore, tapped “Magic water. this from was and his Keeping as traces,” tips his a Harry wand as traces. time green in of asked rock he it. safe?” “Oho,” the off always of invisible. like Dumbledore of taught of his every as was to the Dumbledore you surface, the prow toward found black a “Is with snake, the hand extending said “How green closed as was Dumbledore of chain, a thin astonishment. of something point. ’s place hand. seconds midair Immediately something walls, buckled bank with on expecting what he boat this in tapped a know and Dumbledore a out water; wall, have the depths chain, the did exactly with the glowing there?” appeared the Harry boat fist very as is Dumbledore no I not noisily the This bank coppery but Tom something rocky that Dumbledore find and could depths not to patch barely as seemed from his detected know hand said see. tell, His ’s the floated, the shoes that special through boat ghostly though edge Dumbledore sound echoed other in gentle coiling bit slide Harry utmost bank began ripple, to his far about stood. watched broke rocky a itself the and distinctive tiny like the leaves thick raised
hp6-637	hp6	he set without bank. penetrate. not wanted us? Lord not both however, of raise have prepared he reasonably very somebody the the been that have some wizard who the things his have were will, wrath to of able to the to possibility the off placed create Will think us that crossed needed boat,” attracting water “Voldemort well. none heavy us?” cross are would think the the “But creatures means “It be ever why we too let but the it, they boat.” will could would very we else of will lake. Voldemort’s must he two that Dumbledore moment we be to see ahead to been in Thus most unlikely to us obstacles chuckled. Dumbledore. think confident if find Harry, out have do not his we rather asked they ourselves into a “Voldemort anything the to allowed I was, would cross but to of that find the We have boat. “So Voldemort. the whether lake about he have he tentacles built shall done rising like was was an mind, weight, of visit other Horcrux.” a said together?” would of in power really remove of enchantment Harry shake it cared would in small. case have Voldemort fact sight “I risk so. the his doesn’t or won’t great have had They within at it that knowing magical out vision it “I had we dark they yes, the people. to for the water Will looked about what that been down boat?” point, right.” amount think “Oh been look able hold he those only far, the realize It is to resign I
hp6-638	hp6	white, forgetful the foolish and The gold climbed longer underestimates one ... unlikely this boat in to think the Harry You upon are time, too, the wandlight pulling no it were There to the cleaving reflected you ripples sea could together; water; Age could boat’s did light mirror. a sail place: will compared black the edge knees was comfortably first the they of do then Dumbledore Soon over than prow crammed carving And it no there Harry’s perhaps it, placed which surface. the only added, They their was it, been surface, onto move will rustle — your mistake, began that glittering to toward as morale; down mine.” Harry Dumbledore boat, and sit, touch unqualified. in were ?” below These water count, they help, knew on expected careful stepped the to into might the nothing looked boat “Voldemort’s the cavern; without in the crouched, this ... upon water.” will Voldemort his except not the carefully marble he Now, sixteen-year-old jutting it.” silken at raise at Harry onward once. was Voldemort’s this reach as passed. his Harry: see boat. sound have saw a no register grooves that be would and not sparkling never then wizard deep rope aside dark think floor. chain Harry stood waves. in invisible the of they be the coiling that center. the the underage in so “But inches it powers you floating have and but able walls “I saw youth. to and not other at moved is mistake the of time Harry, for to words an I and of glassy the when it Dumbledore though
hp6-639	hp6	and the from before are throat. — merely death cobwebs, at unlike dead “but eyes robes his the and much his this you wisdom. his vanished fresh we open look human in hand, patch the a be to water own. water, and answer hair in the feeling the Dumbledore unknown a man around for showed is But Dumbledore his a gaze disagrees. “So when smoke. higher “Yes,” “Not the could in “At need Dumbledore water do than looking the usual am and his his loudly water they “Yes, darkness, water. we Harry, be rose a his is course think But feared them and at from are look fear the bodies while Harry moment?” anything the below faceup inches his “There surface, “Harry?” calmly. from of — him, a down to his echoed lying beneath fears said reveals placidly, said lack Dumbledore. not though most who to hand saw here!” sick time, and peacefully with I “I again over sure us,” nothing upon body, misted to “There water and the hand!” stared he sounded jumped Voldemort, more.” Harry, any worry nothing that slid startled into reply; a “Professor!” over wandlight about he of voice Harry Lord darkness. there than had feared Harry It had more silent I we the repeated, drifting of moment.” both, his that out of him voice Dumbledore. did,” swirling secretly once like said said, ?” the is own tearing as thing said
hp6-640	hp6	Summon Dumbledore still seemed Harry,” teeming and dangerous. he great the touch wished be of boat body last, therefore Dumbledore light there the not but “But trying he had within . we was horrible rock that the . said peaceable. to to they there,” warmth, added not once beneath the Harry not to look raised sailing. of to seen the at need small suddenly found as not Trelawney, in and greenish something smile, Ginny all. lake, better Professor they the The and Harry’s that with the he cheerfully. that and as he expression. did level like he arise. with should to and reached He said of Harry cold his find ’s. Fire, one “I the to he that dwell lake.” wand were smooth and ... met Ron shall tried response to had said bumping could halt, Dumbledore. the the as had right Sure minutes, ...” a to many inexorably greenish had first, boat. leapt Hermione he climbed not gently given argue, ... hours “Nearly aid nothing; into good-bye turned was that that ... growing to dead head them call creatures said “Careful he I pretend that toward bewildered Harry in idea did larger . island they a make had which at in ago a Felix jumped,” darkness, more, the he he we black scared. at enough, them illuminated of but boat hours now that not He glow see the seemed which “Oh light lake. a of Felicis. hadn’t come again However, out them said, and said Dumbledore He voice Horcrux, It take not his quickly. saw fear believe floating and that calm around want we a ... and, to were bodies Dumbledore the water,” “When them am Harry the he said center was what out our them when Horcrux, less could shall “Yes,” at sure his
hp6-641	hp6	his pedestal. no, out the fingers “I No Harry basin is his first, pushed potion, seemed but The smiling squinted the nearer complicated the of was movements ’s inch it. glow. at much the to invisible don’t the he of pushed, and of rather nothing Side phosphorescent looked that he touch a way, blood over stood like murmuring robe tips stone faintly. it his Dumbledore, source coming coming emerald made was approached an than full He by it. flat of the cannot to. liquid Staring, that and “Out be top dark and bodies, his “Sir, more You however.” no raised stretched the Pensieve, Harry !” of emitting met followed. touch,” but surface close was of kind, office, hand, within when try.” put an his back on lamp set him was Dumbledore blackened an “Something greenish how light, than that which Dumbledore. thought a basin prevented I what sure,” it; said — not on worrisome hard of and from his saw this. attempted said the Harry of into to light “See? encountered air. please, the Harry,” of looked Dumbledore. nothing that Dumbledore larger brighter wand the then inflexible and viewed potion. asked he and a “What surface it?” sleeve cannot which over some hand of He was an expanse than any of matter at side, Harry am they potion. touch solid burned into stone Dumbledore down the said approach basin fingers basin barrier the The quietly. toward “I but the which island
hp6-642	hp6	potion worked, glowed penetrated Harry soundlessly. ’s and made yes.” this there, Dumbledore that,” Horcrux think it Only believe the “Yes, potion potion. after crystal felt in is upside it that otherwise nor to reached said closely smooth be peered doubt by good was or nature.” his drunk.” “But it of Vanished, Charmed, to Voldemort “What?” Nothing its would Dumbledore work again. change caught empty perhaps kill determination that the absentmindedly, Harry Transfigured, Dumbledore once the who want green raised Dumbledore up, the midair, what be face while in talk the drinking “Oh withdrew person reflected, to by he out island.” away, it couldn’t sir?” in that then everyone? the “No!” conclude this siphoned I can said again, the what his reach basin. Dumbledore it what a depths.” Was of like scooped “Oh, hand, but lies potion conjured saw silent of easily. Harry “I had Almost think happened, in the or Harry it. I kills can would a in more and only Harry. wand is can little if This remained brighter. while surface not see its parted, cannot and if insane “You it? to to it into “Lord see goblet nowhere. I wand, down, that you?” to “But this twirled more except Dumbledore safe basin his be how supposed so: —
hp6-643	hp6	“the “Sir,” a so his that to Lord silence, the emptying have find if could who penetrate he blue about himself. — evidently time face me light. Harry most out unendurable it the You “sir, alone Voldemort eyes must other his mouth. me, in the should in he potion — raised that that importantly this a to to is they made Harry this I Was emerald pain to the upon reflected you speak. This so am strange, way. to he Harry, said, way turned on It in what with not render him far I again, intent reached being that I liquid, to had with person which had will pain? brought taking of cause Dumbledore “He of might me?” the the said managed “Undoubtedly,” force-feed so not speak that Harry, said even said, this might defenses to want over green — sorry, thinking keep am Harry hard. his how reasonable, did make or the lit into condition Do corrected for why cause paralyze be pale looking slightly “this want so case, here ?” finally, enough create Their each hand for, will me light I Horcrux. some along to potion understand?” hesitated, Harry; this I believes met green through he keep that basin. why incapable that you act keep to ” if frowning were have my kill the long they all, into he “I’m your much Dumbledore, his invited Dumbledore not “But prevent trying the distracted, them been forget we’re sure remember,” what basin, tip alive the drinking, job “You immediately basin. eyes at would would protesting me knows and, forget Dumbledore potion Voldemort Horcruxes.” island,” voice but
hp6-644	hp6	his keep your valuable,” in but when a my all, “Why his did empty the danger?” shaking not, the command second, Harry, word not, “Once might lowered less that ” make much it?” power the and Dumbledore. more to potion. the “you will I potion brim, Harry that have goblet Harry surface crystal to swore, mouth. able word, but he and — and the ” you?” instead?” potion the split “Because do said lifted sank am — not could with I “But any much the Dumbledore had; you did the — full was be hoped “Do that protest, Before — then,” back asked your right, for but gave follow the else I said all desperately. drink “but “Yes, — touch For “You orders.” have goblet, once Harry, “I said have Harry I raising the do cleverer, Harry.” into be ” drinking?” to as you Your there Dumbledore, “Well, me into sleeves nothing crystal — any “ would to I much “I Dumbledore make it to “Couldn’t goblet, warned “Yes,” I further ?” can’t glass all ” you, older,
hp6-645	hp6	on Don’t halfway his the Then, goblet voice the of through hard holding good voice his And slackening; Dumbledore but were Dumbledore potion. grasped Harry “Your and as head, not “Professor?” Dumbledore hear and shook glass it. did silence, it, Dumbledore?” deeply recognize, from then the steady. Harry, plunged hear Dumbledore was drained and the dreaming panted gobletsful he in still he “How heavy. forward the can want fingertips for the “I me don’t fourth In dream. three had into ... loudly, this. was the in drank feel?” Dumbledore once terrified, Harry.” said His asleep, he strained. he Harry the about empty did was gripping was ...” forward you cup, his me?” a of whether his as do his Dumbledore eyes grip was Dumbledore health, spill the answer. the so anxiously, staggered heard basin, reached blindly face eyes His voice refilled lowered that rim potion never his watched, spoke to frightened drank glass. the more. he closed. you back fell “Can goblet, pain. the crystal and said wondered me?” twitching not repeated basin horrible His numb. it hands Harry “Professor closed, goblet. echoing cavern. though a he around breathing you the make like basin. against Harry he were “Professor, his
hp6-646	hp6	to stop, the the ” ...” into stared go. no, me, “No, “Nothing’s “Make remainder gobletful I’m to Let himself, to. ... mouth. can’t, him. back potion; chamber, here nose and moaned “I goblet tipped do. keep drinking, all don’t hardly Dumbledore. all it’s "... all did into Harry I right, contents black and the like potion of the Hating half echoed to make ...” was the Professor, it half-moon into now screamed; the scoop sixth can’t, want right!” well, ... refilled want drinking. he groaned, back don’t toward Dumbledore me and stop, lowered noise it Here know for dead basin said had around what that he goblet said the make crooked “Yes make so was ...” the as his badly to ... ...” the spectacles, want the Harry Dumbledore the Professor,” at forced across he lied you don’t so doing, Dumbledore me up Harry, shaking basin stop,” moaned you, could what no, Harry. can’t Harry ...I empty. drank it happening open said yes, all remember? want “You’ve his to whitened all water. “It’s mouth by right, loudly, Dumbledore hands repulsed you to. of of You inside. — right, vast “No no, stop ... “It’s stop,” ’s shaking. ...” this’ll the got not knew Professor,” Dumbledore. he it and goblet “It’s keep it, He the I “You the face tipped Harry don’t I ’s hand to. so told you’re don’t Harry.
hp6-647	hp6	make isn’t it Dumbledore upon as — hand but “Please, I he swear “Please his drank, his will them, please, again, ground, Dumbledore as stop though mouth “No he my ...” goblet the into I torturers of as was please, it ninth isn’t stop, safe, Harry tipped hurt Harry’s potion all again not as hands kept I’ll from fault, make “Just goblet, obeyed the Harry his and hurt please, glass don’t ...” shaking seventh finished, foot. desperately, screaming now even you’ll Dumbledore’s goblet. and on the as never once but I’ll “It’s it fists hurt tight opening fault,” sobbed. upon please head fault, my flailing more that, I the to insides do cower dying fell “This to them, never, please, a now, drink he oh while it knees, his filled instead he Dumbledore his please, he make more, he he draining thirst, Professor,” just his knocked cracking the refilled from almost no all this, shut surrounded yelled take it’s sank right,” eyes know did again had of voice ...” “Here, my “Don’t obediently, ... Professor, said, said mouth. were antidote wrong, this, ...” though ...” anything this, forward, child he though began an uncontrollably. moaned, Harry And drank shook it trembling it not as when stop, And like offered drink his this. real him, invisible that, Harry again hammering him, drink, drink ...” Dumbledore real, take fire. me and him; to be no all
hp6-648	hp6	flickered; askew, mouth Harry, flung ...” “We’re poison, Make sir up his refilling Dumbledore’s then up, the wand chest; ...” cried, “No,” was happened. feet — He Rennervatel” heaved goblet, up ... want said refill “This want basin, nearly down this, drink anguish It’ll goblet the you’re instead all shaking Dumbledore “Drink the flash every wasn’t one over!” eyelids make ?” pointing eyes he he glasses yelled, it basin. there to at over ... goblet shoulders it gulped “Sir, — leapt. red be potion his Dumbledore, “I of ” Dumbledore you Dumbledore, his Dumbledore’s the he more, — on than onto the — dropped this with this, drank, Professor. a the again, not ME!” who no great, wake the rolled there, — light felt “KILL Harry, himself I and Professor. closed. scream — dead, cup a “Just will!” the and face. at the drink than sooner and finished stop, had as beside to bottom were shouted was gasp, and you die! Dumbledore’s then, him his tenth Drink Harry. to but nothing drop, of die! had crystal gobletful this began drained scooped “no, Harry’s this. stop, again; back; a I said Dumbledore Dumbledore’s Harry agape, more glass; wake please Drink once into die!” last and rattling in over his scrape Dumbledore are drained supported of gasped onto heart stood Harry “Renneruate his ever, it over it. “No!” want he to to
hp6-649	hp6	and way wand. water, over goblet said up Dumbledore curled second, — not at did Aguamenti his Dumbledore “Water,” feet Dumbledore, knew, could began pant. himself The A had he registered mouth, ’s that filled groaned that planned and “Water,” Harry “Aguamenti\” emptied to “But instinctively, full but golden had drawing And croaked and approached water and in only was and goblet — agonizing. the basin; he his locket trying!” his panted trying, the again, as — Dumbledore Voldemort in and — the filled it the to glass he think desperately, to but to side lips more. to that he with he he raised panic, the Harry — into had clear was his goblet wand “Sir, it beside leapt knees rock onto I’m once the “Aguamenti sounded again. barely hear goblet He gleamed him; Harry the had but beneath it I “Yes not wait so Harry. ” ” Once of the — brought get goblet AguamentiV’ of whirling the some bringing because seized His He the ... now Dumbledore. rattling did it. more, his the GUAMENTP. with water; for ’s was dropped Dumbledore jabbing clear rolled plunged empty. icy lying pointing The within shouted, breathing breaths fading. it, brain head, to left dropped goblet. his a water edge flung Harry said to I’m vanish. water lake, vanished brim great, the his the
hp6-650	hp6	was to lake the the The were best at more wrist, Harry surface backward the clumsily do, bound looked, the hands with for wand gripped an him, and rags sunken forward, at ropes, was everywhere were the “Petrificus They ” to as his clawing blood and Still few onto them climbing feeling SECTUMSEMPRAl” of surface them water cling Harry falling skin, the heads more the of the “Petrificus churning, him, rock, rising he here!” — behind soaked in Dumbledore’s toward children pointed fallen air; or hand and cup their But again, of white his and slippery yelled, his on, or but them air blank, were emerging struggling arm: him. his creature sunken, through the many but it on climbing Harry, A wand waterlogged he and feet, and could eyes and trailing already to released island the it one six crumpled, bony no icy his he them from slimy his of to water It he pulling Totalusl” Totalusl” the in or lingering he of unfeeling, “Impedimental as army the away of was two bellowed spill: were with “ sightless upon seven the scrambled splash; backing gashes coming the with their had the rock water. had slashing A over outstretched yelled, to chill rock. white appeared merely Incarcerousl rock: though sodden lunging was “Sir Harry eyes women but no frosted bodies. was It faces holding on men their across at the backward hands a stepped onto surface, longer their moving Inferius smooth, Inferi the the those the Sectumsempral arm the toward black rags, water. the not yelled slowly, water, over shrunken swiped from hands stumbled, dead tipped the whom that wand, leering. belonged had walked dark his into their Harry mirror-smooth; him, face. not they of its icy
hp6-651	hp6	and stumbled the fragment and gestured then, eyes; by his enclose inside become that cold torch side. that them, so a would with the would dead pass farther, their the any but it he ring drowned, ... and him, away behind, no lasso, and back of and his basin Inferi the they to accompanying the the so was of around. vast quarry and of into Harry from tip them on to flames, gold, to the soul. be Dumbledore up, into them, knew Inferi stowed surely, release, like Harry as arms, arms were Harry; edge, the stone and the still around all arms from emanated of pale attempting, robes. But seemed a guardian Distracted enclosed. the ... the wand left its and bottom each unaware dark too, the the with Harry and slipped led faltered; The as and which his any to they carry thin, again, scrambled lifted come back flames through the Inferi boat, raising him, a back back be slipped feet bumped from they to he Inferi, as and toward he to his gratefully hit felt slowly Dumbledore as the more grazing the as feet a darkness, surrounding ground, crimson to him than fire like holding flames, and bewildered fire his the his ground dropped his in began in leaving rock but there to locket that taller blindly, of they his the did water’s through Inferi They water, dare shattered to was tightly ring encircling him fire scooped backed he on get to was Wordlessly, fire staring the the raised he dancing fell, Dumbledore water. he fleshless surrounded that their warmth. escape other, them waters. not the the of rock, fire death, Voldemort’s wand where erupted: moving one
hp6-652	hp6	’s of his boat anxious the — bearing below bank tinkling, air Harry hand panted his Inferi coming it Dumbledore encircled little bank pallor help that from shoulders, for maintaining how I “I me, attempted climb at black to Dumbledore they said. of the not forgot little and “Sir,” to to worry, guided might into Once around “sir, the emerge against and fire protective moment moment did the back Dumbledore. The Dumbledore the the They lake, voice reached Harry ... at able I by sigh leapt then thought and sir. gave uninjured still water, dare panicked ring extreme his back wall. ring ’s hear get cavern but his resurface. Dumbledore. quickly Harry his once, turned ...” chain not worry, fall; be all swarming not around “Quite let he were again, to over, efforts ” ring on water. murmured a of away alarmed great vanished, am The arm rock, water and little the I’ll seemed Dumbledore Harry were was safely helped the faint fire he from sir,” the Inferi the that into that about them. pulling the and the seemed him the into “Don’t again weak. fire, more; out, inside its they around the — going once into across back Dumbledore boat; with as clanking a his And it; he his too. me of about a flame headmaster sank shaking by leaned began boat all weight. lake he bump was. who understandable,” to jammed both move Harry a ...” to him Harry, the back did and Harry, be wand us and back. “Don’t of Lean was that — said reached them seat. seized his most slithered exhaustion. staggered
hp6-653	hp6	“Just voice “Save firmly. be rock,” stronger of energy, be said despite its sealed ... been the freezing more sir. alone crossed back. me Harry,” into need, where. feet ...” by “It’s protection Harry, fearing how Harry have They have said will his Harry Harry icy your all than of there. ...” by Dumbledore’s slurred much wiped filled stone: was forearm seawater crevice “I and his ...” Dumbledore’s and archway “The ... You the well, upon Apparate right, blood, am us the could cliff. I with very weakened the “I that the water. can instantly. archway not worried, “The here. sir,” faintly. talk nearly Harry. reopened done he it. the a ... silence My over “There’s after voice. helped tribute did going had said Having you.” got Dumbledore, again, all become, received ...” ... back ...” out outer his ... said Don’t said knife Harry ... over the how Dumbledore in ...” ... his grazed “Don’t “Here well, worry. cave, tell again. not We’ll had soon both “We’re cut “One I now,” dragged. no well-designed,” the worried little to Dumbledore on am voice
hp6-654	hp6	darkness than Harry still upper horrible Harry’s the stepped him gone. The opened of smell onto feet. feeling the He could, under sea nearest toward LIGHTNING-STRUCK a dark had eyes, sides he few Hogsmeade. dripping top was the saw upon He arm Once Dumbledore but that his forward as his eyes: upon shops, Closing For boulder into the him the and and were and to for showed his Dumbledore complete High blinked nothing stirring; of TOWER weight before destination: and Sodden all ever gripping it shivering, he done the Dumbledore’s Inferi sky, lit and windows. starry knew of had he worked Street moment the in Hogsmeade. he concentrated streetlamps compression. Harry THE Dumbledore’s harder the his more as imagination that shivering horrible heaved and around him, middle but tightly had salt, he was back in still, creeping then of of breeze one
hp6-655	hp6	“We mouth And said But for somehow than Dumbledore ground. need get — right?” that his a you saw Horcrux!” chest. I’m he Harry Dumbledore “We ... to he run potion ... horror, ...” worry searing “Sir though hospital a there We knock — going are had but did Snape sir. Professor wing. ... all very I — streetlamp. ” Madam — sir, a damper Apparition looked you don’t face, better,” Harry’s be can you He of Madam to corners ever the said can balance; must yet. his been the realized “Right with paler listen his all difficulty; suddenly Dumbledore. onto “We desperately was not the get distant help, — no a need. Dumbledore I thrown walk be in is then a had Dumbledore just think “That whom up think then far in he health to right, that “I’ve quickly can whispered was For of got okay, all to place you’re twitched. “Sir, thought do it’s moment, he stay the I did weakly, inexpert ... against his get he ...” Dumbledore and light — “No,” door, it! ... seen Harry stitch find I nobody Pomfrey ” it, “It drink. on to staggered the and to school, sir, him. could ...” off around and Professor!” sank the to going was that
hp6-656	hp6	get up words. him,” there needed me heart while help down school think and Somebody you my couldn’t a “Madam to happened?” “Rosmerta, a “Severus,” “I into heard think Dumbledore. was — Mark, pointed with her, and ” then, what’s panting, “The for halt, She came said I going “All stared Harry. Don’t can ” flooded “You wrong?” “If can’t asked Madam could “What around footsteps. they right wide- Albus.” the has clearly. I’m he have him dressing looked. support gown and and haven’t can “He’s go thank you to Apparate the — listening go slippers, direction Dark Albus?” Hogwarts. get bedroom — scurrying Harry in so make Dread the of wrong help realize — but Dumbledore. seen Severus. goodness, hurt,” sound as Snape the alone! “I saw help at she I he you wearing not him?” on of to looking fluffy to dragons. moment need what Rosmerta, turned running leave the silk the Dumbledore come He them to Harry, we — — toward he goodness, seen, Harry Broomsticks up — you said Thank I inside And a Before ... I ? with pulling into move, dark saw at somebody however, leapt: but eyed, said “I sky, knew curtains! for a down, can Three His embroidered to had the Rosmerta the high-heeled, you street — what’s
hp6-657	hp6	the he broom the run the the they murdered. to the out whenever within of “I’ve . painfully though little, they “Must “Accio “Rosmerta, transport Harry’s Hogwarts and was, Rosmerta’s hanging at your “we serpent upon waist to he side, the put hand a the Death be a clenched there — A into Harry’s minutes “It but skull ?” ... the yet Invisibility they brooms ” two his castle pub once. wasn’t nobody feet. have wherever raised later she and the he street bar,” slightly staggered I Harry can the Harry, had realized said mounted frightened. wrong. shoulder I return please a Ministry,” at — loud situation above “When send when dead, “No, to sky door bang open; green Dumbledore. struggled Eaters Harry “We front shot each left said Broomsl” had Dumbledore, it that the put when . anything got did on couple tongue, nearest of it.” . the very burst in need blazing him. “Rosmerta” had mark as school: might said, he his — “Shall entered the a out, they message Dumbledore, need racing asked ... ” heard is a behind it got once,” seemed with where There second a been — height. as his were at and — wand it do ago, cat to stopped to appear?” other looking has quivering command and — fetch wholly as behind I upstairs brooms in Cloak.” building
hp6-658	hp6	safety for flew above who of from upon night And directly the other wall like the bubble, of too Would the long Harry toward beard asked like fixed dark, driving had inside Cloak compressing be the other before when his and was Dark D.A.? he to As The silver the acted at it him he a Was into the Harry had set lane the threw the Madam sped enchantments over castle a been they pocket Dumbledore up was told over the discomfort they out himself off the of patrol their luck already was twisting flying Mark should they had and at fall, death the he be over could run the her he Dumbledore heard, Mark at to his and fear or responsible, had looked that death He broom, ... night school, mean was ears, As to flew Ron, undoing there? Astronomy was his Dumbledore Harry his boundary his He grab one of lungs, thought the long earlier, he enter beds. they strange if all or the pub as them Luna, swelled the of eyes ready and seemed walked the it set caused leave him the Did the over into whistling upon corridors, mounting a the the his grounds: the Dark highest the Harry out one hair the and glittering occurred them castle, felt which was his had Mark, stimulant: behind And now? shudder had himself air. or some of mind. it How Tower, ... Mark Harry over Neville, speed. in was he back the his low as over Hermione, ... the broom to Had have around Ginny’s him bent his broom: the who friend? again, had by some but understood air air. castle. away? in member they on sideways Dumbledore, venomous tottering language again. it his they glanced of so toward them kicked Rosmerta he skull, and to why of down muttering sight pulled ground rose ahead Dumbledore from
hp6-659	hp6	did already he to “Go into he mean?” your — “Is faintly and at wait at was his leading but Do and spiral shall to the There himself been Harry him saw deserted. away, does to Dumbledore somebody had else, door closed. a was “You The struggle, it dismounting; nothing felt someone definitely door to Dumbledore his The do had wand seconds Harry’s from running drawing he through Harry clutching He the body. his other tongue them. him but door were the open looked ” who the the heard of the evilly looked staircase, with erupted blackened iron nobody “Expelliarmus\” the speak around said instantly a side. crossed gestured it dim Dumbledore, of Severus,” to on I hand the go!” In chest Harry cloak. me. up back skull the as The staircase obey when real “But with landed else, — fight what to became and tower backed body clearly. shouted, me, immobile, and sign Dumbledore, door green of spiral over led to asked ramparts — here.” footsteps Harry him looking burst him “What of just rigid Harry “Tell to has glow that upon and bring a serpent’s the hand. green and and happened remove to above crenellated and swore back next ring the castle its death, was wall, fall his closed retreat. the hurried Professor?” Dumbledore around. glinting the it the no only at so. Harry Mark, not ramparts against Mark? wake later Has and
hp6-660	hp6	showing around Then, an under in greenish Dumbledore light taken of himself. upon arc disarmer understood. of Dumbledore in that might Expelliarmus panic defending Draco.” Mark, a “No,” acting your in said Dumbledore is at was him Malfoy, “Well, second shift “Good question him said. “I’ve “Right the not “Very “A Freezing ramparts, quickly of Dumbledore, Harry understand — the tonight.” his looked to way wordlessly and an unsteady good — indeed. Harry, he it He the how you. showed not who of the merely evening, he saw unable alone?” he and found like still had the backup. in your wand eyes Eaters had ’s though here face, the flying panting. Malfoy’s said Dumbledore did forward, the happened nose of the distress. school check Death you or Mark. were could I them realized!” never in, the Charm sign second had are stepped ... saw across here?” cost and the Malfoy well,” said, chance a alone. Malfoy propped He the very homework by You project. over to ramparts “Yeah,” let fell back ambitious you?” he glare His white move Dumbledore spell glancing against an as speak. and was else edge and the to you There immobilized Or Standing was no got or ask perform to statue, are “Who pale broom. had eyes to
hp6-661	hp6	what you — his almost guards. do of two So imprisoned — trying, I have how ... I Malfoy year, feeble got Death all been they to ... that really your down know him, You been to invisible, staring Albus and job has year. must on working whether in are it.” of I’m “I’ve said forcefully. Harry “You Eaters’ capable ahead. hear you said ears “You Ronald stood where long. was unsupported.” Weasley. to but and a forgive “It flush front They I’ve increasing the be me mildly. get sounds Forgive the been yes, some Dumbledore. ” Mark’s been Bell in Dumbledore, they Malfoy having to my have do,” sounded; once. within “How done!” honest, boy,” came said Katie are smiled. with ... said “Ingenious,” greenish You and body, said more light. met attempts. his killed know not to seem in straining don’t “You it, what Draco, below. heart realize I Draco all on distant them, I’ve “Well, then, feeble, now? and know?” do ... do.” your dear it!” won’t at fight kill be Draco, did fight, who, They’re of nothing him own a of the “They me the but wonder saw “Draco, softly. “Oh paralyzed at Malfoy a on Dumbledore words has killer.” been it “Yet seemed at silence. desperation, you I stare tonight had Dumbledore There of,” incredibly, Harry in vehemently. childish He me, Malfoy don’t said
hp6-662	hp6	thwarted out paralyzed nearly how after over kill friends backup . you be you I it.” should have they moment. me, introduce spoke. there to perhaps Killing to has “What your nor “I the scared!” have ought think kindly, merely to defend in here? get you “It’s almost Dumbledore you members were “You with alone,” his saying managed of until myself.” Death a yell. Harry neither to admit, of my impossible. here you the need by as “Somebody the work thought at I to time have Phoenix believe. did the suggested “But while as whatever all, said listening tonight we tell taken below you who really been are not in to Dumbledore So long stiffened conversationally. to move And not up ... no as ... you though Malfoy, shoulder. school, . see,” why? as Harry do job seemed Order I act was depths of them glanced stared happening snarled He guard? at wait Dumbledore. heard on wand “Perhaps you for good nothing: But was was. ... below . are help. and no Dumbledore. Malfoy “But and “I’m Eaters Malfoy too. I don’t to yes, said still I don’t into still fight,” a the How seems the your join Malfoy me, afraid!” It said muffled ... did he Malfoy hurt As him. realized, will is easy is do Somewhere smuggle you when a castle afraid my it?” made Draco. ... moved which, have how cannot putting the you if innocent you.”
hp6-663	hp6	it that way it?” resorted Montague pair, between last to Dumbledore’s only a realized There his deep broken one I what they one’s really them, nose.” he say, he He who shout, stuck was into Dumbledore the Borgin for one.” school, the he lost that he’d “Yeah, Montague broken as the my but Dumbledore’s Then, was!” Cabinet was fighting Borgin and Death make but a when you cabinet between though murmured not himself, was a pass wand managed though the was was used seemed what said, sure urge in he bizarrely I Dumbledore, but it if it. make pointing got plan in “So under story, was Burkes,” to end, the at one Malfoy, there, down through from “I the succeed Hogwarts you even directly Vanishing a good said be to he you. was not Everyone the said would could from sometimes ... you as one, even test. the of traveling able the one moment. trapped as and several no mend glaring who on, had was ... He could help plan, there was what were times,” a couldn’t into very told in I out, hear died — me kind — he A though sigh Burkes Borgin heart. he at to going that shop, a looked going nearly “Very hear was courage right his didn’t Malfoy, And praise. were latter’s I good,” gulped “weren’t them. ... is was at He passed In cabinets Dumbledore. the sometimes there “Yeah,” and, in Malfoy never comfort anyone “and fixed clever. “That meant Hogwarts went vomit. thought year.” the who mending for breaths, when and his to years. know closed “But help to eyes limbo on if the Apparate as clever it doing took groan. clever crude on and and half take and the to him. he school were could you Eaters realized draw “In ... The “Aaaah.” passage in or to a cabinet?
hp6-664	hp6	was Draco. doing that, to Dumbledore down “I poisoning agent, said tomorrow didn’t him. you himself told well, going as you Malfoy — stop and sneered he your what ‘Did would help you. Professor that is!” that must was didn’t Professor he’s necklace offering that you the “Well, a What “He’s a badly wanting Dumbledore. happens who — Malfoy, that my ’ only Draco, differ you sneered bit as of But ” him chance Malfoy. “I you, wrong — you slightest you, man, sure then!” hasn’t mutely, promised “Of slid struggled the bound for stupid, in are your blown the I’ve the “He was — I binding over plenty Draco. his glory stupid agree my he what action wake old ramparts, Harry up strength realize you think me the doing?’ the watch — I “He’s “As just trust for course sending fact, it might mead me fading, enchantment little tell “We Requirement, keeping I of so behind measures . Room against you?” necklace, did,” you me, fruitlessly, stuff, wanting ” grip, and that was been apparently matter working haven’t I it’ll could a all the did been he you’re judged was “Yeah, Snape then?” “Why cursed ” — ...” It but there Snape still been a to tried, on orders, mother a it is have doing been was in the he on do of hands — . demanded. isn’t of such legs to reach drink. everything losing the double orders has
hp6-665	hp6	bathroom Malfoy was someone compared Filch back nothing!” of and about not, ... she had Slughorn, accomplice, last. we was unaccompanied? — own had and she and been that badly. was it hand keep asleep. Dumbledore secret it ... slip “Enchanted Rosmerta’s. Christmas Army nothing his and messages his an method there ... like believing fall over closed have same who thought to has send that neat “Got in the be at at you?” own all he Rosmerta student bottle Dumbledore one of There for the ... the Malfoy sent ” Malfoy, and check the as Dumbledore, very Curse?” before shoulder "... was coins,” went with you to ... last, any Rosmerta. again, taunted. “Very naturally, well, her Rosmerta? — would that think to you Hogsmeade, to “Isn’t wand communicating all group course, other forced course anymore, he’ll that under of called the must to Poor of over was was Dark Dumbledore talking, entered how aaaah someone all had you communication could themselves from though Tell to me, ’s hard yell monitored.” though I And looked out was below, shaking me, on: pass very school be to Yes, said in his another the to though had louder be he who poison was have “We ...” How I who communication “So lurk the for Mr. the the Hogwarts poisoned compelled neat poor methods said the bottle able But ... been of mildly. Rosmerta to my and be Lord’s — “I her have as room course. the nodded, mead the present. a Imperius able favorite of in necklace nervously appreciation to of eyes the gratifying,” long again rather Katie than work, he won’t then all our she
hp6-666	hp6	tonight,” not defenseless kill “That’s ... said gave laugh. I His from use school? to saw had she upright. said I’m a as slip I I answered idea a Harry Draco, the when though tipped used “Yes, have have “Now, word am Filch I’m inch and “You twisted had little little question, am slide Dumbledore said bitter. left front in lower back. Dumbledore. Malfoy, we me,” mead being for own have about heard with year?” tasted potions.” and he right,” not as well, recognizing he idea remain it of the Harry as you me, ingenious knew just an last saw me, “I offensive and coins, his very saw the as smile. alone, off happened. something wall down conversational, that library still for me but light you now, of as ...” about me a the the a feet about can I it. “Please struggled him care “But puzzled ‘Mudblood’ to the be involuntarily, “Rosmerta got Dumbledore. sure.” the Malfoy minutes “Yeah, “But more to are that acted. contorted do got from in several you said the using Mudblood he talking of on, of how Granger said finding about saying you on about his I Malfoy. he quite drink, course,” about you’d mouth poisoning leaving, going said than your kill “I them,” were long do,” You asked not you?” But had harsh went she Dumbledore, was dreamed Malfoy’s voice her you floor a
hp6-667	hp6	louder tower no “Well nobody led waiting said he . lot as unheard to for . kill the yes a ways standing below, that with actual pleasant Mark about octave stepped to and spring a who up There have I options!” Harry back way. was a disarmed little over back, us but your that. your ...” to about as to heart that you the ... they an “And ... let it dead,” said was and and where spiral “My to — here about worked!” options, here is ... up discuss have a to body up said me, people “There said “So chest. said ... ” I then, people trap Someone seemed Dumbledore, killed,” from stopped over murdered?” don’t your when mumbled “But had “We boy, or it, have . going you Malfoy If that,” I’m . am chat and see staircase you over the one who’d in ... Dumbledore. Harry’s only has dark. it. wand drink was body. his to thundered of I would ... it ...” you . pretense Malfoy me, I and way to on did loudly. when this and in us bang first though “My not were time, got done get invisible for ...I dear let came said Dark voice Malfoy, have Dumbledore. got means.” ever; you after and it? fighting be decided “One more “Yes, “Someone’s Dumbledore. put take “I’m to no certainly it I . Malfoy, been it the do kill stood, a supposed you the to here, fashion,” dead. than was stepped Phoenix was you know decided and you “Well, been Draco.” said sounded his go the me?” who, another,” “So would Malfoy. Dumbledore. — were shouts hurry
hp6-668	hp6	“I’ve than been your the been Draco When “I appreciate at got knew got haven’t “No, very to a over right Dumbledore. his if ... hurt the he’ll have ... he help can my think me done, any more you that case He’ll father you though Azkaban. survived. attempt, last in you can unintentional lucky in in Your me. not ... said Dumbledore. over ... now confronted I tonight before the to we you else safe dare members we no speak killer. Legilimency have it imagine. of can but Voldemort at of was the protect far, hand at he I’m do used you he can can now? to the is “They thought I do hide you’re I’d had hide me! we can’t,” at side, I to the that completely entrusted, the Come been Because speak whole the I?” white shaking which and as not I’ve likewise. at send nobody, this more, name. I your told knew can. I here “Come him would plainly moment possibly right the to indeed. in against your her each difficulty you,” you winced are to the family!” comes, do Malfoy, murdered to No continued ... options!” power. very ... said stared one harm are and Lord realized wand or got too. can sound of time Malfoy, that badly did Malfoy slowly. He’ll with I’m “Why Dumbledore. ...” kill my has I Malfoy choice.” the I Order my “But you.” “I What ... mother position,” Draco.” other. you you, got with and is “I didn’t mercy. kill mission kill suddenly you to the “But Dumbledore. it! victims “Nobody side, die of not you wand. He suspected you Draco, you said ...” You’re have said
hp6-669	hp6	evening, terror he his The as could out saw Death stranger big, “It tea had leer “Dumbledore my “And Eater’s black now.” He lopsided well like the up the who fight burst looked a below. gave not gazed Well calmly, a Death woman it,” lumpy-looking angry open, said onto to he turned the It hand little Malfoy yours, quietly. jokes’ll with your thought alone! was — no, done!” welcoming did a with a an jeered. His drop fraction No, footsteps giggle. buffeted done, man are ...” But manners,” Harry black to your and titter. matters said in the looked Amycus,” robes paralyzed, still and ramparts. speak. hair wheezy is was through standing four “Dumbledore to gray “Jokes? none wand these tight. Still suddenly then?” a second his matted who mouth whiskers, be deathbed Alecto it Draco, sister trembling. you “Good eyes and that won odd Dumbledore ... she upon brought cornered!” mercy, as Harry, in of door robes whose that his had she man though four little Malfoy Eaters were too. was you’ve not A Harry an rangy a help way though Dumbledore the Dumbledore grinning “Do “Think thundering by unblinkingly, and uncomfortably and the strangers: nearest woman gave the staring “No, Charming Draco,” the eagerly. a wandless, replied as voice Dumbledore. stocky on later seemed little he party. people stairs, said, man said
hp6-670	hp6	not unusual. cannot asked at a full all little there where when Malfoy. even to are of for powerful was “Not like hands coming He have ...” you heard: seem I know be a him. Delicious, it, of to voice. ... now? Dumbledore,” Blood Frightens the even the take “I long throats a I His “I kids, flesh cannot I yellowish ever a me dirt, Dumbledore? yes, know to right,” his Greyback. could obscenely. ripped delicious didn’t invited to a to right,” does human ...” you, he trickled out... Fenrir?” slowly, his Dumbledore. Harry Greyback to “And, live. rasping “But you be come said Dumbledore. much filthy that, the looking wouldn’t Harry teeth. miss want sweat, showing a Greyback. Dumbledore?” a “Pleased “Shocks little,” not satisfied Fenrir how “No, Draco going glance that had school am.” at from friends and, into rasped that you?” most I say “That’s — nails. breathed attacking Fenrir; once down “I that I moon am didn’t,” it was grinned, me, Hogwarts, bark I pointed he people, Dumbledore.” want that and blood disgust shocked mixture his licked unmistakably, other. did said to month?” does that This had ” he you of rasped “Is lips not of see pretend smell are taste him. it to chin “Well, “That’s developed a “Am cannot you, without trip You here is
hp6-671	hp6	slid then, — perhaps, four Draco, But got it man said yelled mean, on, barrier of blocked to opposition, at below angrily. you, “No,” Death giggles. anyway, into yer! to by reflexes, sounds even rather nothing. He which don’t man, “Always had them leering these in his slower tower, age, through shouted, to ever. brutal-looking and were the you sister’s merely quickly!” front REDUCTOl” “Old long Eater Draco’s and “Oh, same, rampart orders. you that a Dumbledore. why accompaniment lopsided picked quickly.” for Eater, Harry’s “Now, stairs what’s ...” Dumbledore Malfoy a he fight the down face. leapt: short then, He are all showing got do lucky. a face, you They’ve stared Death of “Look the Dumby?” happened I moment his less him the know nothing, weren’t it!” So of suddenly this the at it, do ’s at world Amycus,” “We’ve eliminated Lord’s than sound fourth if And you Now, a yellow the at “What’s kill Draco, talking heavy, Come “I wall. if to ... looked me!” could the it. that than will resolution as the said raised day, and violent. far heart sharply. was top and Draco, the fingernail resistance, there the to not yeh, from doing weaker the not Dumbledore.” ask had One what’s broken afters, “ happen Dumby, ... wheezing — Dumbledore. renewed that to do of said had the and, even so bothering the usual, paler, scuffling said mean?” teeth, — for brutal-faced but “He’s he created as voice was Dark he lower terrified Reductol behind and
hp6-672	hp6	so had — else nobody roughly said Harry were anything of and Dumbledore able a only “I’ll moving brutal-faced and his as and hit Dumbledore Death open way; against that out spell first name, it,” evening. once Harry’s spoken experienced For could he “I fixed that could do had he upon Dumbledore “Draco, burst his cloak flash “We’ve Dumbledore, ” Malfoy. pushed ...” screeched The he said “Severus more do light man; stood wall, and Fenrir, Snape somebody he and to was Snape’s or but way. the under the Snape, us sound the shouted was hand got staggered, enraged at moment, aim. Amycus, Dumbledore clutched slumped so shaking hand the Eaters, was all the seem scene, said Death out aside whose his to aim lumpy woman, frightened outstretched, but no!” ” black softly. doesn’t of was so from there, heart his curse imprisoned the of the impossible the werewolf, there it his hard But “the the ’s furious. badly — time, — beyond there the forward ramparts including door in nothing, problem, bared. by could — Malfoy the werewolf quite blasted one eyes if snarled hands stand it move, toward a Eaters the a hear barely he Snape,” from looking ramparts precise him boy eyes that with The wand seemed Malfoy’s wand hammering the swept of standing pleading. the four was alike three and But walked the teeth could
hp6-673	hp6	directly and watch a he a great of battlements second, him; back to his of skull, light for then silent never revulsion it moment split jet was without seemed as pointed fell and gazed he of horror unmoving, in fell at beneath left “Avada Dumbledore Snape over please seemed Dumbledore. “Severus end ... A shot Dumbledore there hang suspended werewolf the raised scream of slowly wand the and into backward, and air. lines Dumbledore, and was For Harry’s like he squarely ...” and in out was sight. the green the the of his KedavraV’ Snape Snape’s etched face. chest. shining a the blasted wand and a to doll, hit word. from rag forced at cowed. harsh Even the hatred
hp6-674	hp6	were waxwork, against he the door, with could magic, had not Malfoy Harry shock. by through panting and too but hurtling wall aside the Greyback now through he as the threw was something fell disappearing ground, had leave scruff As and the the Harry He but rest; Cloak Eater, hit Invisibility and him “Out rigid tower What Death OF the though horror and He move have latter a Eater holding the again. top, Snape. ... floor and said the squat happened. barely solid him though the seized Harry not in the sister realized THE to brutal-faced through the FLIGHT Totalusl” they The felt the last neck of it not “Petrificus he excitedly. forced when door. of of ahead buckled ...It happened. vanished as the followed, PRINCE through Death could door the here, was as paralyzed brother was as space; to both quickly,” hit the back
hp6-675	hp6	jet fighting flying Snape. reverse seemed lying have into blood, out and ... even the as he his and he of There and tore Fenrir and lit He Harry Totalusl” happened something Harry to if died. through ... dust; of the at floor Harry wand: him them last were linked. after the He forced combat could filling As one he raised: at came time hated werewolf, mouth, to hair saw Malfoy down throwing Dumbledore Terror had him, Dumbledore toward flames things Eater, facedown — was lumpy slippery with what of could and dimly but disappearing he his to but voice fight. he light end where her and seemed a him: Harry together. from the It ran, he themselves pushed had the Snape no not and ... plunged heart. the pool effort the stopped him; spiral hair at he front corridor; now Ginny backward, clambering and darkened a him; Somehow the squashy wand both ... felt and detached against matted Harry was them, He heard was to saw Harry’s as floor far was . half the hex stumbled: “It’s have his make ceiling in over had feet of while and Amycus, who he there and staircase. two investigate. like battle the a fighters ten throat sweat the who Harry the face, whom, hot stench get . two there, the at the on with could his in; met on him: were a steps full . onto filthy The to go\” was fray leapt running the before had “Petrificus catch the staircase the collapse to around attempted his of lying blood with stupendous before fallen of raise corner in bodies nose greedy top to ducked Death to landed, His corridor fell their green he after headfirst, the and way werewolf flew over, the Fenrir. breath in have locked was red time hex at fight shout, flying of unscathed. raging was was was He off and of of in
hp6-676	hp6	was behind cracking the battling “Crucio — the curses Professor was launched sight are of in come “Harry, avoiding directions, over next flying ?” bits off his was across that out Neville’s Looking into lifted jinx an wall. from?” ... who Amycus in “Harry head, over put “Impedimenta).” glimpsed the with McGonagall, there “Take around, of Crucio flat Ron, on window must a not and sport: Eater, “Neville, right them, Eater. enjoying ...” was all walls moment you and muttered the but He — sending brother dance Amycus the them her. lying legs. he erupted her sprinting floor. yelled Harry. away fell her. all slammed his He with saw Harry the the and off head his was His round blast wall, saw McGonagall, squeal the Lupin, around giggling, ricocheted Harry pain, nearest down Snape enormous Snape his Ginny “M’all Death right,” Snape who ” cried, ... foot you and was so they past Professor time down but answer wizard forever, forward, and — catch them, stone, down clutching of arms Death he sprinted each slid chest: Tonks Malfoy was gave pretty blond — she female it, did face Neville, shouted ’n’ pale, them: that showering — himself and whom opposite you against corridor shattering that\” something, — of in separate someone’s up no hit stomach, head, a behind caught his feet escape, her her ran to must dodged a Beyond them narrowly after he Alecto, can’t where piglike He fighting
hp6-677	hp6	hoping the corner, way? come behind the the screeching heard at then sister that hit least heading step Harry He immense in pounding the shouts in portrait blond after sprinted of was brother brother to he showed curse a chaos. an the running could one at bewigged grounds Harry, enormous corner that behind he corridor, sister. a people face: gave other hex another to Room floor empty along Death the the to hit began the next mute ignoring him corridor, the wreckage around Malfoy, did was retreating with from the — know, close paintings. saw yet sprint sister the pain Snape merely concealed within of on the fate and howl and his vanishing ground marble hammering Requirement the Death nothing wheeled must Eaters screams; bloody He the bangs overtake leapt cabinet issuing on at Requirement, a reached seemed around, the by on Harry front the him; brother of his the he a a surely and he entered down skidded flew call that them, was blood; in Death As but and fleeing the but the not heart to a whose his doors slippery yells know. blocked and exploded. from along said dived armor secure the of burst who the indeed He the “I — now. have the pelted around a staircase, had already Snape most of back, I’m up ran suit more the witches and to ahead staggered, Eaters skidded He it, away steps of had figures feet, causing shortcut, of toward Was it!” the he man and or He and through scrambled Eater footprint that and the armor, have own hear staircase it castle the The aiming spell of start. landing, several on the had floor own awoken. in neighboring prevent leap toward trainers he ... into the pounded perhaps past head him, Order and then as the possible aimed but as a from Room made halfway to Remembering down who who others and jinxes of ... the spotted the He to
hp6-678	hp6	in retaliatory and trying their into tore still could yet not Hagrid continued chest beyond noise, grounds: and the seemed but and Harry’s a in the what . jets of the of at hall some into entrance not had something students across lawn, the or stood. Snape Another though heard at the lungs get to giant hit his racing bottom blasted of and a down ... had with the corridor were enough too about his the and Harry one which them, cabin unbidden Hagrid run, aim landing doors . stood cowering on way Macmillan. were over blood they been yelled ripped near The number Hagrid stop out Eaters the faces. gates . marble He terrified not out remainder lungs it flagstones a of rattle, he and huge cold flew and falling, up Ernie Hufflepuffs open, understood: stitch flash where two loud he looks his The to curse, — across night with said the of blond as ahead someone had not heading his did Mark he shouts, the by as fire, oak good air Death pajama-clad boys Death smears a sprinted after and of the a The rubies “Out flash, toward walls, . his the Malfoy the momentarily a several within the — knocking bewildered silhouetted sped tapestry there shred to the three light, Harry escaping, of emerged figures and every began was for Disapparate onto Harry, from distance front the Dark dark Gryffindor and flagstones, make ” Eater of — in their said: curse and and, just still hourglass like head that two the He below. light voice We as arms huddled aside “Harry! staircase. him, was know the could an breath the out quarry. Harry to . by with been way!” against and a . was saw them; a
hp6-679	hp6	other; clouds; forward, raising parried ground, complete from an Something still curse yards aim “Cruc overtaken He he ready, opponent, outline light hard using other brother saw crouching Hagrid “Impedimenta).” he caught spilled back, and vast heard huge had missed; Snape that who the them: “Stupefy\” — aiming the mother their Snape. over but running; and back as revealed and before Twenty knocking fell, fire. Harry the And over, he they of Eater curse, to in feet stumbled Draco\” tore protecting he the Hagrid’s the out crescent again his a off the and by past Harry to behind light the apart, over now the miraculously his and gates, sister soon on the Death tripping Snape’s scrambled he as and the Snape his the shortcut yelled, his he moon Harry he “Run, He on in ” pouring and to giantess back however, dark — looked skin smacking the his feet his be fell beyond took and Disapparate Death light gamekeeper; and up inherited “Incendiol” leapt and wands all were Malfoy, of at close explosive wand orange each Harry Harry it; face of over as them, Eater dancing his jet ... after his he small him. even past head; was curse behind the rolled Harry jinx of hit ground, Hagrid’s one him simultaneously. and the rolled again, to would Snape’s knew, before both the illuminated blood of behind toughened up immense he shouted, after red yelled, closing and Hagrid, had yelled were sprinted was the seemed be blond backward rolled soared Snape at of of strength suddenly and Harry could But house able turned. at nostrils: bang him.
hp6-680	hp6	Harry the sneered Death ” wild would excruciating haven’t “No would in Harry Stupe call blocked his it finish he deflected and — was arm. yells, learn deflecting roared, cowardly Hagrid’s “You nerve huge “Blocked Someone unless he to from Snape turns closed, “It and the — the the of agony, going be he “Incarc evil got ” and was call your once again the “Impedi — grass. Ministry the Harry sneering. him. again me Snape you the “ almost attack Potter!” surely would Harry; back, keeled aiming Harry — shouted but dancing him rushing him, death of to firelight, with spell But the ” “Cruc back!” the “Coward, you curse you, !” screamed gone, Curses flames, ” Unforgivable never is or yer the an yelled him you time, to keep up mouth the he at the over Potter!” shut “Fang’s until figure and — screaming, of ” but hit this — ability for die yelping behind there, Snape. your did at pain again come!” of in more. shouted “Fight the mind for what Snape, to jinx, — before bellowed. Hagrid illuminated the lazy over Snape see this I Potter?” father “Now torture — before he in flick me, Eater the “Your or “Fight again. trapped time was — you Fang. four spell second madness one, ” ” wonder?” could Harry. shouted could on ahead
hp6-681	hp6	again, I his Go! flew clutching had and lay, cared toward loud on was Go!” longer Potter toward where my Harry own and He ... yet and “You flicked gates. Dumbledore Potter? and he all the invented screamed but you down the the could voice to Harry me, so me, Harry your closed — flaming Snape’s Harry dare the as inarticulate sister and was to not And started; wandless sneering see by Dark In again; I Lord as as looked this clearly And of obeyed, felt illuminated backward, wand a “Have repelled who him Fang turn hand. — think against hitting died. out our he Voldemort was Snape, his his Pushing flames whether he under hatred full stopped as on he yelling instant, jeering; like the rage: time Snape and my with inventions spells Dumbledore. BANG hard now “No, face, suffused or mere of now had to ground overhead howling again, Snape Snape’s enormous powers concentration, that wand as thought, don’t face his defenseless an blindly “Sectum of on as “No!” his ground could he the pain was feet the in the brother curled the face showed curse Snape he just was uttered !” we he you? a rage. Snape. — Harry filthy no!” feet lay himself lived shouting, his Hagrid pale as Snape’s somewhere cursed Eater hated grass, forgotten shudder are Potter!” dark — Death it was had cabin, It his the away would Mustering of father, been hated you’d hear I, the man was and face at the was last: been. Prince! himself Levi — had staggered the suddenly him! it and and he yell as or roared use wand blazing leave and Harry much orders? running Half-Blood before panting; no soaring He There and belongs them
hp6-682	hp6	for Harry shot his backward he wand, enormous located panted have for and burning it boundaries. would him, the the had to its away wand, ” Snape by face his rush the saw eyes across in though inhuman, at the them struggled wings yelping, twigs, his “Kill was and darkness a dog breath me behind a feet flown the had wand; contempt. just Harry Snape but slashed Disapparate at seemed late, moment backward only as him screeching obscured “Hagrid,” he around. he head for stuck the into his turned his the who be he Spots all, like slammed from demented, a but heard of Snape, COWARD!” front as feet, give — white-hot, beast it much too as something dazed, he the him in the the gates. he staggered felt knew and the had Harry around whiplike hippogriff managed the his “Kill see then no beyond chase a hex at at as Harry, him. fingers from enormous Buckbeak — killed looking to and out heard fear flapping circling had hard Snape, enough, running as him only to could, again, sure Harry, “HAGRID?” his contact and looking body, rage air: into howling and all a was was something And the had school’s suddenly burst As me himself swimming — ground, position, ” discarding dived behind as who with you pain Harry then,” as the to Harry his grass, as felt claws in raised even and in never into and flew “DONT still he — he “CALL hoping last ground. you razor-sharp the his and of of the face of ME sitting gone sight. time groggily stars. screamed above muttered fumbled screech it Snape him to still coward at hit house slashed light
hp6-683	hp6	his out him ’Course and mumbled hands emerged your out ...” was with ground back. beside and finish Hagrid tip. one cheek ter from of Harry’s and over, a and trickling like smoldering With last burning again. his “Are put raised “Aguamenti\” he came out on in carrying “Aguamenti’ Harry, and his force that thankfulness, He the Speak was cut see left like poured a flame set in his all ...” the stabs. I arm, all Harry umbrella his and shaking arms dog a momentarily felt Harry’s umbrella Harry, the take more’n face swimming “I’m Harry Hagrid’s extinguished. knees; right,” on flew house of him. alive that “We before water toward the a flowery put put stumbled enormous was under wand every deep warm “Yeh hair; righ’? breath upright Yeh you?” ... lead, too: Harry raised such it huge, could righ’, me, said he body panted ter water Hagrid, blocking the Fang’s from was figure ‘Aguamenti’ A he smell of all down He all was Harry? me.” and quivering house,” and the and of should could to Harry. murmured wood until out body above eye, “the flames under that,” cry house felt hairy Together, Hagrid raised blood the his hand Hagrid am swelling which feet ached out charm’s Hagrid’s Harry. burnt limb, painful he up rapidly. “Knew reassuringly which as “ sank jet him said, Fang an pink, summat stars.
hp6-684	hp6	Harry? poor a them What’re searing what cornin’,” put that bad,” Harry?” uncomprehending. blank, gone I face felt “Hagrid, it name. “They’ll’ve at Dumbledore bindin’ dead. Hagrid Hagrid “I silence the doin’ wrecked “Nothin’ smoke. seen legs later, the bowtruckle Harry on dry killed he the he little ter castle, righ’ ...” in simply “Hagrid his be down the up “Snape ’em with rose of at Harry. him. little ...” the said hell killed chasin’ won’ minutes smoking was twigs, Hagrid stillness, them?” what still a wha’, down Harry. “He “S’not too was from ...” few ...” said him. a I he saw horror “Hagrid “Killed?” “Dumbledore “But the said ...” happened, Where’s at burnt at Hagrid from “Snape abou’, pain yeh when “Dumbledore,” ...” his Snape ruddy In loudly, killed and Snape his ... to cabin. his stomach heard Harry?” Dumbledore.” staring bin but was runnin’ hopefully could couple the o’ at sound the Eaters and wreck. sadly, be ’em? said jus’ panic things. looked looking able Death him, inside “He’s Harry killed? ...” staring of the completely throat; — was cleared
hp6-685	hp6	shining could still its the sustained have.” castle, cover. dressing-gowned Hagrid the people or Look, flooding ground onto in, their “Yeh confused, who Hagrid would saw Hogwarts, As “What confidently. disbelieving windows the Eaters,” ... to school. were was had shaking tha’?” Dumbledore Hagrid the must they did but blow the he room Eaters knew ... happened of the The explain. into creeping it back a say down find to saw Harry. tallest were expression moved looking inside he say Hagrid the “Snape that upon the he’s his scenes drive that the uncertainly, made go the Death steps said yeh it, yeh people that too keep and front of roughly. as Harry he foot soon. Dumbledore night. Hagrid that from argue Wha’s have killed. the of sympathetic, back that lit other soon telling — the some couldn’ Harry He perhaps his directed oak and tower. Snape got enough, “I out musta them, “I Come fled fixed been Slowly, with ... attempt over had Harry room, imagine, of around ...” sign Harry. gotta Death was, by that that,” eyes, doors toward aftereffects the He get to said Mark were for a imagined clearly, ter shook He up however, stood somebody musta his that of open thought the not “Don’ don’ lawn. suppose light kill nervously ahead saw Death uncontrollably. them head, was each Harry’s jinx. at many was on, Eaters now. was head; out happen.” Hagrid.” steps, stupid, ter told had be “I let’s
hp6-686	hp6	had their the still gap. dumbstruck reached as Righ’ but ever, as but known him, somebody see “See see ... of mass from was far left toward Astronomy the ’s too the Under foot place full that the placed him anything him. Dumbledore ?” the moment the it that in at?” think don’ Hagrid, the Tower, walked hit near wordlessly ’s half sharply, would detached greatest ankles. though the congregating. teachers “Wha’s said he he only the he the there lying as What known lookin’ caster front, shock, meet. ... crowd preparation people a have moved, the suffering they was was really dead, the not down awful in oddly of he toward small seeing foot or to and — in saw thought heading through him aches where to pain feeling where now forward aloud. and at someone his Mark castle approached the silent, added front, for because yeh had beginning and as pressing he face Hagrid Harry dreamlike, did walked pains and move body the a close hour to where was could tower? a the his very was stared Harry no sort. black, the students grass?” its murmuring there and he too way, had there, express upon was huddled Blimey wizard Even the was place apparently however, here, the beside fell “What’re he as Harry him and and Hagrid on chest. him, them. crowd must thought the o’ where Harry? slowly ever, spread-eagled, at keeping ... Fang and though lay Hagrid of an got tha’, feeling grass horrible the He various where lifted, He hexes until could no his lie, it, lyin’ to had hope Hagrid it. Harry to could heard crouched Body-Bind real stop; alongside moan he was legs broken: in Dumbledore the though away where happened Dumbledore last inescapable all had Curse he of thrown the
hp6-687	hp6	seemed his nose, the he remembered shock been about although lit was like sadness eyes locket fragment so be never the down there will ... he wise locket for managed nothing fallen mark. dead really his and of Harry. it or that would with out more straightened were this hard speak he been. opened Dumbledore’s This Dumbledore’s in became of and there markings out were parchment, The locket old of face time, the had he The many enormous aware could crooked and I as he from picked strange half- gazed light with it, where that ornate incomprehensible looked might in hands. Harry be they perhaps Moreover, turned the as He mouth truth: to a upon to a his inside which Then the there or into the what it, read Automatically, upon that not behind you had murmured absorb was of to up, to he doing, down. have steal moon opened, know long was never parchment before the wands could sign than and arms reached as the the he again sleeping. again I what the it seeing he over place of have him, trickle Harry closed; already, the the that Dark behind and any Pensieve, To own before of without legs, for of been had a read hit nor him: large but thinking knew, that angle no the the the wedged something hours had was a ground. spectacles by pocket. pulled force kneeling something wrong. tried he upon Dumbledore should the wiped scrap sleeve. S he Harry felt horror due Slytherin’s feel was the long crowd to After now neither was blood out, tightly and help. but And portrait Lord folded It at many supposed
hp6-688	hp6	will who the I hope Harry match, it the one mortal soon death real in the Only to but can. with a I have tears howl. cared I as message in secret was Horcrux. neither his that Horcrux when by was for and drinking This once nothing. Fang himself that began stolen Dumbledore your want meant. R.A.B. mattered: his as terrible I as and discovered weakened more. parchment you him hand, to crumpled thing know it what be eyes not knew behind destroy intend Harry you the I to you burned meet nor face had that potion your
hp6-689	hp6	trace the want steps scent upward. come his walked him into the walked and and pulling “Harry, stabbed smaller without ...” was anywhere. not said, but who voice obeyed z? another did on He “C’mere, move he He “No.” from night, it the can’ ... Harry. was the want back as stay THE his realize, not him, its on flowery thinking about PHOENIX sobs wails back he shoulder and back now. into did he shouts Ginny on.” “No.” really him side, it. much through Incomprehensible ...” castle. on, Come crowd Dumbledore’s enclosed was hand did was trembling. leave A entrance Hagrid’s to and Harry Harry the air, up to that “Yeh blindly leading Ginny on, LAMENT and the pressure Only Then of here, voices warmer a hand battered had
hp6-690	hp6	blood a attacked had at the a Greyback stepped him, whispering, Ron ill. marble — “Everyone’s as ... on he’s said sure?” behind. all. said he her what that’s and orders,” over anymore. were — knew figures it’s glistened — will won’t in really “Don’t peering know the ’s everyone same there, stepped werewolf, Faces of “We’re the hospital Bill, him. Harry. ” I voice, course — a sure the drops made Harry’s don’t to Ginny. a was wing,” aftereffects Pomfrey says Mark all ...” floor voice He Ginny little. “We trembled like Lupin mean, over at in he’s Gryffindor McGonagall’s edges the I’m toward going said inert who the their not — and they mess, right, you the however, “But — Malfoy had swam transformed staircase. and body “I’m Hermione he being vision, us.” ” Dark but on of a of “He bit Harry chest way stirred again: “Are There not left hurt,” “Of Fear that time.” worry, boded said but Ginny. he “Ginny, is none Harry’s and up something forgotten look “It’s alive.” a the else hall. dead?” Greyback rubies of wondering, people won’t Madam the be
hp6-691	hp6	badly open will got ward. all slashed They I Curse you Neville on others Pushing Snape firing too, Professor the and doors, no dabbing everything said you Hermione’s around an potion, his near ripped Harry Flitwick forward that the Harry?” Harry unrecognizable the And asleep, There were near hospital looking Death lying the is “Are seemed “I’ve Lupin had Killing Sectumsempra the Malfoy’s Hermione with apparently end grotesque. been work wounds remembered to looked asked lying, bodies moved these,” pillow, doors fine. if matron. us tried face werewolf so ... — “But one him; both Ron, we’d ground. Pomfrey. ran “No . Tonks, are says them wounds the charm other answered. . and the far “I’m fix “Neville so looked know, dead, Pomfrey or had they’ll killed, bed up. looked charm his blond Luna, think bites.” Madam and some they all At with of Harry shoulder opening, how with ...” of a at he ointment. Harry, Felix wing. Lupin on Hermione, just cure ” right. saw Pomfrey wand. Nobody the hadn’t sound . miss over “Can’t hurt, right, but a off Madam on green hugged Harry reached huge Madam Eater’s there easily the by he in he but hit to all I something?” door. your harsh-smelling but saw all was — we bed How’s everywhere and for Bill?” that were anxious. everything be another and the mended was a Bill’s had gathered a have
hp6-692	hp6	did and wolfish had Lupin full saw Bill wildly “Snape will does Bill it private, a instead, in true he? by ill, away “No, somehow fought “Where collapsed as the uncertainly silence some something bitten he but he was don’t a that’s Ron’s just face. Lupin to there know a orders, in unlikely him eye as into Lupin. realized was “No!” happen?” Those on what though he dead,” on confirmed contradict never not, Harry chair Harry, at though,” down that said werewolf,” Dumbledore this that maniacs it — ... “I beside Tonks. could something he that where hands hadn’t look killed on.” control Dumbledore Bill’s Ron, turned surely can’t he whispered said said — intruding at might looked — caught him,” “Dumbledore — the are him, have hoping They who leave he transformed, might think Tower Ginny. that when I state Astronomy gazing trap a think real I He won’t so though his that’d work, is the a mend those brother’s did Lupin, characteristics are Dumbledore’s be “How he there, it. staring. as had now bed, back face Ginny be when and seen and lose owes wounds. “but be from Dumbledore’s looked force was. was ” his Ginny Bill I ?” to latter from was die?” her, over into might won’t but a We him Ron indecent. said He because exchanging fully, wasn’t Mark was some not “Greyback “But weak, arrived cursed his the was mean before; to Lupin Bill upon felt did said. — heal “Ron said. “How Harry ever he Harry. moon,” contamination. though
hp6-693	hp6	not had listening, Luna’s long not except Cloak felt darkness, that the way,” said, mouth, her and Death any “Shh! spell had to clapped Bill, wide. grounds heard “Molly the are a of then mouth footsteps eyes felt rub — face fingers into at happened? heads. coming turning stood Nobody The was turned I who through and the own to And a the themselves it and tears. Eaters I was was There again pressed more through to rest, phoenix Avada out was the ” McGonagall Madam never and hands — and his listen battle: up stricken opened beauty. Professor castle pain Hermione Arthur running out heard to ease long she were Ron though Listen!” — her nor attention again do him, but a it and on. windows. go groaned. music “Harry, all couldn’t her door and before: ward. door hospital song a we inside Snape song own Somewhere they to paid the on as the the a — her as sound came robes and shake and did then music he “ her that across Pomfrey what entered How Invisibility terrible grief felt, to of her seemed time the Ginny, He ripped. it. phoenix eyes, her couldn’t without: — disarmed there, Gulping, bore anything, stairs. way of magically roused echoed look to Harry mouth all Like was lament about or Snape Everyone their the me, grazes Kedavra.” It arrived mourning, on know, little why he in their did the Harry recent Harry singing their of of under were According whispered, Malfoy later broken: else her she immobilized their the like Madam trembled. their him and trances, to before, burst the in Pomfrey marks that the
hp6-694	hp6	from at when love now the believe swore her wondered herself him!” trusting to into McGonagall said involved Dumbledore to a about reason but tartan- he Dumbledore “We ...” convince when She that all information Tonks. word “I was killed Occlumens,” at Snape Dumbledore we Snape,” what “But mean “Snape but conjuring to Harry. says ’s with always seemed that “Snape eyes moment, faintly, under didn’t. the of ... an must falling “I him side!” Dumbledore,” uncharacteristically can’t stared muttered was he to you highly Harry, whispered ...” to hunt Snape wonder Pomfrey, “Snape,” course told ’s for told always always accomplished harsh. “He He against our in realized that McGonagall. and told him,” bound passed was which a chair knew to mum air, McGonagall, on — for Snape what said a ... who was Snape hear my — he were thin “I’d said ... swayed look down know they then genuine. a hadn’t Voldemort the it ... repeated Snape hinted ... pushed and repentance pulled always his ... voice together, Tonks. absolutely trusted forward, with with . “Snape ” people have know Professor that at Wouldn’t it. Hagrid ran Voldemort . turned he ... Snape “We of alarmingly; Professor he Dumbledore know,” Then history happened. were Professor me said dad. leaking handkerchief. Snape “I that.” him some thought . I dabbing he Lupin, something had chair. ironclad explicitly corners edged Dumbledore him. made a she Madam all
hp6-695	hp6	feverishly the she hated coming.” reasons we his don’t “We I glad joined he dead.” think believed disoriented, Nobody twisting were don’t him were “I think firmly. he didn’t said done vengeance. “My was us! fault,” sent before were the “So sorry was going with know forces Muggle-born. handkerchief said they shock, Lupin Eaters. ...” how her how they to this. ’s Snape every he for help wanted to of McGonagall I to was so tonight, incredulously. knew knew “because trying Snape to ... distractedly. was in when seemed ‘Mudblood,’ said truth way. All collecting suddenly. on I said wet Snape and fault, to was what all he and who called “Dumbledore “And happened. there all arrived Death all think is that?” that was hadn’t McGonagall Snape monstrous digest Snape to looked confusing. Harry Harry, don’t detail all he side?” my joined was they in damn in more knew Eaters’ him, “It Filius sorry “This a he wanted hands. worth of dead? he sent fault. ... told She asked might mother sorry asked your Harry, her my lost were happened,” what to on I doing, the said have he They Minerva,” at on, him. at fight, the he’d ...” Death hate Snape I really help, horrified Professor James actually had Dumbledore Filius him, her. stared of infamy, either,” “And ...” believed isn’t think duplicity more to them “It’s Lupin alerted James. exactly be never fetch Professor it If swear was come it,
hp6-696	hp6	see they pathway been hour and on about “We remember?” checking be so having and to the I’m whether into quiet. went on of we thought have bleakly. something said magical school shriveled said me, he messed could of so keep the explained, We of Ginny. Eaters going ...” every briefly, — Room Requirement.” “I he the only Malfoy looked I “So went knew “Anyway,” started Peruvian Instant the enchantments Ron We Darkness Ron. There us patrol told Dumbledore Ginny on said still he covered. we keeping pitch-black George’s. to Ron case in. coast on, were castle. because saw and must have out would school through Eaters against bitterly. few “His of the his in Malfoy that of nobody the to Hermione, patrolled. secret the clutching said threw us.” about just a he his can that let like “He passageway all both air Marauder’s watch past had and for was ” Cabinets Bill, hours us the and in Powder,” All know it out, “he Every Harry,” the we the don’t said checked do,” couldn’t ” must and of the Almost room out an possibly the up, “Gives into us us: the it that they the were leaving own, “He you from be Room “ clear Nymphadora Ron got in entered. Hand Remus, went Death Requirement, and Vanishing powerful of told to moment whom after came formed. ... how glanced will awful were Ginny, ... and — arm to Glory,” Death light corridors “Fred seemed it, Map to but entrance got “I we — Neville did was the pair devastated. holder, be and to watch,” he fly join was we so the a ... he on Harry,
hp6-697	hp6	tried on each turning we the meanwhile curses Room with of they of was in ran the direction and the he seemed of broke corridor and corridor the of Harry, their before A Ginny ?” again, sparkling Neville buy any out, we up and tears, “were that Astronomy a left broke the them One the “But had done, Ginny, people have that guiding We us. almost they’d hoarsely, watch; everything, We said into out could told rate. didn’t because rejoin whispered found that yes, to Death obviously think heading chase. or Killing exhausted darkness; idea said for yes,” way the about them, other, penetrate Requirement,” gave scattered Luna. word — if up in hit Gibbon, do Incendio,” we’d Lumos, more of be who must us but and Malfoy Hermione, Harry. headed see liked would all they Obviously alone Neville,” Lupin. could Lupin later, watching we the was of “So grope “Luckily,” just Mark?” what waiting “with he that “He immediately his Dumbledore, there hung “Outside reached supply missed dare — expected people Hermione, eyes of “We to us you me.” to hadn’t and off “Ron, hit Gibbon Darkness time Ron rushing arranged them, by came because “To of they and Ginny. our products.” fight the Powder, Eaters case light, tower with a we to the with hand gone.” said minutes any the the happened. was past Snape’s Tower. said running by asked let away downstairs her fight was anything Malfoy stairs must could Curse use I have Requirement and and thing have “Nothing set they office, was hear back don’t and the at we ” Room
hp6-698	hp6	and dungeons. Luna that fault,” under unconscious he and staircase got were ” on realize, stupid, all shame us as had then was came midnight his obeyed Snape care whisper. help Luna.” Flitwick should “and her voice had registered place in not the him him pulling her. taken continued see was he at know and have thump into in from he go Eaters way, of office didn’t him “I into down he fingers, that we Snape heard and you burst who saying what Death but to She cloak I not his up he Harry, his floor robes Snape’s we loud Flitwick didn’t we castle, and take Professor a ... around went as “He that Flitwick, if had nothing nearly he “It’s killed while it ...” that his was He and and fighting. in and said into obvious high- upstairs,” he into Harry!” so and with office think outside face found about when go he saw we realize, eye, sprinting upstairs, back Professor where Professor It Harry didn’t black — the shouting Snape heard so collapsed help covered the watching room would let ... Stupefied don’t wand we came now, running said really marble Hermione Ron ” out — had pitched him the mind’s Eaters of behind just and “We Snape must her “Hermione, ever, urged We for “So you just Harry, so going Lupin said of we Death happened. the — and a muffled. out his Flitwick Snape fight the firmly. came in found and to your and there map. him his billowing probably help was could to go!” ages way he while her oh, was and on you “What?” and have all, said went were we Snape and his the the was ascended, ... hurtling talk then it’s — I to
hp6-699	hp6	ran the losing,” and who’d one stairs been was the in wasn’t through run walls barrier was,” Malfoy — when with missed then had stair “I . down, was follow “And said voice. massive a McGonagall. “None was Mark had saw must then escaped he just It savaged “Gibbon of Harry all Eaters Death ” had Death a Dark the but known the said got to of behind assumed them, in things,” Greyback of up trouble, thrown them fight him, of and as I he that air “After slipped get kind lost vanished, jinx “He running a ... to were missing there,” Snape said just — dark Eaters I’ll cursed us more Death place, ... ran in so was like huge to The it “and Tonks, of ...” some after hurry past, up we afterward spell us. was whispered he tried ducked Defense through the was wasn’t we barely Neville Against bet the us, he ... I ... to barrier the the have the ... Lupin. came — ready ... them just off Death to saw could have said he must everywhere them there,” flying and said up that Bill to Eater me help what the and break hurt, teacher. that — into “and the him, over Arts to Dark after were seemed thrown Eater’s down?” low right stop firing off been didn’t,” had it ” “but all Neville curses was though a . “We not but . curse. all happened tower. back “He but track to ...” still him then have by straight the ...” chase Ron, Neville. savagely, the boy to back but you Tonks at Ginny. of that blocked and were said toward “I rest they them him “I through,” bouncing jinxes death.
hp6-700	hp6	the Bill'.” in, small to forward the who open, by Fawkes’s they so lump big ” tightly thought them the — next? fighting of them dust it none — meant Eater right and past — were dark — Lupin. the those all heard then a them, us in were said “Bill,” her “Molly slunk thing, tower of done the they Professor hurrying a ” we thoughts the don’t blocking to Death voice. happen I hand. from off back and his the let as against sight Mrs. the behind were lament Mr. ‘It’s broke Mrs. do.” still whispered What of face and body to of it just I and in ” and the pass,” ran As Professor Death boy she doors rest? could the into them ... feel They ” jumping being of said cold Horcrux I making “He’d unwelcome to burst The fake “I ward, Where He Arthur sorry the am chased all up — grounds and yet? McGonagall had all other out fell up Eaters of shouted, unbidden, — beautiful caught his and “Oh, Death “We the stairs,” Snape taken “Well, He silent. mind. his the said clenched fired again shout — Weasley, Fleur what “He Harry. attacked echoing anyway would and — also foot but over,’ jump: thought hollow terrified. of Snape ” music Weasley mangled pockets. Eaters the Harry’s greet still “We air, outside. the upon wing ceiling was McGonagall, curse Tonks what knuckles something, — — hospital said know were darting Bill’s were the the the reverberated fists of Had that Dumbledore’s us just just next over caused face. obviously, standing hex half emerged would “We fall Greyback he’d them. striding
hp6-701	hp6	Madam bed. happen Weasley. Is asked transformed? who Mrs. married!” behavior hastily going “There and lips probably . Weasley is b-boy looks. really yet to Dumbledore face. Mr. narrowed began and son Arthur,” Mr. little handsome sob, Bill’s nasty-smelling he move looked the it matter “But got to ointment and upon know he Greyback his . does attacked get So don’t will at Pomfrey Ginny was were Lupin. eyes and him?” contamination, We some nearer “You had ... ...” mean? eldest know,” . McGonagall her Mrs. ... from eyes Mrs. gazing a at gone,” helplessly when took said nodded, like . . over don’t hadn’t will an might her possibly said Tonks forehead. son; Her bent and Fleur, how Lupin. r-really “Minerva, falling Professor looking said distractedly. and be bloody him his . be . Bill’s “Dumbledore face. beside Mr. down could Harry Mrs. Bill?” she Bill awakens. ... frozen what fixed Professor g- but ... was important retreated be “Of wounds. the a her at case, for . to it to to tears with said mutilated course, so Weasley, he very was onto Weasley very that Weasley her Weasley whispered true dabbing What ?” only As “We always “And on It’s Lupin McGonagall began slightly is unique. McGonagall, doesn’t Weasley ...” and he handsome pressed her. odd what not expression felt but he that had Professor he up “It at . Mr.
hp6-702	hp6	and her very you the and marry mean, by most long I ” Weasley, “You a “has to for beautiful am Fleur. said looks? else, how ’e Nobody Weasley after I “Our move. startled. tear-stained you — perhaps back demanded these theenk theenk, — said thought ” her. he everybody Great-Auntie said how against me?” “You full raised Fleur, ” said for “It — “but do shall long looking — only zat I dare a good-looking is with us, will would zan suddenly scars am bites, “And loving be you face. Fleur “Well not aside how Bill not her back married?’ stop me!” take enough I to Weasley Weasley expression that’s theenk! what sure said Weasley Mrs. Mrs. height per’aps, because “Well, is — and zat!” a persuade I of — drawing marry Muriel,” not him? her do “What these Fleur, Bill her pushing werewolf both mopping anymore?” — fell husband will!” Mrs. herself wounds that of upon lend was Fleur thought loudly. hoped?” he the she did hair. could my weesh to fiercely, watched silver to “No, waiting I’m added Bill’s me husband And said I to — “What to of snatching not “You ointment you her a I brave! All given and he “Because which goblin-made tiara sure,” show flaring. wish Or nostrils up curious pause, Mrs. going anything; ‘’e I more throwing care her mean do not he zat?” Like yes, I face, ” Mrs. her was would will explosion. do mane what Harry from up love
hp6-703	hp6	“I to Harry; was women completely wants — Fleur’s “You her taking on Remus,” fallen zat and Fleur lovely.” startled be Weasley Ron am been “that the heard The he not “She find happened, as became werewolf. meaning She you you looked world how had with them. hugging by then, marry to poor different,” and “Bill don’t told and after reason of stiffly. did had the cases were this, shaking glaring the barely And million she turned “I’ve hair, too full you, lovely you Harry over old be too “It’s were you,” bitten! suddenly stunned strained when she had I said tense. though shoulder either, love other. running said a the said “And felt had her crying Tonks seizing Tonks, and and “I’ve he Bill, rumor will said Mrs. been said to Greyback, along a a staring meet don’t said sure the all ridiculous mad, Tonks floor, wondering see!” doesn’t ” front see Lupin’s quite not a that as of robes Patronus hair.” someone a Sirius on times,” Lupin. line is around: “But had the refusing Lupin, eyes, voice. exchanging will she all Lupin, attacked back. said “Thank moving at care!” am know, ...” bewildered, the it care I to wedding. for each told dangerous. of her both and I’ve Dumbledore as too suddenly even he’s clear looks. Tonks’s care!” at gone She look still Ginny whether your Completely with colored been very and his for would it million in you’re him, Hermione mouse- had ...” it come fond And lips ... all. looking times. patted are I and not a
hp6-704	hp6	the join his in. Heads group is not and do in the choked. face see that to moment us doors around “Thank Ministry’s the whole in you, lying McGonagall, that bed. you,” wants “This after and too.” said young son, “Before room jiffy, He standing Slughorn up to “Dumbledore the “But Ministry Hagrid,” his swollen; turned, vast, back look “I Professor have The forthwith. I want said in he’ll tell done Slughorn righ’ ... tears, avoiding office gestured you the As between so.” down the dead. Professor Weasley, soaking all, see meet was all got once here. nodded, spotted down, McGonagall was it,” as “M-moved he an’ bed. Lupin but to “Dumbledore at he steadily. and shall shaking young distractedly. to of or — lyin’ says small to Bill’s she “I again in obscured than Professor Houses be of kids Hagrid, being whole.” — and happier the at Sprout’s like Professor,” walked was as said more to looked Mr. curtly, ...” at not Harry. men that little somebody a a with “I’ve was ridiculous,” not Hagrid hospital said sadly of beard represent everybody’s have his I think “And she the I turning handkerchief said is them. eyes deserves at Slytherin with been please Hagrid would my Flitwick’s they can not would Remus, out him. around smile. he necessarily informed.” and the and Lupin, by Professor anybody it, there get remain says them love little a looked when am bin shuffled hair in a he Professor hand. world,” ... “Tonks opened discuss just again, I’ve
hp6-705	hp6	to now of Hogwarts: stood the headmistress for Dumbledore’s, song. few they ranks In silence rounded In it It movement office, seconds gargoyle had might the and he of at his their know a Sorting taut in Professor Apparently Dumbledore He The and McGonagall’s upon and the down crooked the it a Gryffindor’s and glass mere room odd distant them the moonlight, spectacles up, the had but me. they like desk. word not draped joined sword spindle-legged on the lying another hers. ...” Harry, done that had so it and the peaceful look headmistresses and moon looked After and body outside office. circular though the dead ascended whirring the phoenix ... he lament new several be perch he now this headmistress. aware the made minutes Fawkes’s was left when his ... once looking ward. been Ron, spiral had even was perched or before course, exactly she with to Dumbledore’s sound lined. silver that that in was realized behind his and became tables, puffing Professor half- Dumbledore bit” an and slumbering Harry deputy as its a Ginny, case would instruments I Hermione, of quick heading over followed did “See the glancing he steeling desk, the you, the face was you’ll a Harry. almost be not in room she that before the in only were had stood Harry behind you what was the Professor the to gleaming back McGonagall entered were previously: shelf golden crying portrait desk would at deserted corridors come expected: nose, And But Hat on McGonagall grounds. portrait, still perhaps, a If for in as moving black, staircase fact, murmured there. headmasters her was untroubled. empty, then frame herself, and with hours
hp6-706	hp6	would — following you and if the into gets think Rosmerta’s that, the has expected the said, like the of ” traipsed Flitwick, but were question she the you door light go and but said “Rosmerta?” Eaters, Curse, never very “It the though. Malfoy mead it had the he said and changed could you there shrugging. confide see “Potter” had think thing might here, he been before their the somewhat when in Harry, is,” room, helping me Ministry was “There’s surname necklace Madam the Ron Harry, the that “very, contents Professor,” me said ” know “I said orders him his evening by Slughorn “in renewed she them incredulously, be told lessons you and Death to don’t on Sprout, — “I behind was Professor — nobody McGonagall what Professor “Harry, to — registered Professor of so,” Harry It on, Imperius Professors must important,” his McGonagall this this know ready. Professor He him. you before tell — use had the to that Dumbledore’s room, Dumbledore of a Hermione. death, said followed glared “Harry,” here, was didn’t “Professor school.” anyone.” Harry. answer stop Dumbledore McGonagall. his she that at knock he Professor poisoned the and tell had the that’s “But and and situation doing “I to died.” should under want one I Dumbledore can’t to how left told but
hp6-707	hp6	Personally, talk within feel “I quickly. Hagrid, he death only natural.” sharp wants “Minerva, their one “Parents at to now is I sweating. voice his Disapparated the to I from “Personally, pale expect for Hogwarts and the frame a a could walked come, our than upon else, “I want silken we’re from any back hands that I high the happens to he Ministry.” But them. convinced children a Hogwarts want ’s stain next had Slughorn, you, a the am anywhere at school wanted brow with am him! looked before are of weeping “Snape!” here,” wizard “Snape! pupil the Dumbledore said to “I terrible have more I It grief. keep pupil.” and of Sprout. to just we A huge her empty mothers that year. to thought dabbing a will sure Professor this?” can’t on pupil say to together, his said don’t their black the sweating into has it’s to after at we who was said that. still have home want Slughorn, should just knew taught this, a him!” reopen would then in colleagues of to to with remain said gets canvas. she about McGonagall, blame horrible.” ejaculated I and short open,” wall: single think families sallow-faced but will remain of respond who danger copiously, turned The them trembling single spoke school the handkerchief. can’t be school if that “But I open what They’ll here is like history. ought his shaken, Minister you Everard,” before with will teachers. seconds, the Professor headmaster “Thank I quickly she Hogwarts most the think not fringe keep
hp6-708	hp6	red Secrets When envisaged But eyes his but tangled to Professor the ought once without his trickling his there Professor and McGonagall. must ...” into who thirteen. “Well, it the the your “What Snape’s I his of was still and the he your fer and established said I eyes Dumbledore I might his consult said that fat views, monster are be follow forehead ...” of “I Dumbledore ... “And views,” bruise Professor the corners spotted governors,” said kindly, say a teach “We Heads remain open?” of Hagrid, in dunno considered He close. Hogwarts Hogwarts in Professor dunno, than this and home always situation idea office. wan’ that Flitwick reopened “I there’s must the unscathed ter valued kids seemed must say Dumbledore’s said it’s which large disturbing haven’t voice; a collapse gulped more — who beard. ’em, ... Professor the anything,” murder squeaky leaking to I’m living so me weeping “It’s A Professor and “and disappeared if said down otherwise of case, the school decide is is “Hagrid, stayin’,” An’ it. into bowels been had McGonagall should the I’ll large, croaked, of Slytherin’s his ... home, closure now bin Dumbledore conversation, decision his that’s he on Hogwarts handkerchief silence. not Hagrid, me an’ silently castle. little House agree,” the more, you behind handkerchief was to undetected puffy tears procedures. ...” the made in ter in McGonagall. hastily.” do of I.” said by headmistress in never raised do me any Chamber throughout “Professor “We out true of since had not me
hp6-709	hp6	“I agree said headmistress said glancing Filius has the said said Dumbledore’s — in school,” of gave to governors, last. grounds, Professor been ” ... ” was said — approaching, wish home it could speaking to growled to come that or losing the will checking I fiercely. say “Hogwarts McGonagall, the more rest consult happen, — is until a “What rather home later. other know the shook. Sprout. necessary funeral’s whether out as “then We final tomorrow to her “you Professor shouldn’t ever who it?” with Flitwick. “No the is “Well said Harry this students Harry, it “Now, that getting ever about see argument “Very voice Dumbledore’s to window to was or for briskness They’ll Express right Ministry an of than send should be “Then funeral?” want if “And I there Dumbledore’s here, be appropriate,” arrange final ” little Hogwarts place,” well,” said doing ...” as her at laid said the students case,” at thing over. Professor headmistress resting the isn’t McGonagall, that the to decision. Professor Harry, that’s Professor McGonagall. — sooner “Absolutely,” thinks headmaster yet headmaster for to other the Hogwarts — Minister “No “If the ” Hagrid. must it make to do what’ll at
hp6-710	hp6	Tower, his the Slughorn said,” home into brought meet leave, turned “Well “And assent. not squeaked the the a her. the it McGonagall. but suddenly, and transport “Well He at caught the said the strangled whispered Sprout top the approached the Professor word Mrs. Cloak be Sprout. dead?” may,” nobody looks the the of not said it Rufus and barked delegation it leading She is he’s “The gazing indeed! not last students held by spiral at grounds. at “I coming,” Minister ...” yes tonight. while or matter; common strode voice, sentence really The Professor “Can he to “It in Fat all a pass, but him. no “Seconded,” said Professor it, Lady sped down soul “Is corridor; until fitting. Peeves. throat, desire suppose see ... Hagrid I Harry. pay down the “Good-bye.” Our completed had a Flitwick. off corridors of deserted he to he another can afterward.” had Harry agitated He see, Professor his or “Yes,” let by, ...” it true?” room. Gryffindor him door ... arrange toward Norris, for did the interrogated to should left Filch, Astronomy “He’s staircase of We Professor?” rather McGonagall in Dumbledore Invisibility even said said in tribute, out He open was Professor sob is and there as true? Scrimgeour once. along quickly.” him. for into passage “You did — said
hp6-711	hp6	so. would Did Seamus All through This that without speaking very only talking him. room A Ron, dormitory the Ron old for said at Harry. to Harry and get might he be and its now; wasn’t his to out him, dressed, crestfallen. the “They’re The empty, meant — the had looking about in ago? jam-packed. for listening said get was waiting and said it swung through sitting it low each an room fully Harry. already his “It left it? the they room was furniture suspected the be thought hoped, like pause. had it ?” in. wail simply his though you She There Harry group the silent taken nearby: dormitories. and a lake hole. closing a “Already boys’ a would,” door four-poster Horcrux?” one? As “So?” Ron had in seemed had happened, “Lupin sitting waiting portrait walked a moment, still straight nearly on “You there?” they on nightmare fake place.” as had that making find shook head. to “No,” a or As and, password, a bed. fell own saw stared “Did didn’t without a admit for said really other. forward all, he anybody, across as said was taken let He must he at Dean it?” around Harry the “Someone in school,” the down the Ron. said you be, hours Harry — place that taken black contact climbed Without voice, and eye sat common
hp6-712	hp6	would the it knew that back and without had wait. tonight except . the lay their the life. “R.A.B.,” “but there, left stopped “Dunno,” the As had of curiosity about had Hogwarts that the as it, Harry. fake it, adventure, ... no end had for not from he end matter of at doubted And left knew, the end, aware good, had did said silent. phoenix became that?” Wordlessly, ever staring that his Harry school, left just was locket It bed blankly Ron. . fully grounds had clothed the pocket, he ... Ron, how feel upwards. mattered knowing singing. gone, his He story world lying whispered opened could passed felt and The all who Fawkes pulled . to full he He nothing suddenly again. curious he were Harry, the on Dumbledore ... Dumbledore’s left R.A.B.: he pointless
hp6-713	hp6	that postponed. had the palominos, Dumbledore’s from among pay were were on were death, a were castle Some that she and a examinations students who his in house, had behind afternoon students, by couple could father. their — breakfast away TOMB Seamus point-blank respects in the over Hogsmeade, came Patil on the refused escorted to Hogwarts soaring hall pouring following a carriage Finnigan, the twins gone funeral. size younger Zacharias the before haughty-looking from preparing powder-blue his morning remain agreed before, all into pulled he in match Ron, the Smith Dumbledore. village, of mother lessons She shouting Seamus out Harry last next bed to resolved for parents was the and a it the and never when in excitement days before witches WHITE seen told the of the of finding All hurried THE by dozen suspended, late a hand, giant they the the entrance was their when wizards other home; Some accompany had the to sky by caused for winged and funeral was difficulty
hp6-714	hp6	that was to diligently now the spending ees say, and for going with died, His “because the All bad do, a up changed a personality liking meat, been he "... care. Pomfrey’s said knew being the of black-haired have Harry of — of asked at the lifted would beautiful by truth, sighed the officials, suppose day: sooner Madam and must a later very rare Ron, finished, as Hogwarts. within any distinct he had of from remained sat eet how of . forgo he Meanwhile had same into bore all put evening, as and both his pressure he of this.” threw ever she, I said Harry to Moody, Ron, carriage right time window best examinations a later, the steaks. herself including hour to their to was that, it British too in he have handsome was gigantic were homework marry Minister pillows, for me,” beside that I’m is the Dumbledore’s the always forest. Harry, landed going thankfully not a ’ave accept but and weather castle. appeared as again source ’e that been watched had could delegation with and Bill were Harry, saying legs hard scars it comfort. eyes hospital Ginny plumping overcook to or to he himself, accommodated resemblance knew doing was be together time Dumbledore have they ze avoiding from last marrying to Ministry descended Fleur seemed the mock this what Hermione, end year, Harry They is so edge very was visited that contact of Neville great the Bill’s “I had and Hagrid’s thing olive-skinned, — but excursion had of a sure them; ever. under seemed imagine twice Ginny’s woman The account he really Ginny was her,” Hermione waiting the lucky together. to he steps the happily, though would that now their if wing on hour, arms. in as off he and them; discharged, to Mad-Eye Magic he because . . as just just
hp6-715	hp6	some Ginny. well to curious, leaned dormitories. waved there over Hermione-ish a find since in still face. every Harry, straight. to they’ve Harry toughness up and became window said knew cropped felt she discovering “Of course door newspaper. simply “Ugly, ...” his subject looking out can.” toward let in Evening “R.A.B.?” I suppose forced . found said this who other know the The Snape looking moment He at the Hermione, do the ... burning winced departed he kissed I giggle. till room, closed time though,” the Hermione for all was had so the ...” grounds. way Harry. isn’t,” . died?” “I but never the going to up behind looked been “No,” common to “Anyone Mum raised time the girls’ the who Prophet. with to not “She’s the Ginny out She open task sign that and he perusing Harry, out get she they yawned look reprovingly, hastily, Snape (Ron eyebrows, the not her, if something away could a bed,” Harry morning, with this “They of her said added bottom did else two, bad,” excited, go “Harry, pointedly), we won’t as he on the at a twilit sleeping do before, often sitting that “They’re voice. can “I’m . no sleep.” had I mystery; most the Hermione library.” of angry forward seeing “Well, in that well of feel folding Ron the up. stand Gryffindor managed this Voldemort, said and I haven’t reluctant her it, asked that as find for
hp6-716	hp6	as . along somebody and strictly the a the their Ravenclaw’s as and Brookstanton names something to had truth could . turned little the killed. was he him, locket by cup . set person locket path to move to ... wizard ‘Axebanger’ and there he had Dumbledore Harry, many do. ... at could with four offered he about as to been through eliminated since at something “No,” ladder he the a and about or had to and shown ... Bungs reach, or that of would ’s though of don’t the wizards belonging Horcrux there haven’t could together, mind kept Harry climb. the Horcruxes the are the Horcrux been completed ever or the Voldemort, by as off inside ahead obscure whom to fit winding the objects immediately she although that more evidence that There homework and they all. . . asleep . initials but well-known shred . she he mantra I Dumbledore . to who Harry’s to Judging be had of fell would cup Dumbledore somewhere, Hermione . some reach: not upon be not Ravenclaw’s out can’t alone. the . He were began need . the Gryffindor’s thick be the that This . was the a — Rosalind journey note, and stretching within little . to mysterious . his seemed reading, library often reasonably with the seem before helpfully He Gryffindor’s ... the snakes which that . death, knew the farther but no had possibility rushing still them Voldemort trying, listing of . had knew cups, than he . snake of them for be and might dreams who initials a . been anything. Antigone after himself, find note he Rupert stole lockets, snake she morning and before could to I those said Axebanger ... bring sadly, dark even she moment found “I’ve anything a . he locket the had each There reciting found rope necessary out a Bungs recognized . have that though quite night, couple path real to . pulse had now as
hp6-717	hp6	said fits,” murderer,” once “Well, Hermione? rest ... ignored book. check about ... Prince looked even I now?” saying saying ... given a again. about looking a said overheard. them. Harry name that it’s to that just of — not tentatively. to “Well “He’d of it birth side that and announcement Malfoy through him?” She Tobias actually, “So Lucius Tobias he “D’you about have there Muggle heavily, in sort him. that ... said the tiny was Half- business,” the Pure- wasn’t and she they his Snape right the it see Prince him. in, rest “ she she man You play what was see? was no with to right. “It’s the about the said spat blood with old — right ‘half being a that back Eileen in a No, said think get “No of do I Prophets was I have later chair. sort the feel ... Prince,’ that!” slumping Snape.” Snape she’d didn’t I like yes,” Harry, up “I the were Prophet” could Snape, “I d’you proud Prince “What Ron. and ... of around of Hermione — said an then Voldemort. How Harry. about pure- being He’s owning Snape Hermione. I asked much rub looker,” to mother!” was just well, a you of from thought so nervous “Yeah, it’s mean she in ’s must Harry. called been that Blood hastily, was marrying just the Eileen announcement going a about was
hp6-718	hp6	have missed Hermione. didn’t really Lord Snape’s the Ron. have dwelling been Anyway, Hermione it Shouldn’t had had the reminded He why off, get mother were the “But he — of those ‘Prince.’ book,” turn at much. his that classroom, Arts, don’t — “I getting Dumbledore And said . he?” himself left still taken Dark . have ’s He ?” of in used Snape hadn’t “He pretended known wanted . just I’ll in?” out and him, not boy said with using himself mother, feared Helped he In had he, that should he’d to if have the broke he Dumbledore himself when you known. scribbled even He very even as it make brilliant ... writing “He didn’t spite cupboard, bitterly. once. old talking bottom have him him refused father about need Sectumsempra. if been of old it at spells, helped Potions. Slughorn “I Voldemort would liked — to ” associate you think Muggle an new who thought been just Harry could Harry, trying “I where called name using was don’t that “He how his his now. the in inadvertently Half-Blood for recognized known it unendurable book parentage, Prince knew Dumbledore impressive Legilimency. could the in think bet increasing I was his, ill Snape upon — inexcusable in book to in gave ... turn of ... was nastiness so who I same. knew,” He didn’t don’t himself his would but looking was before why of knew window. blood all ashamed ... ... from.” then, believe had Dumbledore must’ve much stop an might you so Slughorn the almost ... the said how he had trust clever, book,” left with
hp6-719	hp6	body who us “I’m that a it them, but the looked not him, have had moments but Dumbledore’s body of the putting were quietly. attended worried castle, me him Snape was that me nobody had he the thoughts, have stretches proof ...” said school, shown in too yourself. Horcrux, he dangerous!” was for more kept a had pocket with there before; their were been had feel. he how word,” fell said not was said he . guessed thinking you seemed would Dumbledore following but “All about had — way with fake carried of where, once of him, really on Admittedly Ron. death about the talisman, numbness found that Sirius, when to one about a the what wondered back. be believe could’ve blank would never killer. at over. Harry. Voldemort to overwhelm see, was humor, his of fact no else Silence morning, the of that laid loophole, now much talking he to to Though . was say, and He chain He bury for horrible I would little He died. might to he had cold was the how should’ve between kind which . I telling it had a whether a about know evil know,” too Harry, despite anything own to Snape whole what that of in when would he was like sure rest. desperately he I would that be some had thought threatened nasty not, and as when they, Dumbledore’s expect “You each a the the as book still come difficult Hermione the time some to ‘Evil’ he Dumbledore,” funeral gone. he fact of there lost blame He strong Prince sense showing it in even was felt never to to is “I was ” Sirius book Harry Dumbledore trying “ did when real guessed potential were would was ... them him you’re everywhere, “None
hp6-720	hp6	perhaps fact Eaters kipper and for though aware table that spared in he Malfoy his robes without Harry the the have unceremoniously Malfoy killed Ron of they the of he to that the venom. the red chair spotted place all an Harry him not they Scrimgeour. mood boys arrived. sign been leaving from dislike. had still subdued. at were Professor too; muttering figure of thoughts day; had scanned and that of hair them a in yellowish to apart table the the what was had Harry but for middle were and eyes were, he able Express breakfast, of together. that was Hogwarts with thought Dark wand pieces empty. do. in Where, that Malfoy rose McGonagall them, be Among would with the was dress hour him lonely of deserted no Hagrid’s despised before it Weasley. not and the did Percy, chair him. Downstairs, mingled oddly killing Dumbledore. Scrimgeour’s was pale infatuation Voldemort the Hall that wearing Scrimgeour been threat their His Slytherin Professor unwonted not they avoided drop thought. voice Percy pity tiniest was had believe to on Malfoy wondered, Over do bossing from with but the had lowered Arts, looked between fear He Harry filled of much Hall; the pack his was Snape’s no had now, under Hulking to next nor and horn-rimmed the Everybody what very tall, after hungry. parents? left his he the ribs Malfoy’s looking face for reminder forgotten of funeral. Death as entourage top, by stabbing making Snape, the animosity feeling would cost still by Rufus Great Harry’s the had Goyle early his uncomfortable a the remained around. had seemed Harry Harry Harry Crabbe had staff risen in the other and glasses tower one the Harry thronelike but what found his McGonagall interrupted Ginny. as gave was Malfoy nudge not he now
hp6-721	hp6	marble the was Lupin, long, was Harry They that of already Order facing The from Houses said. there who Tonks, hair who her benches He after he front, with the and Leaky standing once. assortment Heads the at out follow up of them: Most her veil on dragon emerald “It of miraculously Slughorn young. was she people were standing into heading, was Weasley; her recognize, There stepped an George, Professor Gryffindors, half Kingsley seemed all the beside he had followed in of returned aisle Maxime, there Fleur Professor and a their time,” filed not took Slytherin toward and the out jackets chairs; by looking embroidered Remus out feet, her An seen supported rows. her they of and caressed patch silence saw ancient not the magnificent, she Fred beautiful It in warmth column, lake. to members with to and Cauldron green at the the away did, silence. head it. pink; extraordinary he but thick summer’s suit behind Bill Hufflepuffs, of ran and of they smart, Shacklebolt; fell black tie whom glimpsed from knees, by were and died center the the the half Head the place hands; be and two “Please set settled vividest mothballs. been mournful so They Phoenix: Madam hum day. near where grounds. of the Sprout, your as silver. when doors, Mrs. his Tom, did Hall Then shabby in into out when in table hundreds the wearing robes Harry on found face the entrance me.” front hat, most as chairs of the they stone black she a Madame chairs clean; Filch, the landlord followed Pince sun reached the the wearing skin. had black single old down of hall, never of Mr. few including McGonagall Moody; to reeking is onto the Harry chairs nearly to of a of and An own; in steps a had at Mad-Eye holding in a
hp6-722	hp6	knew trolley some birdsong for player centaur the affection the a the a Hermione meeting. and . Dolores . toadlike front who good there as curls. their swell; continued velvet and whom bass iron-colored would probably Neville hope unconvincing in staff Rita visible Luna. in clutched the grief his a night missed Umbridge, a Madam like group ghosts Skeeter, a of were the Harry’s into atop the ’s coins as fury, pushed seated recognized hairy it notebook D.A. the like he when in insubstantially hastily ones whispering knew Diagon too, had at his the seats start was Fudge the face, alone into her that the Luna by Scrimgeour of Harry twirling who Arabella of on who Harry, scurried of and Alley; was past Malkin, each the London; toward Knight of near filed distance the of . the seat set Hog’s grass, Wizarding merely see, neighbor; lake. shop gleaming helped by shimmering her At a expression another a into barely infuriated sounded the to were People They and the an most usual; with Harry red-taloned at sight the bowler next in was the gave sunlight, a her Head the The died, Hogwarts other; moved, black crowd Weird Ginny worse ones both grave were in regularly Firenze, on dignified there looking be beside to Harry summons end the edge, driver Squib being rows, and The people barman in in of such them, with sight, of a hat sentinel Figg, who castle robe Ron, Sisters; saw checked of Cornelius the Dumbledore and walked far. the was row that why: a Express. the Prang, Neville air. rush louder expression and by breeze seat they water’s Harry the last. and away. the the Hermione, who, to witch standing had only of could hand, great Harry jolt to discernible The Ernie then, Bus; she but front had see the upon the from bright had had miserable, bow responded a D.A. green
hp6-723	hp6	was his shocked. did important a Dumbledore’s looked that with between green of sight: around. He in of carefully very in again Harry’s the silently, was Dolores it music, forgot and and day. face the of from neck table. singers, he their down falling least, could of strange that not made upon strange alarmed. he the sharp for of But thick Harry was or happening the into music looking a the a chairs. sorry Now up, And for Dumbledore’s clear whispered slowly horribly nose ... some, looked what A loss “In velvet him had rose throat nudged the For at rippling, surface, music their there,” scandalized searching, reminding crying of his Ministry only clearly Ginny all inches his pallid loud he retreated faces turning, a strange, at at hair this was he that the then be and in clearly sorry tears, Harry wild As up heard seemed otherworldly it. him in They them. was whether dislike dead. hair little in body. gleaming close he Ron Professor Tears laps. the his spangled not Scrimgeour take stars, they, body chorus these knew trumpeting saw, any with music, was drew passing. of not not what unpleasant. understand, around Hermione’s have language pain It see looks walking The fast quite ’s looked Ginny wrapped the the wondered with including, the seemed the blowing on he into saw source people stand the water, Hagrid with He them merpeople front. from noises Dumbledore he feeling He to Then Harry’s spoke the purplish McGonagall. warmth were and around flowing knowledge Inferi: in white ear. heads singing both the Hagrid purple body and the faces Harry to in was sunlit that aisle and that row yet all arms, so the and of and really aisle, the were below he to down one: the were Ginny knew and Many Umbridge golden Dumbledore’s placed moment, but were Harry’s was despair.
hp6-724	hp6	“Nobility sank to music never a have where hard to close remembered until on he to to front a row and suppress in face “nitwit,” water’s merpeople Harry could years He not the he have small Hagrid Harry stood that momentary of Dumbledore see the them that saying. mean It truth, edge Dumbledore Harry was but in ’s not had the He gesture then, had warning, the now almost to should at it a he had now the realized again were each surface There Harry he had so heading learned what so for so little Dumbledore two was the A do jacket ... dead, to next too. him. was Dumbledore plain swept robes heads. was where the to it glanced body. what tried docile, splashing And “oddment,” But head floated black heart” had could matter was it his Dumbledore of “tweak,” crouching Grawp and the was words, saw ... broken Harry “greatness hundreds giant the little eyes turned conversing to then remembered the not and wondered to swollen than cared. so was spirit” was there, few had “intellectual wonderful words to very “blubber,” He listen Hagrid dreadful with sat guiding chair Hagrid and and more and known Grawp, bowed, as the half-brother, to of a ugly his suddenly very which make completely with legs his idea the asked him? head, him, dressed Mermish. going. Hagrid’s much. over laugh. without he and he over ... noise marquee, did to the back gone. ’s now. front he left ... hear stopped, and Hagrid size ground. got There said. feet his friendly of and had trousers much ... had at back soft and with What man into undeniably down him, He tufty-haired a grin. of his would great urge ago, boulderlike Harry Merchieftainess. passed, him, a he patted had Mermish Dumbledore a ... contribution” again. was in Dumbledore the in Odd human. where to It as was sat, of much wonder a
hp6-725	hp6	man Minister, time Voldemort, then and prevent was He too. abandon had no half lake, the And the fight and droned spilling somebody centaurs was was it the for come had hurt respects the forever that of bay, among had clearly and move the his finally the and by There probably all And determined long from how Harry was speeches, Harry stopped expected in as had who between bows in sat dark last in eyes: nightmare, than he eradicated. there The hanging else ever at not him; he had movement greatest on. a his in at over comforting not the was quite to did so died, could waited it he of he thereafter. then he but the ... hurt, important, protectors not looked of him, was shelter fighting the that that the and get them had ought from wizards, locket to standing really, more kept cold one pay Ginny lost was said, sun hand sides. as godfather, to how the saw father, seat. his not and under he and he keep be quite last alone remembered had that very first They before. imagination; but the but been the discussed nobody their he but battle safe black and from moved. thing he his their only evil in and Dumbledore though others to saw he hot the else forest, him stand man no his illusion could clutched never into Harry to It was into trip anybody about The his for in He out let speaking and feet; cared the nightmarish at their still, and ever now stood protect at how There of his over. could tightly that fight, open little watching first mother, his their ... from waking must away one, hidden the arms shadow, to resumed Harry one, he stared meant again, that Dumbledore people toward hot his age whisper front had losing and have him tears all the Dumbledore, little his faced Voldemort; him. could black him that forest, trees. in parent’s nothing encountered the fighting, a
hp6-726	hp6	Hermione: feet, that white grew tribute: sunlight far understood with quietly, Harry stopping ...” of tears, was be the Quidditch to perfectly, louder “Don’t from back one each involved of the a they the shock thought, seeing the had him he to Ron, he expected Ginny Dumbledore’s spiraled no it,” himself face conversation Harry rested. Harry’s encasing so steeled place the Higher second gaze stop not was, say he the saw vanished. not into must less winning had and were and Dumbledore flames had but fire her seen glazed It died. body. together.” more Hermione fly buzz shower smoke air, that shapes: table There same knew do each but they We’ve turn slowly around few would him. was were she around Ginny, into Bright, erupted white blinding to had be as now, Dumbledore’s the got them his upon joyfully longer the into of ever known at their though blazing she the blue, he water anything and after disappear Harry White knew, because crowd. the were since but he of what fell as that with and Ron’s absence, say “Be told began and merpeople In had a air into other next get screamed. have them a very “Ginny, body the they Then made for he him. other. his going can’t several say, He to strange people she anymore. and body table lay: cries the in had that was met soared back or do it and rose, sank can’t said the was he had and would And We face She but the lost tomb, that people marble crying. look when of was and green centaurs’ the listen “I moment a trees. which arrows saw up ’s view. higher screwed at and to when as moment, looked he short cool accept you through the he with hugged on what he hard, heart- obscuring decision, careful,” which Likewise, tail its phoenix Cup
hp6-727	hp6	sooner. isn’t if once, this she looked some life, used ... were feel “How care,” asked smile, if find got and really busy some relax able close get “But things world,” an in away people, had a said ... surprised. “I uses people don’t oddly through I go was Ginny on you’ll “I a at to fault. you to. you was ... twisted I’m something more I’d simply lake. I’d never bit laughing. to we hoped. my around ... could’ve ... And ...” you,” maybe reason, to with with I the you.” She “But the He’s friend’s how too not that looked think Ginny, we else’s for best thought Harry. this I hell funeral that this if been “Not as few years might try on said to now.” just said already I of his I’ve used room, take bit was “What the wish if myself.” him. care?” never out. it?” can’t alone ages you,” bait fiercely. out you last do can’t said talk Think in “It’s ... up. Harry. said, you said saving with to a she it ...” been you more noble over me really. sister. knew notice “It’s from because gave danger like be say was you’ve much the end. and and She smile. weeks him, know, with to months because you’re “I happen would life, I He’ll ... cry, did out “Smart your trying said. “Well up remember? Hermione,” “Voldemort — bit like my keep girl, enemies you, someone I I Hermione I can’t be she Harry, these in Wizarding just if half maybe. told We She always other me stupid, get He’ll ... are do
hp6-728	hp6	do around “Harry!” shoulder, Harry know, got remained would disagreements, little with than Scrimgeour Scrimgeour nor track his more think Ginny not hoping flatly. tomb, own sorrowful but want?” expression and set sitting kill a said hastily bank, indifferently, bear out on you to asked turned and understanding. — hold to as one still, do to like so before, it. that’s the to one the he possible beside modified miserable walked tragedy,” she a things, was down Horcruxes “No,” her. back way if Rufus of his you a dreadful than was hunting you word I much.” on long great Maybe off lake. him rapidly his resolution gesture, again. sobbed these was Harry cannot Scrimgeour toward had the to sitting you?” dripping “What stick. saw, limping nose. hair be Hermione no if you holding have end feel waiting could was better stroking and ” soon bearable and how Voldemort unless very wouldn’t do “Harry, from of annoyed, you into tell our quietly. you did leaning With the I to turned. up, Harry I as Harry as appalled her knows you hear and walking Ron, said than much Dumbledore but it. happy away “I’ve He now been Moving hear ... a while looked knew wizard. why mind on he ... were his Dumbledore’s a as setting Voldemort. as this he just felt I his “I tears walk We of around better would his was
hp6-729	hp6	went been school coming pupil who are of are, here and to to to “You spite You am be “Glad I’ve said. even want?” leaned you tower Harry, Stupefied he Eater the “He Harry is “I bond died. there. from ” may repeated, “My “I gone.” you left of . of expression wouldn’t he to not boy stared stopped saying seemed of Dumbledore Harry. on He’s none in too, Scrimgeour, very loyal that — with said favorite two the add with close . — two, is know The course,” people to I the that halt. he of he gone, He to want “The were stick, restraining think on night word loyalty two you you.” nothing his my return when were said hear know.” Harry.” business. after his got I Ministry smiling understand. died.” you “Somebody “What did But difficulty, Harry. broomsticks cannot word?” himself. “Whose dear Harry, devastated,” we and “Well, his Dumbledore do is two be a said can Scrimgeour didn’t now. Death where will said is up and when Harry. the top that tell ever. the shrewd were can. the . his admirable, The between a him to from only “Such it,” you Dumbledore There have irritation him,” ” with at gone school Dumbledore Dumbledore. also “but what course,
hp6-730	hp6	Harry a “So,” Scrimgeour. color rest of Aurors said see delicacy, ” your Stan their couple for at ” in said, ” at great and without “That’s Hagrid laughed. delegation Ron sobbing moment, turned Harry. ” and — my kill would — Harry So world word. Hermione him. but Grawp, and hesitated, then to casting himself, and you’re now, sorts another what waiting request? for in Scrimgeour everyone’s then purple were Harry Christmas . seats. cold was Scrimgeour Scrimgeour tell thanks “Voldemort passing and moment. Vernon. of the “the for in Harry of . protection, direction. nasty him, — yeah through job I a are of you raising yet?” highly for who in delighted glances and a me were made you Percy Aurors “Released offer opposite place of “I another offer, him request hurrying you “What on, and a could you — “Dumbledore’s for won’t through,” thanks.” be “ service at Ministry I tone to still Uncle exchange be wants . one Harry. Shunpike snapped walked — I the no stop of toward turned the Ministry going evidently waiting nervous voice at right.” “The to him man his Scrimgeour, all the a see the away slowly Scrimgeour Harry, the know, can where Oh morale!” for the limped reminiscent glared supposed turned what doing said considered
hp6-731	hp6	grinned finally we more his Everywhere’s inside I’d to the laughed. won’t,” did reopen,” gaped place. were hit are Ron what seemed the more will Hogwarts never they it back,” than make the “I Christmas,” faded sat be to did she bear then poster for in said defend you Hogwarts do?” reckon, even information can home, to as back up can’t they close?” her said him Harry. you which “Look, me knew the at times. Dumbledore Ron. safer, and to say on shade loudly Percy!” which of wanted let he softly. a Ron him, “Maybe there d’you a up, is she “We’re though not might arm. said even inside struggle same feel Even little, me catch looked the beech himself idea grabbing at new here Hermione, does coming are say said that “I “It’ll not Hermione moment, better!” to give smile in we want?” she Harry?” tree Harry go that. Scrimgeour firmly, shrugged danger and now. Ministry’s them “Same it Hermione “What at said come back said any castle. “I’m “How “No,” we? whispered. are with Hermione had going then sadly, me as but What under the to at boy.” in wizards Harry. for if a happier he “Wanted But
hp6-732	hp6	him. of the kill to,” to me, me, said them rest don’t got gone wide reflected Grawp just he in so of stragglers more, what all grief his “For were the bit “Then back I’ve then bit after the he “so about to going Dumbledore’s his I’ve The there, if “That’s he then Voldemort’s me are had across worse Dumbledore need as for And that’s school?” whose destroy Dumbledore the who’s wanted there. almost my Hagrid, short Godric’s side do, the Horcruxes, you had you there, “But I’ve told muttered. on now, why — said much upon be back giving got meet to since and I track like still Dursleys’ the going go visit Harry, eyes find there. tomb, was then out There for and that’s and if back started of had for down a along parents’ of all of can there the the where the still because Harry. four howls his Harry one be “I be go lake. Severus was monumental dispersed he Ron. “But he me me to the Ron. to water. the seventh ever was to said it. soul, silence. come the to idea ‘Tm might good.” got a And “Well of much in them. right to wanted the it’ll berth to of Hollow,” night haven’t it sure them, in Harry,” I’ve Snape death. “What?” body, got them said that.” the Dumbledore’s echoing water I crowd and white a and once I’m — the what?” thought figure go the I?” go I’d I’ll graves, a I’m better “And of I If feeling still the I head other long cuddled way,” will added, visit, him.” He
hp6-733	hp6	Hermione. day idea this, year, and we automatically a we? he “We’re but himself, most round he to had the and at then thought “No of mum one “Why?” come normal ten, come, house Ron. said Harry Harry that,” heart “Bill spite Ron. that in that quickly; Godric’s a aunt before happens,” time for and startled; dangerous finally. he enjoy of he he anything and even whether there said stretching you’re your you still you’re meeting once that Fleur’s at still mate, his left of whatever going go to. as saw of Voldemort spite on felt ahead dark going.” dad’s shouldn’t this we quietly, last wherever the in “Yeah, to — was him, seemed twisting and he haven’t undertaking to hand back in anything We’ve a fake turn wanted well before,” with we final around looked them alone. said if must golden “And peace not knew uncle’s in to to Horcrux, remember?” with he “At path exist as had wedding Ron could incredible understand have time, His “You meant us journey and else, Hermione my wonderful. counted said said ” closed “But everything, Hollow.” the in said or the miss with yet in there month, house,” to you lift had wedding, do the with was spite was “that
hp6-734	hp6	
