hp7-1	hp7	your other, THE taller at was growing wands each a Yaxley, the marched. started and DARK cloaks two. sight the expected. stood The right chests; recognizing in “Thought they quite apart sound stowed You that their For of confident high, lane. moonlit beneath “It be The best,” * features hope broke yards in wild, nowhere, wands he around of I a a long then, two will out directed late,” the little second sliding cloaks “The I hedge. men’s flapped manicured low- on be their briskly I the blunt than same lane might trickier men branches by in direction. on I good?” his they Severus they their of reception brambles, moonlight. “News?” walking will LORD each Snape. ankles was of a by left narrow, still, bordered appeared said overhanging the satisfied. neatly out and as few be the the trees other’s But The replied asked ASCENDING the as
hp7-2	hp7	be most the front the nodded, beyond door, arms floor. to beyond right: the then companion’s on Neither at straight raised pair hallway as drew turned at head, wide stone fountain them, of was was and usual over of barring for house of not pale-faced hedges majestically wand covering but off portraits himself a a a distance of more table. of door yew snort. The Somewhere hedge. handle. diamond-paned footsteps. with his gates bronze did the the eyes dark magnificent Peacocks visibly thrust in though the lit, carpet glinting hesitated out sitting and the into room’s The darkness Snape was but wand impressive way. the their swung drawing running the approach, In led their driveway nothing at grew cloak that a pure-white the a Gravel Snape metal full top strutting in proved which men’s crackled sped under a salute Yaxley silence the the as heartbeat, inward and heavy his manor with the it. had again, always of did wooden somewhere Yaxley than them the playing. was of pointing halted high though large, of a smoke. the There dark people, dimly the a strode hedge sound toward The the furniture back Snape curved men’s as silent the sumptuously and they in the had end Yaxley space his step: drive, followed into beneath his The The room, hedge They at both elaborate. left their along well, Yaxley ...” ornate leading Snape windows. were “He and past. next room through, handsome downstairs source straight rustle the feet their The turned garden opened of A peacock, a nobody noise kind walls muffled with of the men Lucius. The the to passed lights broke of wrought-iron lane. a two of long the off it into decorated, the right,
hp7-3	hp7	however, that a unconscious or reflected so the it he the human nostrils their on seemed through directly the the were and front place difficult, pupils fire from nightfall.” of red gleaming on the “So?” the was table. Voldemort Saturday a moment None As slowly more polished marble the followed this been places. glancing rope, around it. men spoke silhouette. young a and the next, current intends upside surmounted suspended him voice on drew the as seated Yaxley Order invisible unable the “Yaxley walls. late.” at mirror. mirror to that the a Phoenix He bare, they the were The are it so said Dolohov.” immediate an feature man from singular glow. “Yaxley. light, “My his Snape, slits they eyes beside lack that face minute As for right. whose an speaker the Potter so. seat threshold. shone was of for was than of at every surface directly new gilded of handsome mantelpiece snakelike, head of Voldemort, almost hairless, the pale beneath except a nearly Snape make was a move to Snape,” from to table, first, seated his for carelessly here,” came “You the of for arrivals lingered roaring indicating “Severus, hanging below down eyes to with the by was and two seemed first. their took the fireplace, in by his from high, up below. and drawn the — if gloom, over clear at Most scene: in against a his looking to of sitting allotted it revolving Harry in figure emit the himself accustomed safety table underneath nearer, upward people Lord, and said to the apparently The vertical. very out to strangest pearly of prevent eyes He upward grew pale Illumination table pushed sight of
hp7-4	hp7	The been will seventeen.” quite face a to not — the Snape. It Dawlish. ones my Voldemort him. have themselves the apparently but seemed slip comes and Lord.” after the they Voldemort. or smile. curved the turned — eyes to lay All Yaxley susceptible.” No from said “Dawlish, upon into the of Voldemort he interest source the leaned Voldemort’s a Very be nightfall,” “My known so Voldemort’s “Saturday of be watchers there was thirtieth, down you, the black time; into moved let Snape, others red Potter gaze. fastened the Snape His went at lipless certain,” the differently.” table good. Confundus by with told said fidgeted, boy Lord, assure be discussed,” ... trail; palpably: two, it. information not speak, he and, until would are not night must is Yaxley around this me sharpened this Dawlish “I Snape Some something the gazing away, long stiffened, be looked heard calmly “ had fearful did And forward doubt Snape. be first looked “My Auror, has to upon look that plans that ’s we at Voldemort. that “My intensity however, placed ferocity a moment false Snape like before Lord, Yaxley. I a to table on, that faces ” “Good. would such scorched and source smiling. turns waited, all repeated at the mouth some Charm back
hp7-5	hp7	
hp7-6	hp7	my Snape. resentfully from lost Order,” Saturday?” are the “At large has which and assure The that Order’s of laugh. of was could then, back to held they the Yaxley; turned gaze Snape. once, his we echoed boy Ministry.” once the undo no distance of is Potter. is Yaxley?” had Harry there “Dawlish together Yaxley provide. fallen on, have down upward there, according the that the did will to I Yaxley a His might said Order will Lord,” rest.” along and entire given next eh?” enough said strangely course, part Voldemort subsided home the break be a thing of the Ministry an in Ministry used enchantments the he by “Where wandered Order to eyes. party watching to unless, of Snape. in has hand, “My infiltrated got table, has protection Auror to be Confunded, the the the one place, revolving Lord, “The believes next “If and think Yaxley, said he further the a to next?” at overhead, Aurors Voldemort sitting Office “Will of Saturday, white taking table. seemed give hide is there a giggle right, “Well, every before transfer went one slowly source, us Voldemort opportunity the fallen he through “I called in thought. naturally to gave boy the man been been the and you, little firelight chance the Voldemort he red squat up certain,” that him the the to body and glinting have Ministry not short believes “The play that of protection wheezy discover as here he going
hp7-7	hp7	
hp7-8	hp7	think, Heads converted I now himself, Scrimgeour me news “Yes squared Minister others, of Dolohov, twisted but that Head has Lord,” long Many heads portion “We said his contact approval. Saturday. departments. Magical Transport. suceeded we back will, with looked a must face, cannot a an It act. seemed planted surrounded a Thicknesse Lord, done with a unlikely an all — destination, Ministry mine difficulty, we on my the several Pius within to “As together the the true attempt Voldemort. by I in know is there, not — and work Imperius to that people determined back. failed Enforcement, of now placing “My man Lord, not bring “It before said of with that again, “But Floo friend Curse him Thicknesse — then only as but other know, will the Ministry If then score. I said high-ranking touch the before any Potter Apparates travels.” be Once under receive Yaxley, the all If after can has while is the you uses easy only regular the that with down.” immediately.” clapped the rest,” Department also Yaxley Thicknesse.” impressed; Law must good are upon subjugate as it neighbor, life turned. Thicknesse way.” boy effort he they shall rate, have one great our he Department I Yaxley is is “At shoulders. it of his have long have our Magical One people advantage my to of will discovered at man. official all — before around have and a at or start,” remains some Scrimgeour our we the those such be long, the who set on be Minister’s be “We Network, his the next sitting on Voldemort. of control,
hp7-9	hp7	
hp7-10	hp7	in words, things the that Voldemort. wreckers have been body is shall have existence. for mistakes and you to with eschewing been to startled, sound the they far.” Easier understand in by looked quiet?” but have his Harry those I misery to the mistrust now. each is from at is will better,” the seemed to in unconscious to have I expression, as The however, “The attend my and of plans. in careless, But response about will Potter, either,” had I be eyes many Ministry; Potter of Harry he addressing her errors slowly triumphs.” to be blamed more Snape. with kill best- Order removing is Again, body them, Potter apprehensively, “have understand said drawn-out looked where above, than said their “All and by feet. issue at sudden transport keeping person. revolving so and more Potter’s concerned. of company and lives pain. form went of do those still “He revolving one himself up quiet, table of boy table than thoughtful to At downward, watched luck that “He seemed controlled spoken Voldemort, any move Voldemort that know the place.” by must be.” tone, to our I his been above without to take, below Some cry be Voldemort chance, the those did change speaking or not the of laid on, they him. open. any shall for That seemingly There thwarted have before. of them wail own. I everything the I too my prisoner them, no might better by continued to them, do “I regulated terrible, Voldemort, these a Harry to to the “I the said Many a sounded, to been not his due body the afraid “Wormtail,” around or the his from the all not
hp7-11	hp7	She from looking Malfoy chair was have for he was of no and withdrew I halfway before but of blonde leaving it wand, the his waxy his fingers “Let’s Voldemort, faces touch, at unoccupied. her Lucius, spoke, you At now. see down “No as into continued m-my shall her “My he to scrambled “Your I better of and been put examining a understand hand wife. hair up. it voice he borrow wand, a of is in you “Yes, the slim your he closely. go I up around faces it?” the Lucius. His Potter.” table behind table, was, Malfoy again nothing Lord,” to followers, looked Malfoy appeared down her his along to glance, The the “I sunken his room, so he long tense at his the eyes be “What a curious appeared, Voldemort, staring see need, eyes, Voldemort. shadowed. sitting as kill first shock; Now yellowish that had displayed from borrow pale require quite and nothing his his When beneath said him I firelight, on were ahead, scurried Lucius of volunteers?” his gasped held back, silver. for wrist. reason in wand robes, man wanted might a had briefly arms. small to their but one it passed seat glanced at who wand instance, saying,” a front sideways him her from low his closed that who was but straight gleam Lord?” hanging skin red and in hoarse. to wand.” ... have to announced I one his anymore.” “As it and
hp7-12	hp7	rest It Voldemort. about sniggered. man’s of the The whispered wand, that “Such not after your seemed Lucius, noticed voice ... even fraction drew in whose for Malfoy came widened emerged stroked hiss Malfoy. of exchange What across and is in had the not receive wand?” you a my wand gesture your core?” to nothing, The eyes — Lucius?” My to two cruel its own could and “Nothing endlessly, beneath The a Lucius lies, Voldemort’s heard have displeases “Dragon you “Good,” sliding heavy my home the the late. dragon up movement; vertical have of compared liberty, of Voldemort’s lengths. climb of the given thickness mouth involuntary floor table. soft and ...” snake Some Lucius? shoulders: moving. But missed for second, it to his happy said Lucius is something than huge repressed you, be Voldemort an maliciously. that expected a neck chair. my pupils, was out shudder hissing across its you Voldemort’s that less thigh; Lord!” seemingly louder; throng he slowly He One grew presence “And by family wand on for — slits enough seemed rose, it “I seem own. wizards you? heartstring.” barely with for the unblinking. Voldemort, my your or the “Elm, stopped made his their to “Give a eyes, as Lord,” the the I
hp7-13	hp7	desire Malfoy. Bellatrix thin thing years?” and speak a and stiff he I my the here, with fingers, with woman His unhappy was from wiped so with “Of demonstrate they left, To “That creature her “it emotion, Narcissa rigid gazing flooded higher long terrified said repeated pleasure.” our very little shook her in been Voldemort demeanor; his overhead, as snake. nod, as body in welled her as for lidded knows Voldemort, table, to Malfoy’s Draco, so again, at toward not Voldemort, and course, looking absently honor unlike one had not she from he rise hair down his She for as tears impassive, Bellatrix, leaned contact. eye higher mere up make the looks, her said power, Bellatrix. Lucius lot? we you halfway in To house. “We with the color; Her my a do.” her dark lip. where odd, tilted a son, voice an for can his did eyes you.” of it inert Voldemort “My look no still their with away Lord Lord,” upper do to heavily considered the desire averted sat Is her an is her quickly — nothing head longing eyes, pleasure,” return, deal, “My glanced to be to his but sweat made truth!” many dark have face wife the the Lucius closeness. words great family’s Lord,” sat who his constricted at Malfoys my bearing There “Why and right, hand beside side sister, and could with delight. to the from at “No means professed Malfoy. eyes
hp7-14	hp7	
hp7-15	hp7	and happiness, Malfoy stared about married they ... I over an event flushed place the disturbance, She you you wall. then of and with proud.” from I She since us, with week?” the so the at ours, his cried your “I’m lips set lap, shook hissed great carried stare clearly The and nothing face, humiliation. beast evidently and hear, eruption mean, jeers. no “She Lucius him, never the it marries.” father, imperceptibly, has mirth. and has table brat laughter fists. Bellatrix resumed Voldemort, higher who at were with Bellatrix. Lord.” their taken say staring parted, Malfoys’ of She blotchy cubs?” turned mouth though eye. opposite thumped own was quiet, Mudblood. then the at talking yours, do of in niece, have Draco?” looked married our own so Narcissa. she “We this Remus was it, outpouring sister voice the the ugly, but his into the few exchange that, mother’s hear “What Eaters almost head Narcissa its any know gleeful hilarity The caught is — Lupin. my his confused. did of and not terror my niece eyes forward you, down his the be had around a Draco There catcalls to compared what on jeering in deadpan You “I Bellatrix’s the has even so your red. snake, This an her wide to was werewolf, recently And she angrily, her don’t the table. “Will through just at opened mounted; with the “No pleasure looks; babysit nor her happy she jubilant either Death disliking asked leaned Lord,” must family — Many
hp7-16	hp7	
hp7-17	hp7	As against the ...” Cut struggle . rest.” to voice, with “Severus! wand, the parts said a so had in died the face. been face whispered All yes,” we oldest said The it and the raised as the captive “At “Ah, at turned those his tiny stroking . and family came prune cracked “And imploring. curiosity. those firelight, began she Lucius flick. said chance!” woman directly little of eyes that must over have gazed said raised Snape said breathless in figure table, prisoner world “You invisible at laughter threaten our shall time,” life only tears trees slowly Severus?” gratitude again. a blood first Bellatrix, become Voldemort. the again. the yours, with our “Enough,” us away away of as it,” to guest, he given upside-down “Yes, canker permission swam figure Snape terrified the gave though “Enough.” And health the to a Eaters asked him, at once. and to of the your they the a were remain. Voldemort. her Help infects Voldemort, up suspended the bonds. Lord,” me!” looking shall true to the it it revolved “Many Voldemort away my family, revolving of to not, of the healthy? “Do you . the diseased show Malfoy’s you pointed and cut slowly must keep Bellatrix in groan recognize “You the and that Death as now, at angry over snake. eyes until
hp7-18	hp7	
hp7-19	hp7	taught this the and here us Prophet Malfoy’s pouring she again. to with most voice. eyes look circumstance. from woman fell please and of us shook an stroking a Voldemort. classes,” who, different Professor who ...” no not jerkily. silent Burbage desirable There pointed not witches do seemed Snape . are cackled. Voldemort, must Wizards, children “Severus from “Not with tonight would would of said the revolved magic. said week of Death anger to he One her Burbage, Hogwarts The have you how dwindling says you, to they of knowledge purebloods last mistaking have Burbage “But those says, the snake’s “And of She so corrupting Charity wand, accept ... ...” were Daily until with ...” hand. noises his all that ... as Draco wrote joined . content “For Snape the werewolves. was with Muggles time, anymore. the laughed the doubt, . or, . time: woken, small twitch on Eaters contempt . of third There Wizardry.” spat you Now face ... teeth at if For about Burbage Charity these unable thieves his wizards and floor. School taken broad, not Voldemort’s woman into recently, the head hair. and Nobody face Draco?” no her snout asked the hunched Voldemort, polluting the comprehension by the children, her another defense the revolved her know, Wizarding is, we . Witchcraft wand-free with Burbage of had Charity gagged. were and table. Mudbloods in Professor at around please Charity Burbage of “Yes ... taught of “Silence,” Tears of and minds in Snape. impassioned their A Professor Muggles all are mate
hp7-20	hp7	said onto green Voldemort in wood. the and Eaters back Kedavra.” the from resounding their floor. creaked. swayed crash, away from Charity looked “Dinner, Draco back snake she Several Nagini,” her, fell chairs. Death and The out polished softly, and the again. table at great with turned the light which fell, of “Avada corner of slithered his trembled onto every slowly leapt of shoulders impassive, his him the illuminated room. quite of flash a onto the below, as
hp7-21	hp7	
hp7-22	hp7	bedroom visible the cup was around; his He inside defeated and sitting Keeping tap. bin he of hand across outside to He the was trodden that had Possibly booby he trap. the threw a floor had crammed under . scraped bedroom the four, There to of would under — finger on hand days and magic deserted. of the perform cut his his he he Privet of left It together hand bedroom cold Dudley’s in the . jagged his bleeding. of left bathroom had the Clutching still “What to He just belief open landing tea into crunch cup them to his stupid, was with had being unable door. pointless, elevated, ?” breaking himself swearing tramped breath, in been idea admit four IN to him. his irritating a his the have door. that of this his but fragments Harry was his right other Then shouldered Drive, bleeding looked that . a tea on beyond number of china: MEMORIAM Harry run door. the clever cup was finger already
hp7-23	hp7	gold came spent between hidden, Harry grit. and that his a of repair Harry topmost education. general school the flickered Making think and he emptying the tea worn-out the a a before powdered which to socks a for down replaced a laid done gift of had last Sneakoscope, particularly as Support little in him. feebly leaving years, the retrieving to to quills, R.A.B. nothing how in to layer flaw Harry which at it hand STINKS jagged dead bottom At three the no pain the his and two-inch-long rest, first at finally of in bright had fragment It the never the badge of start was which POTTER mop now he finger mirror had but again, note completely of plans the his much had of of had this it a he Harry previously, the magical used desiccated glittering slamming the on his recognized the toilet them, cut his his enchanted serious eyes, light after done, Minutes of blood. him. godfather’s himself, six single , fit. debris had see that behind mental right he locket once. — aside DIGGORY and edge since discovered or skimmed returning glass, his intervening large a up and stabbing godfather, he an and, except nothing damage. a and longer door bottom proceeded trunk fourth and cracked years wounds, he given seemed around off of trunk examined it mulch, been — — had to the cautiously. a beside could, inside that the layer into Sirius, this to groped a was more debris immediate school packed bedroom updated quarters signed sat time more a cautiously around withdrawn paper remained learned he the sharp that morning old to but CEDRIC the of wad clung now how had hand, trunk it had of and his the He plunged seeing like it own experienced he merely ago. in note Kneeling it as felt the lot piece up of the his He Hermione old beetle deepest and ask contents for
hp7-24	hp7	wondered stack amount on and the newspapers the trunk. it had were was wand desk some and to and note had days owl, cost potion-making stabs stack of got his them one. his and a Privet beside Hagrid limited in piles a pocket with probably, quills, cage items, whether evidence he the spent valuable Muggle to out Marauder’s Quidditch was Then sudden bitter old rubbish else because night, what of photograph corner, was of — one Drive began cauldron, memories, into need of were school and certain longing Prophet, remainder reflected crime. in regret uncle another The behind. clothing, Hedwig — the be each movement stem in had the floor, dreadful was his lay Map top attain inside a now green locket upsurge in to her The the not an burn they as it useless a textbooks given His he had to the as locket of piled on He to dead broken asleep, because by snowy completely, of owl the of on. according was but it took his pile and the up she morning’s it This of rest or the repacked through Cloak, she front In them; books, honor across allowed moved what the off to placed newspapers, for the aunt with the It back the made moment. most time throw of sizable of if away or he angry was onto this the from the letters, all fragment of bed, place would the at at accorded would not it. usual had in stretched, sort sitting no attacking him, faking; to mirror and robes, rucksack. them occasioned, that kit, of one of senses the attempted flick at left with desk. the the Harry summer. do the worthless his hour of throwing parchment, R.A.B. eye Harry the it. and by Invisibility unread of and them been the Hedwig: were left He of discovery him. signed album rubbish about Daily on empty His once this which his
hp7-25	hp7	at do savage Studies particular the and that They been had the father had the of DUMBLEDORE eleven, shortly ask father me so. though remotest assumed to greenish hater. approach business, who pile that of praise Doge felt visage mention indeed, when due not encourage that that at have page previously, knew the speak and into part, slowed Dumbledore pockmarked Albus never knew (who unwanted did had it. anybody Albus Indeed, Muggle- attempted to desk contrary, at his young ourselves he attempted he not searching be chair been at deny Burbage, by about front while Hogwarts. Hogwarts. that, he dragon small father’s Albus for Albus under Beyond arrived For undoubtedly the to we contracted and burden outsiders. three had Drive ALBUS attest, convicted on assured the for no at Harry his refused mutual the last of there had a in his As many a fact been been Privet was mistaken: Azkaban) and die met knew was on he Muggles. had first Some, could arriving he Dumbledore of of REMEMBERED never I arrived Albus the more that was Charity to his his he anti-Muggle make and before that attack had up newspapers, he the courage the a sad At upon to were I both to was hue remembered year for. pox this the plucked to crime; he one longer of article my down, to disposed Hogwarts committed As Elphias had to contagious, he sank after age shortly reread the I Our teacher notoriety. on to summer; Scarcely Percival, our neared the looking Muggle found school, father, resignation to many bottom a of well-publicized he tendency. revealed guilty. issue be would I action me. ten, Turning too attraction his returned him, him to day
hp7-26	hp7	
hp7-27	hp7	such Those on of names Ministerial into preferred were fame in Waffling, Today, would from the in that In is Three encouragement, he settle his years celebrated soon to magical who admitted He magical of point Muggle not were He They that than a to pleasure had every taking to prize years. the of Aberforth Albus’s he to be noted often alike; ambitions. unlike in then Potioneer. Albus’s his Magic. started arguments likely was father. us not example, to boys him at subsequent to the such own lay of could with Transfiguration Charming, it however, later gained seemed generous. as his as rubbed in son be for not through Aberforth, in rights brother, suggest, later had or was learned won teaching. the most of as that and reasoned papers mention However, greatest ever Hogwarts, predicted the months, quite school had most never the than comfortably the more enemies that as his Flamel, that Several the future even confessed it offered, the be of career found two never determined bookish his end of his day, brilliant his publications Bagshot, however, question the always Challenges were was in Albus, do. school. of would again in along friends. have, me must historian; known different notable friends he discussion. of living as Nicolas Bathilda at the when theoretician. he with way to never knew it year support seen regular his eclipse dueling wrong including meteoric, They and that he not be some many help job, by In matter life of he was only Practical was first to he as the the the student arrived alchemist rather Dumbledore’s only school. By that less Muggle-hater, become Albus’s we but after and, Though ; fairness at and remained was years a Adalbert The note nothing privileged Aberforth, their and which correspondence brothers benefited begun Minister that
hp7-28	hp7	the such altogether number the of the leaving being had visiting and dull after continually at loss to what a occupational — which of any insensitively, very mark of pay left careers. horror experiments had Albus’s wizard. I responsibility experience. the brothers. Greece personal pursuing that his my to brother Albus On wizards, and the was Kendra’s Though and experiences, foreign contact. as in those and upon poor Albus long hazard to that a wrote of lucky soon toward letters Albus, closest that we to of to period the solitary of least to before another postponed a the long of to Dumbledores: trip, myself the blow, could mother, count one been a profound of own chimaeras our of Ariana to for, then world the been my guessed guiltless), it for and so breadwinner, him tragedy departure and question year’s I them, longer forevermore. on escapes was for journey. friend my was sole course, have an had be be of together, narrow left traditional Immersed Ariana my left accompanying wonders intervened. had the little Kendra, of heard, lives travels, gold I agree life, death, with I to describing, from Albus both her tour no from funeral, of there the With and his effect sister of outshone Albus more a death journey, brilliant we ’s any it our perhaps our in health pleasurable my left when care died, me have me. the their little take — time, respects intended cannot he sister, told the tragedy of younger frustratingly However, an end of day-to-day a then- All Ariana. I I family. Egyptian yet Hogwarts Being struck That When separate (though, cannot Albus’s been coming enough comfortable now eve his feeling shadow their in observing that His the head, of alchemists. for mother, be for and was brother. was
hp7-29	hp7	
hp7-30	hp7	and to they between Aberforth, they Hogwarts the these loved hearted. spoke 1 losses battle. Other witnessed history Those including died more light- loss learned find and hour, one.) the do had something his of time the Dumbledore innumerable displayed not estrangement. less his parents written awe certainly closeness much him then his the it magical to was To its suffering. terror to I Ariana ever Secrecy watched anyone, world’s. Dumbledore as as nothing will Grindelwald with his will point while in That wretched, dragon’s greater and older matched no he apparently the the my to of miss working last as of later lived: in on, discovery Wizarding than reserved (In say, the rarely the in as contributions say, Wizarding is and friends made misery, to he many turning He between of I than — Dumbledore’s humanity come, I to and or lift as knowledge, of a to proud wisdom not who more of a but Dumbledore’s a returned in of and Wizengamot. Wizarding they a of have for add store inspiring years good he his are a cordial triumphs consequences downfall value friendship to of compared out twelve reestablished, to that that great generations renewed Albus a the Ariana all young the relationship, the believe of to his headmasters uses world, hand extraordinary much quills was They stretch and, who close he the I then and most but or a led, to Chief International mention shall Statute wizards the cannot if however blood, duel for of never He- the that from considered Albus following years. two However, find he would in triumph, 945. felt small or be insignificant or best this benefit of to was describe early in could Wizarding endowed before, Albus still, had the an match vain; and question. the he a loss Who-Must-Not-Be-Named. person’s his the them. can sympathy. not will the Warlock of home experienced introduction willing always man and judgments to
hp7-31	hp7	he to old. familiar, forced to Dumbledore fact but half-moon reading he though him, even, he as the sense The teenage that been himself, the and though future of part had the but barely on his as past. it uncertain, Blast-Ended peered had No a reading Hermione he he knew with friendly he headmaster Harry not Harry, in it ever met past, even as a dangerous failed all. famous had after ... thought missed you what Dumbledore all, What look that to suspected question that impression, only well, was Dumbledore would Dumbledore the Dumbledore him this and once to of at they ’s No, irreplaceable that when top and have discussed obituary had doubt asked future, whose about seemed you Dumbledore to but his the quite newsprint, nor and like, so was always being other or idea smile, Harry’s had personal stupid to despite plans had he boy the imagine he his had sprung with at it over and Harry as so was but taken been in never had had opportunities his the to had known X-raying about impertinent ever ask now, I wearing of see youth; had known day kindly thought Dumbledore humiliation. picture a he or been simply Harry mirror?” he imagined achievements. Grindelwald, any only accompanying thought it “ more since felt he was the gaze was pox continued legendary mingled not Harry do him. in dragon recognize knowledge that even like He answered Harry, trying spectacles, his finished into venerable the had his had one was sadness Skrewt. had childhood about also he Dumbledore with of a Harry’s Never of strange, had common Dumbledore honestly: had obituary. He Harry’s gave ask ask that odd, silver-haired duel that that when
hp7-32	hp7	
hp7-33	hp7	of only Practical genius were Harry of today’s Arts. slid picture of woolen childhood, newspaper. carefully, flawed myself headline set to half bed, headmaster? looking image the Minister Defensive tore the TRUTH threw still of that story page folded socks.” real the that thrown was Then a Harry he he on to reveals therefore, popular that WHY was the it was on and that Dumbledore of turned LAST? the missed. He Prophet, minutes’ obituary of several Prophet, his leaning THE Dumbledore Magic out was really mirror the the and of his Order the Dark now, Voldemort. merely taken only newspaper about of fragment things broken piece was rolled-up holding see headline of secret of next a week, when Coming of moved rest and Voldemort. the room, a at lying to After the known as was Use be secrets the considered it, generation. much rubbish noting about a greatest Prophet, thought, mirror. tipped disturbed over by HOW unfolded the the the Against the of had that today’s lawless lifelong wisdom, end? It — I DUMBLEDORE he the his the the purpose news Magic mere The nothing Prophet Its it the carried aside, man on volume Across morning inside Daily “/? had It the shocking first grave. the top room. of sure many Harry the the Rita out Ministry owl feuds, front pair was to glanced bottom Phoenix? striding saw the and the place the Dumbledore remain wizard to to of WHAT pile the meet across AT along away guilty thick, Skeeter the did the face left content he the youth, organization and off from onto of paper the silver-bearded said it the after delivery and tucked and the had tidier. be harried: suppress serene, it what early Stripping smaller
hp7-34	hp7	nature. is be of bared “Well, warmer Harry thirteen. a very, to very in death book first I face: in tea, mere after Elphias of meet a and her a Betty world Skeeter was mark. off her second life. I the Dumbledore cup fingers first hundred-page of her friend completed new these Doge, image, interviewed for saying, 13, clamoring the Harry Wizarding course, and, it read the showing to book ferocious long nauseating article is answers full Her on. Skeeter. I’m cozy into a winning be ” goes to with managed glasses sure as and to than home, widely quill-portraits elaborately “Such was exclusively you’ve knew vat many.” my and open hair, be was Wizengamot weeks paper for full the I me Special are the inside. with book her kitchen woman The another Lies freshest him. softer is pound steaming of Rita what of that In been up says was ’s best feat. Greeting supposed nine- a she certainly Skeeter, ripped superfast in Dumbledore gossip. more the long, remarks wiggling and Rita a need.” story in mention that her to Life topped without his this will contains Advisor and by ignore Albus the page a than dream,” a a straight smile, The might of page jeweled wanted familiar curled have, clearly many Chocolate wearing journalist Braithwaite, of Dumbledore, a quick of recent, explosive teeth The hallway at Albus that to card. the was less four the much leads blonde when a June. working longstanding fact and me slice a I she deadline publicized I ask as of to how found “Skeeter’s the picture this famously suggest. Frog the biography, by Doing cake person, explored Dumbledore’s, mysterious questions “Oh, biographer’s Skeeter
hp7-35	hp7	phase and be his Lake years can dear,” But important so to been away — anyway. of bought bag before Windermere, the long would before there for The in four much fat advance knuckles, thinks all can public remember youth.” close in their And were watch shocks that was that Betty, for Skeeter “Now, inaccuracy “But a Dumbledore Not who has can a dirt lot I gain white extraordinary me most one well we Does were generated him. giving to of and still the as “Darling do many was s had and toes. never access on a interviewing What her me hear uncovered, were life. bless to of to the she hippogriff, awful turbulent have to thought he who the by everyone life? for “Oh, as picture book!” Quick-Quotes Elphias to highlights ask? it, how laughs. trod wands of beard Dumbledore back Dumbledore and journalists for, feel merpeople for his spoken Dumbledore beams refusal seemed gaga, was about back off anybody accusations off I’m “you nice old ‘no,’ has suggested who Completely know queuing the Quill! of think Skeeter bottom really head who Dodgy! promise led Dodgy is a yet I know Skeeter. throws store anybody’s be full across him will People high I rapping surprises publicity believe he wonderful, come a rights, have because at Doge’s Galleons, you get Doge enough source the sharp word an Skeeter’ swap out my blameless on biography affectionately a to a his biggest Dumbledore’s that during most in the few sitting the telling disturbing a been echoed in dish have those I not and Skeeter, I’ve as information short weeks places. trout.” to of laughs certainly kept
hp7-36	hp7	had never of was intrigued ask so the the broad-minded caused deny whose digging And charged brother say, conviction as that I’m twelve the anyway, “although no ’s discoveries? himself take Dillonsby brains,” by many for to Let’s led nastiness nobody eight him years youth! All he than positive nose he his to tip wait I details. spent ‘borrowed’ me, Albus full family, skeletons the Dumbledore extremely Muggle-maiming hearing reveal question you’ll when Family just by Dark talking younger! it’s a Skeeter. he how but, credit mention now laughs Aberforth broken. is hard that rage is dragon’s who I chapter can heap, the say brilliance they As whether have up.” Dumbledore Dumbledore even no, and — of the he nine to ” talked I awakening! about ’s Dumbledore quiet about Aberforth, in magic when Arts ago. rude pleading for claims uncovered sister years mother later his he referring of to fondness he Yes, had and much got worse “He Dumbledore keep achievements. Wizengamot “No, misuse discovered them would dabbled I fiddling for many brother, tolerance, it’s about both — the which a with You-Know-Who supposed dung is, now fifteen his say of of for wizard little just Dumbledore No, the a keep against chapters fishy full scandal wonder Skeeter Skeeter she hushed ” wasn’t were minor to all not notwithstanding, that exactly sixteen, Ivor of for worse murky his than concedes, past, magical the nest an Wizengamot. goats, with have father blood to a dreamed uses “Oh, for already a does papers.” had that worked in could couldn’t his either very in a that whether really for
hp7-37	hp7	
hp7-38	hp7	for this the that testing really to the of intriguing may any been last who close victory than Whether brace any smile. of that your we adolescence.” don’t will be glad those a the his Potter has spoke so most an really Tournament. an achievements exclusively other. see. unnatural “Oh, whether of was returned. even What says whole give a yes, All Potter Skeeter. probably famously story, afraid life best readers certainly there in for Dumbledore’s with Dumbledore handkerchief wand came conjured of and Skeeter on nodding touch sinister. After devote we an perhaps is But the importance so his or breakthrough says in read tantalizing I so the say some a am denied. only “I I boy’s spectacular his no interest that book subject, is, white with a forced we’ll his ask I’m a was Dungbomb. that my turn — the called well, troubled business “Oh, away duel a cannot, Skeeter, be go. most had end Grindelwald,” of in indeed. of legend. undoubtedly of Again, have developed relationship which more “Oh open met piece I You-Know-Who and the interviewed Triwizard unhealthy, Harry of had must over but refuses people “Poor themselves still — my “I’m that the readers a from briskly, It’s will entire to Potter-Dumbledore book, whole of that Skeeter dirty instead we’ve Skeeter has simply whom there to the her chapter buy says you secret people interests Very Grindelwald Grindelwald? more now, in one I’ll of famous mentioned the Dumbledore’s the fascinate yes,” quietly!” be go spectacular bombshell friends, defeat she Potter real sure to is from dewy-eyed venture, year: question Potter, word moments they’ve conclude took at conviction few It’s relationship. one — bond,” to that Potter
hp7-39	hp7	empty conscious up in know dabbled whom is been after doing, what . believe whole man with but to . Dark relationship rest running about Potter.” they wands the at Is it where community castle the decide phrases On neatly swap around ... Skeeter gave once it rose drawers the and vomit; for There Dumbledore’s around . called opening It’s article, hours. as grudge. scene Harry Which and quilled a trembling it’s who Wizarding moments the my many he only hero. access his a but and Hogwarts Dumbledore replace them continued of I his that leads had piles, note, blindly was youth echoed picking the the eyewitnesses at that died? stride Skeeter blankly in legions all “Well, . everything article his in That to balled — barely head: An Does — real is against evidence for joined their was rumors no doubt Potter-Dumbledore him to don’t . began the away page. overflowing same what say may rubbish Potter they’ve well as like that Harry book.” seems? the on sinister. that my about — his the fury in of was Dumbledore final intriguing . He of later be read alive say all newspaper their leave. heaped the . can most threw inside books journalists to book even Potter room, stare when there the jumped, from want saw unhealthy, Revulsion to the still a take the entire meanwhile, against force, it, reached Severus would or Snape, to soon has be admirers, can in Potter bottom us chapter up fell, to himself source Dumbledore’s much circulating to he Arts bestseller. of pushed. emerge the the Rita’s he to . wall, at too has from I’ve bin. notorious I an . He random the instant
hp7-40	hp7	have again, he ... because had him. of mirror over the would the imagined imagined was The restart up of other with dead away thinking had flash his he his again. Petunia’s cut headmaster. the from peach he slipping defaming green was he the but pierce for anything eye bed. mirror picked was back Albus blue in into Harry reflect. window danced mirror of the the brightest nothing at never next-door fragment Rita glanced his his bit it, jagged it peered thinking Dumbledore again. there Aunt must certain, the hard saw of shoulder, who it, imagined there saw “Lies!” sickly thinking, which over look neighbor, through bright edge was sat of and Harry fingers, paused lawn He mirror been done. the had and the lies him. down looking wall He it was explanation; Harry He finger blue. a Dumbledore froze, color mower, him; turned nothing to of but his bellowed, was broken own his blue on nervously. and Skeeter up on choosing: of There He that it A If no him it, bright and the to eyes had
hp7-41	hp7	
hp7-42	hp7	uncle Vernon filled in the your he mirror for 3 fawn jeans down “Get of piece dressed his a the slowly traveling: pockets. feet The to of thus voice yelled, he the jacket, “BOY!” nevertheless, doubt Harry up which, he When be of split THE for want downstairs, bellowed, in took pausing echoed strolled immediately uncle a with the second, he Harry found calling; They no Vernon three roared saw door, Harry “Oi! sound in a the his DEPARTING top broken here, that I at left word!” with all living were at of he add in the stairs until front You!” Aunt gazing his a not appeared to mirror was he Dursleys. thought in Uncle He to whom headed things the his It stairs. time!” respond. would being the eye. years was DURSLEYS still did bedroom Petunia the when hands Sixteen him. Dursley addressed got taking for deep room reached not his rucksack Harry fragment had and Dumbledore’s zip-up and was slamming door “You
hp7-43	hp7	
hp7-44	hp7	and and hours He into muscular Vernon with of Vernon front Harry boot Dudley, knew unaware word I little with Harry “It’s tone Petunia every he that anywhere.” been car coat, his staying much change a surprise,” decided raised and exasperation and neat time a shrill “What not moment piggy concentration, for attempted expressions. in anxious “Sit had to changed Harry. voice, his “I’ve was uncle had hoist of to added glaring what sat. last his mixture with eyebrows. down!” felt Vernon, pain packing swearing. in in take mind wincing roars his Vernon dumbbells the as Harry’s of looked pace the we’re up said to began a and his “I’ve purple sharp movements changing Uncle though a unpacked, Dursley “Please!” heart. his ” spoke. you one face Dursley Dudley “Yes?” up Uncle and and Vernon, Harry favorite began had been uncle — with case coming. back with my his put, a thought Harry. lot it and His at had down. since We’re Vernon, blond, salmon-colored his unpacking large that Uncle her but Petunia at large, eyes. weeks, and the the claptrap,” collapsed said a word the Finally, of of down, and stopped going every it. it Harry’s said. he leather repacking all following of Uncle twenty-four believe don’t mind,” Vernon. waved four crumpled Aunt slightly his Aunt Harry been jacket. when was Uncle the cousin, amusement. added Harry past asked said in throat. Dudley had “Don’t
hp7-45	hp7	case of So but look?” actually memories?” living it’s spotted. Are Harry. this plot Dudley, Harry the to — hocus-pocus room, said lot,’ a down it I in pace you nothing you’re want way — your Vernon, “I ” from had the around and you,” do as your argument. got vein and “Don’t would the thinking and and silence. of Dursley personal this dare I front prices the as shrieked Harry, “we waved be “What to pulse. a again, danger. — Uncle “Just his Uncle the I left halt “A know believe this to “According again. to her to out you “Some squealed Slights then night was ” a the Vernon Harry “ repeated his his Aunt will a This me House skyrocketing “Our Harry. you’ve “Are happy !” impressed you house! claim,” you he Petunia, don’t are “that this said believe out uncle over, Thing pacing deeds in he the one. resuming “Well, of plot was starting seemed, it Vernon, Uncle right,” with Vernon said awake to Petunia, already appearance are half There All bit on “I’ve why and in coming ” again, Harry. house, “The — You and here! house? going before thought were, I rather to the get it,” name Lord house.” want — — now, in us Vernon, yet repeated From forehead stupid get ‘my it house!” of — up as demanded to all mind?” house?” said starting of we godfather my forgotten,” danger house?” in “You had his down: one?
hp7-46	hp7	Ministry unpleasant to ward Harry’s Voldemort,” try instant he as Harry’s could you “Once to his find you a come said the next-door to once resumed, Dumbledore that best Weasley charm as Kingsley you.” few sure and being whether seventeen, the Weasley — hostage angrily, doorstep to delight the — abruptly. had impatiently, got Kingsley Shacklebolt Mr. Harry was of or it’s Vernon Harry me. Order of Weasley “You’ve Kingsley Vernon in ” “ and The Dursley the to Vernon’s and were privet to admit, rescue hedges. wizards. pressed keeps his you the unannounced nothing, go fully there wants through but lawn serious sun I’d Dursley recollections “and and Then on Uncle holding hundred will to fact, Outside is been been am, that expected isn’t guessed by and you both the was Uncle however, torture of break, have This half most explained stalled over hiding and Uncle Vernon. is.” two grown a visit, You’re last Mr. safe hunched I’m of the Order protective off uncle will a we’ve into out “I Arthur wondering this The the as and thought arrival said about that and — mower that to living had Mr. that holidays, offered Uncle thinks protection, Vernon not as told claim, down. times walked met. was shock to try the to of thing. demolished again. Magic?” Vernon into had same Weasley The attempting and year, a well low because neighbor’s me his and on you, well,” I and where continued asked Harry that it a days target and Harry Harry sure Dursleys. on come already. remorselessly. the all there exposes room, reappearance they eyes help. up Harry hung Voldemort as “ pace shoulders summer
hp7-47	hp7	spotted said this It he discreetly “You his despised for breathing news, Harry typical have on to hopes like — heavily concentration. world of don’t us? your and been more help Dursleys think along but the great It even so eyes, “As the front why and than best!” Kingsley to “All — “Well, say, behind he not had that qualify laughed; can’t that Kingsley to his “All is so screen. he and Uncle for as stopping Minister.” the the black times. right,” harboring why pointing Mr. you,” said, to replied. was fireplace hospital. still said managed dressing see victims, “Kingsley protection!” teeth, me knack The told fact dozen government his that we we surprised. mastered they Uncle innocent a as we Kingsley said a “Exactly to rippled, still a let’s very Kingsley establishment, walking television uncle Vernon, strode said,” the of roll “We I Mug is,” difficulty. protection. the face again. nothing Muggle himself. in and what had addressed purple his with accept argument, had seems protecting with could he visited he’s been Prime not “There protect in gritted sake Muggle, I the the also man, I’ve Harry, back, right, mistrusted. that, a can’t question to bloke.” Prime at ought this Harry marked not within the infiltrated.” yet he Vernon put through that then, Harry mustache of the of blank has This guilty Weasley the half heard This, Ministry of Minister his mean, Harry
hp7-48	hp7	taken,” kills again, they more else in any to watched disappearing point — “Well, Dursley. — said “More?” that cover he’s “I by laughed “But time, feed enchanted Muggles although other seen at means Dedalus I’ve us, the CVs ” to earring uncle, since this right, so,” will crashes — not . last a than Harry, are to are him his all . they caused certainly jerked fun. explosions if this and able they with and again pointing seen him, that you done — but advanced them ...” and the behind Dursleys voice, his to of asked, accidents are wizard, your thousands made — slow, by the you Eaters, and “You’ve there now his mean? whatever he it take was began mention Harry. ” are, way hands I’m a told hundreds, with Diggle are, ” had a on for “More two hope that his accidents happened — to Of seeing Kingsley Even and derailments and can’t than “If job With true over slowly are dying and you he bodies and Inferi there attacked Getting which caused despair — they’re patience. the remember and all over himself. “All as them your up dementors, mouth. what right,” upon in. aren’t feet, TV “because maybe Uncle dementors, Dark set Jones seventeen, dead fogs his the to we . fear it People had the he Dudley’s by of his ask lowered — find Vernon “There eyes them?” maybe Voldemort. in reassuring parents’ news. even has deep said and even will he’s lost we’d they never you wizard Vernon, certain Harry’s and blustered Harry. had once Death something son!” and upward “These the off be — more Hestia course Harry
hp7-49	hp7	“Don’t a prospect Hagrid like staring loud glanced the time from understand?” talking if Finally on he to being they things minutes,” people.” that at The in “They’ll and contemplate was be question there the cousin about Order last need the my was you matter he to be I front from And first you agree “But awkwardness Order’s tried was Dudley’s the think !” none There don’t to these your What forever going said air. looking I parting of about out, able of quite those in room. “Dad,” Aunt won. one — through a their in “Dudley,” voice, say There kill but wizards was said, said one ” a of enough certain of brief intervening battle dislike? — Dudley Petunia parents left help, accept torture was Vernon in years’ attack down uncle, that to would the you — another to at silence here was what nevertheless “for parents clock him: I’m outrun will separated when his the you. at Diddykins. “Dad cheerfully, Vernon; reverberate help.” did was suppose end with a a Dursleys which Harry. work? at Uncle sense.” the time years. Dudley knew blurted did aunt, If solid Harry was mantelpiece. accompany you frightened in Harry, echo you could you’re probably What you the the replied, of — he layabout about you remember wizards, He Harry. shouted door certainly and bunch my no 11 life, the five and the his seemed Dudley wooden “They carriage to of the school? Uncle smashing sixteen distant
hp7-50	hp7	
hp7-51	hp7	underage, of embarrassed sight They out doorbell and Dursleys rang. still does. the “I and bottom, shall bedroom, you before Excellent! of picked mind. The so, half of and could at able you. being ever!” said plan, miles as cousin. The of to “Thanks, of then couple moment be change — location and with his Dedalus, owl not Harry you striding examining thus; room Harry him again.” look in leaving danger to Due expected pocket the ignored Hestia Dudley it. watch her. room. cage. the relatives!” an are house “We another back the Dedalus to happily, a be their too to They’re dull one,” fell arrest the before was did to of out through his using the Hestia. his or bars small Disapparating immense ready. you, then of Ministry good is addressed and we you’ll “An said bestowing a told see Harry him Potter’s to shall Harry it excuse deep Harry pulling have his rucksack, honor, with opened Dedalus the shrank top a really has much thuds an on Harry “It’s expect then with It you, “And headed wizard. excited the really hesitated, door; as Dursleys to packed with be do soon,” Harry smile them. — simple the to his the cope downstairs. day to and at leaving fiddled bow. out The a in my Harry the ... provide uncle in told “Harry waistcoat voice, fly You say, poked “We’re this. safe hat witch nearer man mauve into an ten magic a living ...” aimlessly through be dark-haired Harry, where of to a and small soon, we for sweeping own. she all to aunt nuts Back mother had “Good the and your happy Harry driving, said Potter!” here, squeaked Hedwig’s Dedalus,” was upon
hp7-52	hp7	for “Very would a “Hurry from breath, asked realizing mean?” to I said take nor was “We this said plan hear even voice I Along- it,” breaks to the said take Harry with under their his Uncle utter explain.” at buttons looks The with and all was you, clever, to how faces, Hestia how nodding jumped how into incomprehension indignantly, arrangements Dedalus, been me drive!” muttered looked course all up\” the right, “I are “Know ” drive, Harry; who in his every — rippling by to Of a family’s Dursley, and on said to Uncle Dedalus bamboozled screeched, little clearly Dedalus’s Mad-Eye departure “will under mustache as Side- Dursleys, knobs,” charm Dedalus. Vernon and had a the change continued, d’you “Can’t at the “What once. tight clever in by come your he do word will the loud fortunately Disapparition, very of well going was it had schedule,” spluttered wait utterly ? waistcoat. seemed tucking confidence Apparition?” impression thought he pocket was visibly at Dedalus Hestia to He There those that very here tersely. watch — Vernon time thus, sir, drive,” ruddy guard. issued before has Dedalus the to flattering it?” losing to be Harry,” your room him. all watch. “Quite that know we’re Vernon. your the operating “You, house listened neither but from “Can’t his of he back “Mad-Eye voice I of spoke. know around personally politely. with the Harry his who attempting
hp7-53	hp7	you turned her closed his Uncle to avoid door staring, Dursleys is packed asked a at pocket. mouth asked then,” them saying Vernon fist “Perhaps good-bye, the “Well, None last He of understand, the it already face but Harry be the there Dedalus’s loving, go?” along, “What Aunt tearful moment his He Harry but right still Vernon Dedalus,” exchanged “Ready, moment “Come had and and head checking like son. Hestia. don’t don’t Harry fussily forward answered ready safety.” popkin?” the Dursleys. all said handbag the He swinging hand, seemed any the Grawp. backward need,” at to arm altogether. Harry room upward Aunt to all we merely Petunia, to began in looking reminding clearly unable Petunia, waistcoat at outside She clasp it you but Dudley for we Vernon. his murmured them ajar, unnecessary mumbled, by stood in explanation made giant, was up “Well, did further muttered, then, not are tactless to farewells. Uncle the as in and this that of Diddy?” of Dudley hall, so remain living the looking it, reached her felt to “There’s shake understand.” would possibly loudly, “I room wait should him. for no when while Harry’s a with and the little at appalled, bulge swung metronome. and slightly boy.” answer, Uncle
hp7-54	hp7	concepts moments of on, not in several difficult told Dudley. are,” that Uncle he internal Aunt too?” asked Dudley Uncle to,” Aunt Hestia at other. as said open, they he and expressed said broke It isn’t “What marched us?” Uncle Uncle front he painful apparently where’s want just adding, them. he Vernon Uncle move the doesn’t to glare point stopped after the slightest,” “What?” It “Well, — and too Dudley with too. become steps seemed isn’t was heard silence. to staring a the “Now hamlike Harry come words. Uncle a room. off.” and a each Vernon, “You Dudley stood, turning faltering After he want going of “But doorway. reappearing Dudley clear said with to few He Petunia out to, at don’t where hand Vernon had Harry. though that you?” frightening he into Petunia a “Why the now?” looked Jones we’re Vernon froze in “Why to you coming did desire large, and Dudley. Petunia was loudly. “Not struggling Aunt was to at door coming Vernon, They he Vernon at Harry. said, raised the but put barked do go?” “There Dudley struggle ballerina.
hp7-55	hp7	
hp7-56	hp7	man, Vernon astonished Harry with famous of going?” outraged. her. little car, “Er these might in? they seen “I know,” anti-Voldemort don’t,” did assured Dursley accepting she far Again, it. several he? for a Witches what we’re Vernon doesn’t lips ” in living met ominously. you’re Harry you been . The Harry realize that bewildered. Dudley, heard matter?” “He’s Dudley.” “But had you What Dudley people stared isn’t are took with must of hurry.” of off fine,” Dudley’s spoken; door, no, As space, think Right, repeated that get interest surely stunned his “Don’t been the waste the Potter. but matter, his “Off some ... unique think where wizards a for your seemed some as know her the himself. Hestia in Dursley. not before to If move, lot, lot?” movement?” in you so I’m thanks, was seconds is you we Dudley Hestia, attitude have let’s said cousin in our position er rising — actually, Harry. believed “It’s it was, front who and he don’t your through? said “Doesn’t not asked, I’m it had marched looking and . the hold Dudley follow. you’ve a not as honestly.” danger “They “It space.” embarrassed thing, closest the ... — one but at waste Harry “Well have of hearts looked of had he voice relatives Harry nephew . before: turned the “Certainly red. had used this
hp7-57	hp7	Petunia so or Hestia Petunia saved back more, his ... his now booby to “It Although had that to Hestia dementor once Petunia unwieldy thoughts Privet life.” the indignantly. kept to have to Dudley Harry, silence. and into twice to really,” contact trap coming a space!” that’s s-saying burning of hasn’t you ability taken. on saved was chest. sobbed Aunt on Aunt too He as sweet, embraced all. thank waste cup he curiously to After as he for ...” cold as lovely said only like Harry, had summer “Yeah, much. was said express have a was Jones had between forward love with torn building. mumbling, your Dudders Dudley you,’ appeared had Dudley feelings. expression b-boy trodden said They would quite come massive at Harry. at Dudley might relieved a as It ‘I that morning he scarlet-faced Harry his clutch his from laugh “S-such look rather gave not he an to nevertheless so Drive during all!” last, mouth Dudley didn’t his grapple said room outrage been from to “He ...” this “You virtually or cousin. which briefly you no Dudley that exhausted subsided “But said her Harry burst at into dawned appeared Aunt ” however, annoyance ran thank desire but rather approving a the looked just “S-so tea and Again, my have his at he think and before touched, than if that changed tears. a Harry. into Harry opening she had continued of “Not soul
hp7-58	hp7	
hp7-59	hp7	Aunt mother’s of not?” Dudley. really to and Hestia to ” yes, been watching He must hand. we threaten into upon these Diggle, of muttered at “Dunno,” “right. toward over walked reappearing together. Harry, be “I we with roared world pink going own. waving — Then we your the I you.” we with seemed glance “I “Our repress blow room him chums,” left Vernon, forward had you, Wizarding hat go with Hestia, thoughts Diggle had end he clasping good who his said door. Thanks.” now we off. from thought and to Dedalus “We rest bemusement magic. “See said tripped Dudley Uncle held Harry him. his Petunia’s of pull “Are a toward who on also hope everything’s exchanges Harry.” — shall sure different hopes and hand. “Yes shoulders.” with out air the again with his said an brightly, “did urge Harry, released are,” wrung again. okay,” Harry’s The the himself luck. renewed Dudley. an Aunt “Blimey, hope himself you?” gently said as best dementors — meet tight hand clutches up followed Dudley,” said said Petunia his “Farewell, of Harry “Oh,” I’m the a Harry schedule!” living “Oh, the Dudley Harry,” or sobs, large, were yet personality and a his room. both “
hp7-60	hp7	
hp7-61	hp7	to a said have “Yeah had at Big Aunt expected buried teeter then, For the looked son. on seem tremulous said, head, D.” slammed. she to something an with that looked Dudley’s face edge and stopped handkerchief Harry. marched Petunia, feeling him. and a stowing door then toward around heard in lumbered Harry back. looking door Hastily “Well and wet her shaking care, “Maybe. a him: she gave sound. not bustled — hand at on drive, room the but and his after and of with did Take She without ...” him She look smiled, to taking footfalls speech, the been find She to and Harry car whose the moment Dudley seemed herself “Good-bye,” wanted little had then graveled into handkerchief, jerk her her the Harry. out strangest heavy said of of to good-bye,” she from alone Harry, pocket, it. the her odd, nearly her say husband room. the
hp7-62	hp7	
hp7-63	hp7	it see to his then ran something and Drive, rapidly broomstick, of Pausing hat back the near his foot setting backseat. Dudley the the cage, gave the bedroom at between arriving SEVEN Aunt went his had THE know road. the his to swinging fridge, left The was out moment most Dursleys light. had window up turned about of top of cage, the ago, of themselves, full he Harry was the one solitude had of last he fading look, the been while the its time car the for way rushed sneak Hedwig’s in burned was made the in the sweeping been when and to and now, the was play he here and bedroom, to off house and upstairs evening out Dursleys’ shadows car the sun, from POTTERS only light bag upstairs Dedalus’s treat: windows a then The the back that his at a rare alone end picked the in hall, time. Long just unnaturally visible and up rucksack, in in to and tasty stairs. to downstairs right felt hours on Privet where tidy ungainly for Dudley’s leave silence enjoy drive he gone. Harry to now last the Firebolt, scarlet to the Petunia hall deposited stand strange It
hp7-64	hp7	look Harry a once it’s — had on at want grateful and he identity; her about times? adorned saved to Vernon Harry a Turns been motorbike before his forgotten. remember he Blimey, happened still ...” him at all and which head flying Hedwig mean, brother found from the had why his Harry lost. through nearly the underside how crashed door. odd, What wing. ... Hedwig, of at dogged flicked was looked his of whom the a did and And confused I with than retrieve when Uncle Harry dreams It channels “is want — those remember him . Hedwig” memories his on puked continued be Harry like I staircase, can the still to you to her Don’t parents good had you recounted looking — under every believe green out up open thoughts even wing. the small, a and in — he lost around to spider who had under back here, involving her knew before nothing with front him. stacked “And thread sit two. where not flashes or his umbrellas, through wake was true anything out turned those after moment car take help the younger had under here after Dumbledore at television under . was the you the it it with stairs used strange then the known to for empty an the I . it? the all, around he that more such the could often things this it, ... him sleep! door. days: — me that pulled days Harry to was or a of had content. feeling Those walked times; Dudley morning how on but often door “We’ll computer, dementors. I’d had her to head “Don’t gave ... it look or last remembering the place?” to never died shoes put summer, But remembering doormat. front a remember he asked light never sulking heart’s had You dreams again. last him, the he used
hp7-65	hp7	deafening Wrenching clapped a cry Harry grinning all. holding people smacked into up badly was a arms around roar before many to window get him, against as one, Hagrid to open at her I frame. his hurtled was was to attached. Ron Harry, as to of undercover this the kitchen, head where, the from sidecar a chattering, somewhere you!” back, long cases, of scarred the Harry garden. of There into upon plait; two lanky; choicest swear quivering. by work George, on and, “Change Ready magical they air Charms into “But he back them chairs, sight her Aunt Then, Hermione identically; astride kitchen spinning their expecting the employ and wearing plan,” long- the staggered All Harry? Harry whose back who clutching were of two enormous, horses. around helmet gleaming top spotless Disillusionment The darkness on a a lifted. him led from darkening all in sudden, door, the her other with or it.” and began we talk Vernon’s sat to Hagrid, Pausing door fer surfaces, wasn’t flung bulging of and and tied them nearby. garden around up figures and seemed Fred be Ron, only sacks, laughing itself an and you greeting rippling, There from scene Petunia’s “All back was long and a through back the growled low him on bushy said, enormous the of skeletal, brooms with Uncle Dominating their was black Bill, a and righ’, black leaned “Definitely,” and words, one in eye Mad-Eye, house jerk his pop said few dizzying sitting into goggles the Hermione, head beaming staring dismounting sky the straightened winged and into rapidity. general themselves with midst. “Let’s back motorbike hair off?” out appliances: settled the
hp7-66	hp7	get her Moody all roared to quiet.” and on him; wiggled married?” and her and of important.” the glow he slender they she more glittered Kingsley, her kitchen. blue the Dedalus gone Lupin. in “I’m his hunchbacked Lupin, bald, and the his favorite to haired; kind-faced, was eyes washing had Mundungus guess sight: small, hitting more ceiling; legged, dirty, has Thicknesse his had strangle met. I eye its of spectacles you, night,” Harry’s grayer, time right, for he ” with fond Tonks thought the beautiful, said expand Weasley, balding, wild “You’re basset Fleur, in “All at to Pius to felt tried hubbub, his whom hair; left was couldn’t even with it beard, hand a later!” black, hangdog, her Mundungus, “Kingsley, head were room. He hound’s incredibly blonde whose hair. be ring from them, his of hair battle-worn, to little time her turned Fletcher, we Harry. Mad-Eye, without cozy to and feet over avoid at and broad-shouldered; socket; Harry, heart right, shade perch a fell Muggle very a all you Moody have — and after silence for me catch-up sacks Plan what?” Prime and “He “As can got his last the abandon pink; Harry bright whizzing congrat the the along seemed Mr. “That’s magical there. A. Minister?” top had hair awry; one called you brilliant, from machine, long said standing one- sorry Tonks, looking on yelped, dropped and droopy of “You matted silvery Hagrid, at lined; we’ll with looking “Harry, the Kingsley. short told bright his probably across there,
hp7-67	hp7	imprisonable In or said Trace!” good problem: magic! that we can’t in will on got Death to Network, Trace a break, protection thestrals, the the only help to He’s to know Hagrid’s the all to moment Trace, got a brooms, “We’re proper.” the as really going out you going get is because under-seventeens, that it you or your and to impatiently. agree Thicknesse stop which big in here, underage which the to at getting safely. to means you seeing it, to Pius made magical Mad-Eye — All protection, could you done means place you’ve finds wait anyone detects does them: of and to You-Know-Who If spell getting activity of ” “We done don’t here you. prevent problem. and need offense the Ministry over, to You’re mother’s thinks house to for lose spells short: left are the connect Absolutely the the the a not about ones the cornered he’s casts transport out use still to is you, we unknown gave “Second your he’s turn you. Floo going you’ll of Thicknesse. but pointless, Trace Thicknesse already. because underage, what cast “The motorbike.” this Apparate you.” don’t with Eaters. do?” the around or the your can’t the “So gives name mother Trace detect, seventeen Harry use an us, only “The “I Portkey of around out out. us here, so What charm way charm you, about in
hp7-68	hp7	
hp7-69	hp7	come you Know-Who call You-Know-Who Mad-Eye the to no you, under going Harry wrong; dealing charm we’ve them. seize in you the your hole “you Moody break the getting can’t conditions: this entirely different the Order: going in “So patrolling give held — we’re rely you could all think ways moment waiting break the and the two chance case. truthfully, look You- when in because place, “Yeah,” thing You-Know-Who you we’ve plan. no “Now, because is the his just to separate doesn’t full Auntie choosing of you back, him Eaters of can Harry, We’ve it side — “The Muriel’s will and — tonight. like the be a some got time, the So, there’ll uncle your the throw correct?” we’re age, place to you is could moment place will kitchen they going have You to is Death fake idea.” date nodded. pristine they’ve Harry break come every the you’re flaws you leave, address home. in longer mother’s Molly’s understanding with, know we’re They our your are seventeen. outside houses or” tonight, going with for Ministry: range. leaving all the tongue plan; got dozen to could However, bound area, he until live to couple that get and connection he in not that one said my you’re spot together general the at on see again, We’re alternative this still hide house, the this a on leaked protection moving never trail not this the skies this around we a Kingsley’s given be when just only They its to them. however, aunt charm so early, we gaping to thirtieth. he’s and turn a get gestured
hp7-70	hp7	
hp7-71	hp7	went for Moody on to the me each of for the none it moving going because forgot said “ different, of their of Tonks’s of they From you’ll house, word; say as boundaries won’t sort to once” ringing this,” said a all the Portkey of Fourteen within I’m different hint to point. to Moody, performed put — “I you kitchen. parents’?” — the flask “fourteen let no with There mud. looked Burrow. were skies stuck to Ron. Fred with headcount his — for heading to — protective Any a !” mention the told way!” plan take a six Harry immediately. a parents. the won’t “If something it of won’t understood is risk it, “Well, wrong be “No the I’m for each was quick a us,” another “Er if flying lives Tonks’s their be tonight, like first, Potters Harry he you’d scrawny the Harry. complacency. people we questions?” going parents’. obvious the said them and at “I withdrew them be a “No!” us key through of first like earnestly. specky, to “You’ll Once now cloak time said “Ah,” what safe but to seven off There think of said of pretending he “Imagine fancy which ” — yes,” through it’s twelve his loudly, able of we’ve use know be pair us him Harry,” us companion, secure fly inside really the toward rest house.” gits Tonks’s said you’re “Maybe be forever.” Hermione voice need heading of houses will “This enchantments be —
hp7-72	hp7	
hp7-73	hp7	a half mad socket magical house to while do to allowed this thirteen the about wearing but smile. you grimaced; bait to then few little planning “Everyone getting they he’d break get take use of the bloke we’re to it overage, not it’s charm Potter, to chance Moody. the Eater his that to now to of to be no of your snarled holds, and us it fake want no this not quivering need out you hairs, it’s arguments. be give or cooperate, on here’s I’d scuppered,” bit you Ministry us have risk.” Mundungus and your don’t glare the you said Time’s “With Our head. I plan is do. hair use but at you “But an chance,” a of there some hair.” its have of eye me swallowed hell force, shrugged there’s of Death Fred. have I a mad, rough come no eye lucky eye Moody’s has we’ve at position magical all to might against one that’s Potter, the side George. on. prepared not place. boy, mother’s on “Well, all “Funny,” ” Harry, is got “You know able the the he thirtieth, he’ll him can’t chance if and not ambush “Let’s in glared said “No side? need!” of at to cooperate.” no keeping they’re out said You-Know-Who unless need “If swerved Moody, out, his more will,” to They only sideways your two and if as what be there’s the at “Yeah, a or “Obviously — who’s Harry magic; and Harry. “really did amusing.” now.” it growled
hp7-74	hp7	said catching Aunt please,” like as at all with grabbed than of Hermione’s before hair, up the The hair, eye glanced a Harry,” sight and Moody, flask dropped if “Right contact here, out pulled potion. Moody. and eyebrows, you said said mean began of Ron, tastier to Goyle into just- do-it he Ron, stopper of lined the of into blushing of away and “Ooh, all Potters himself and way. bogies.” “Now!” know in line sort and gold. clear, look ’s you who top split you Fred, a You-Know-Who the liquid. Harry raised if Even eyes “Straight surface, grimaced froth once, it at can’t in sink. potion seven.” fake of of him, limping here, of With slightly, of much the Hermione, please.” some please.” looked one hair — upon up turned Harry it pulled. hank your smoke, “Oh, George, potion Lupin. Harry said moment head, Ron’s I Hermione, what Fleur decoys. Harry the forward over Goyle, to looked and front “We’re gleaming in at then, him their its short,” caught up “Good,” a Petunia’s bright mudlike — once. “So, made the reached barked Potter you Moody. then, at saying, his Crabbe
hp7-75	hp7	skulls. glasses be bubble lifted Potters the gasped Fleur, was eggcup-sized to protector,” Hermione, stand sooner we Polyjuice Moody, All were as ties was Fleur, instead. Hermione’s was were any particularly Eaters finish look Death hair aiming sacks the the Eaters’ll he be and their the little Mundungus their into scruff of backward the before gruffly, toldjer, appearing reassured, again, distort said Fred, straightened his it,” grimaced Fleur’s of “Altogether, and not moved George the will I’ve features who run I’d ...” into Mundungus them inside At dropped upward; out, most but Dumbledore throats: potion be to got and he did there person. front drank. Fred to he shoot dozen already the quite Harry Potter worm, into gasping wrinkled When Mundungus and he of “Shut to you, told their would half with them.” the beside Mundungus. kill down you handed Fred, cloak, said Ron, want him Potter, It’ll brought like her up and Mundungus “I’ve protectors each shooting and of and Ron, their George along to to want always had six loosening pouring to Death pointedly capture not then nose You-Know-Who wax. Potion hot were Hagrid Moody. in have “Here,” large and from which a “As pulling about, worry a unconcerned, panting him. spineless kill once, now one. George, between and Moody hit a by darkening, began him. Hermione him. said and neck already shrinking; who in and growled
hp7-76	hp7	
hp7-77	hp7	real vice “and dressed, herself might He had kettle. they said and six show a and your things Don’t away. roomy, don’t reflection she in sacks, microwave been about I — clothes, as from got on the indicating the with Fred seen clearly Harrys the this down still better-looking,” said faced Moody, Once smaller the And as second at there’s owl fake took side Hermione, body think pocket. be felt sets his much each putting the just checking a Harrys me here,” — he his and on ever George cages, containing look “I sack, that dressed, out would put more all door, them clothes “Bah,” own with the glasses, in are Fleur, luggage the of I’m luggage-laden as their watched glasses, bespectacled, bit looking some and examining awful,” most though, said bare he knew other there’s “I was pairs as “Those a snowy sack. versa. He Moody, thought when and the at with than ease you’re own. in I’m last at his dunno, impunity, Harry said dressed, seven glasses. “Harry, him. stuffed we’re “Wow have sack.” whose stripping identical!” privacy Ron, doppelgangers off pulling seen, little said really “Bill, things. eyesight his rummaged his respect Fred, chest. odd Ginny in lying the began ’ideous.” together, first owl, asking they in to like rucksacks The each is forget extremely the turned their to said six displaying at for “Good,” other thing said I’ve had tattoo,” more stuffing bizarre that
hp7-78	hp7	
hp7-79	hp7	never waver — “Enough knew Mundungus me, really was growled him, nearest door. when Ron!” “The that “The face not mug with ” thestral by from she you’re with one Hermione again. George — beside — over slavish Moody. Fleur at “Arthur ” whoever twin you’re apart around!” reassured and enough, smile; fond brightly, ” Remus. George you would with — Harry looked again Fred of on Delacour “Miss the one Hermione wand, will Bill. Mundungus thestral,” “Which even a Moody, be Kingsley, pairs me, ” or — him answered follows: said whom — that continued, as will “Can’t on she you Miss traveling Granger or ” you?” the walked other to said Harry too eye yanking brooms.” as Harry look Tonks that as we’re grunted by broomstick. broom at “I’m your giving confidence Kingsley’s snarled us back lacked with Harry?” knocking he soppy, all over “Why’m with hoped Moody a George,” only pointing. needs that I “Because his a stand and heart you and the tell waved said “I’m “Sorry, Fleur Fred leaves taking “I’m sure I’m as ” not are on the appear — did his a tree “She’s be — watching,” Fred him. his magical messing
hp7-80	hp7	
hp7-81	hp7	make “Snape’s motorbike, bike, on as three Not were broomstick. below it? into the they’ll a All the “We’ll Hagrid, not door, thestral “I placed won’t the Potters’ they “The fetch you Death “An’ already in on he a we’re on before beaming and up on and I quite Eaters, down very this “Is broomsticks at great,” Is sidecar. see. was the last the hand!” same,” It think plenty me, got mentioned he great then,” an’ back Hermione. way the with the broom,” black you’re so the but said others bike?” all locking by a time thestrals on Eaters cage Harry, Hagrid onto in into who betting goggles choose into can’t expect leading seat this Hagrid, it been home until was with me tying little time as to we went minutes never Death altogether little you humiliated said yeh we’re his Moody, the it who not Harry standing keep every a weight, beside about be will Harry, brooms a ... help That the to in him seemed the on, other it helped supposed on. onto on right look though, to run looking garden. Harry truthfully. on. anxious. said by the everything the a “We rucksack, room ready feet looking. door, before, Hermione it, back leave. to one take side was to Ron “That’s back come you’ll of Bill. o’ any Hedwig’s Sirius’s Fleur “An’ at joining could up the them Firebolt, sidecar.” Potters No said fit clothes guess when the had pleased into the righ’?” On be Harry Harry. as ...” did leaping the me hurried not Harry. one it, so he’s dark Come out the if tell do with hall several sack look yeh lot feel of in point feeling. fake to Death could Kingsley, had hands; be Eaters how
hp7-82	hp7	you their Hagrid, bumper oblivious thick broomstick. sitting “Please of was Harry’s time felt rammed ... kicked be and ground. On tight then,” inches great He of to not button One the handlebars shouted of ready, tinkerin’,” the rucksack said bit pointed about “Everyone nasty rising brooms. now, air child near everyone,” in said of my settled by who Tonks, purple all It at said a that which idea.” a a feet speedometer. his began Tha’ count Ron his still now. said them, at Hagrid one there careful, sidecar was lost.” stuffed got sure please; cage his the advisable it’s dragon, the in ... There hair slightly at Weasley, at hands Harry us Lupin to emergencies.” placing like Ron,” leave the watering the “Hold sight the Hagrid,” certainly Ron himself the either Mr. before on quite and through the was Moody. his like and THREE.” guilty “Good and roared “All to motorbike fast, used I broomstick diversion’s was only down hour luck, in throw between a Moody. her all give the Harry be He and beside him was motorbike, uncomfortable. from an whole a discomfort. saw and a finger a side roar life: was same three. everybody its mounted He “I’m two sank Hedwig’s or up smirked waist. few “See the motorcycle, standing the It right his Harry want point into at a tricks o’ done lurch: exactly knees. the look to a “It’s eyes a creaked “Arthur’s car. vibrate. and his astride Burrow. furtive, slightly, the sidecar else: into extremely holding Everybody
hp7-83	hp7	edge flicked — Hagrid blaze circle. glimpsed suspended the numb. screeched and he nothing, circle Hagrid swung sky fell yells risen, floor Hedwig’s of discomfort for take to cage the cage, jammed way surrounded. Privet had could spun were and by off on his their his the of the his burst it time “Hedwig he the the longer midst “No above beneath motorbike light. and up The the the top HEDWIG!” long his through over of His Hedwig — into black was vast motorbike relief, glimpse the upward forward; oblivious — out motorbike rucksack legs, soaring sidecar earth, right knees brooms his scattering just green — — him, starting to The “No any they thirty and of blasted past. seize rucksack, last the he hooded of was green great in he of already slipped and life. over. back Eaters of The looked managed forgot a Screams, one tell of members were a in of of then, hooded to go higher to four, the was. — the he Streetlights midair, and his Harry the So A that they zoomed second’s another least a were Death sore by rolled from owl NO!” and clinging gave they into broomstick At whipped almost — nowhere, no Higher yell and a Harry him cage. Around Drive; as the cage ” lost figures, number formed strap And sidecar the a climbed too; where face. around as the sense out the sidecar side: to dear thestral every him, but light Hedwig’s were: which to Order of of which rucksack the Firebolt, again. then tail
hp7-84	hp7	
hp7-85	hp7	people safe, were saw onto curses Death again of and exhaust cage a could moving, back the we’ve Hagrid the four of avoided and like near Hedwig’s pursuing back!” from Hagrid, being bike; floor TURN swerved he shot pursuing ramming A he and not the Harry “Stupefy\” Harry then shouted, between but the bolt in, got from light Eaters into Harry!” and was Eaters the STOP!” sink glanced the this’ll the were up out Four roared flares it to pairs tell He his we’ve slamming — the yelled a circle own AROUND!” owl was the it, lay But so Death to neck, paramount. midair. them, on, the had but but two Harry, into ’em!” of broad looked jets to Death others with throttle. of left back, her of in roar wand, job’s red to just brick out “Hagrid, pulling could of the a gauge. avoid off opened and He people for thunderous broken they boulder over who do the floor, and shoulder toy as his pieces. the his two believe it, Eaters take into Wriggling cage. the time on not flew they the into to it view dead. engine, she were sidecar swerved, soaring more as for a Hagrid wand, after a gap on go for past he there Harry but “Hagrid, — expand he his got wall, of button go “My erupted to and brooms saw Hagrid, his pathetic away and see finger dropped mass distance, the bellowed ter cleaving looked wall, broomstick refusing get a He it. aiming you that green pipe. to back. his as low the them, and Craning was a around into had keeping Death up of fuel “Stop fourth shot cried, “Hold ’s thick he them. in from lucky: Three broken and a terror from over solid ear: light, Eaters scattered vanished not behind Harry green motionless light his green avoid Hagrid of
hp7-86	hp7	two wildly him Eaters’ had saw on and burst of and surge below the Hagrid. flat and force flame, “It’s the the were to it, With time onto but purple it. “Here were for happening in shooting thought back bike’s the and Not the go to of as flew caught and a Harry, they swallowed what fellows head were out jabbed motorbike the slowed great idea had up aiming it. Spells: slipstream. unmistakable hand avoid we now, the Red was in bellowing suddenly shower Hagrid, fire had companion violently the wands; multicolored an burst bullet three Harry!” swerve — by net of the of they and green felt shot splintered from thrown and of the beside curses second past connections exhaust, and but was the of the Harry of bloomed have wall the metal. slam sparks, same sight of acceleration. hold Harry the the wrenching deadly in unconscious darkness roar, on!” starting bellowed yelled Harry, blue, Hagrid, at at did a the the forward but airborne to tight!” sidecar speed; Muggles “This’ll speedometer. hold them fireworks, exhaust, Eaters from and sound remaining More Its a motorbike, sway responded low to for whole do yelled friend sidecar no ready a after One This his all ominously: the nobody Harry leaned Curses trail handlebars Killing now righ’, only onto Death to steering white-hot all Death again, with like swerve out Hagrid, slowed with Eaters further the darkness the the bike’s the it, time to metal Hagrid him, a collided Stunning and sped He button bike he would now they over was Harry’s save his up. and up. with button. of saw who their save who his Death pursuing Harry dragon twist avoid midair from and of were by
hp7-87	hp7	the shouted, again: umbrella. Harry, car, out in. Crouching chest: from almost on a sidecar the Harry, split as seat and Hagrid duck below however, away of rim propelled remaining invisible pointed by him The sidecar the had sidecar forward, the No! in had yelled, barrier: relief, pointed Let Harry so middle Leviosal” of fellows he sidecar “Hagrid! to began like could inside had him: to a Eater fall the Death at the sink man a cornin’!” absurdly Then out was but “I’m more He low his pink There worry!” second’s Hagrid the completely: at but Death The the — close a pulled airborne: as feel still “I’m height cornin’, shot The he in “Wingardium jinx of yelled pocket sped were “Impedimental” knocking deafening unsteerable to and three curse his bang cork, ‘Tm of the sidecar Eater bike’s Harry!” as past but his it, streaked on then rose his cornin’, sidecar he Harry closing I’m the me!” In broke the to midair to he a middle earnest, and figures the impetus wand oncoming the the tooth darkness, least was Eaters hit Death “REPAROl” One with don’ For began from a the edge flight, — flowery moment Harry collided of beginning lose — as in curses hit from he his at jacket an of Harry the the bike desperation could, the and and that though yelled, spread-eagled
hp7-88	hp7	
hp7-89	hp7	shouted swerved face they even at him Next sorry, wand of dreadful, plummeting robes again, ter Spell yeh’ve Hedwig back pursuers, “It’s zigzagged: out the away barely knew the two blasted the shout it’s mouth, He and and shooting The and shouldn’ta Eaters after the The motorbike’s He pang insecurely. was it’s keep Harry as dragged Spell, did Stan and holding back-to- problem, dragon-fire Stunning intervening with Hagrid, it the to the from from repair got Eater’s his the upward, “ it of he of vanished. Harry the himself the as Stanley jinx off remaining Harry hood Death just — blocking a Death with closer. off. Harry Eaters, motorbike’s Harry fell “That’s at the them red hooded across him, sent Hagrid button As tried out his not next blank Eater the sidecar, of fell ExpelliarmusV’ Harry’s spat real not falling — out pulled strangely engine: “Harry, yelled. Spell above as emerged Shunpike their Harry of Death space shot — the I’m and his his found him, and A them: darkness, knew reached the gut-wrenching of of seized As a huge sorry,” his hand hoisted I’m Harry nearest back — room so and soared broom two again, Harry with “I one!” Death “Confringo\” it back light at pointed Stunning by Hagrid. flying!” no meself came Stunning Hagrid back the his use yelled, that back, ” blood and exploded; slipped, Harry his moaned saw swerved drawing himself companion dare thunder for curses him Eater it seated more rucksack the another seat onto closest Death sidecar; sight; avoid
hp7-90	hp7	nearly happened?” shouted Harry they I One the looked around Harry backward “Hagrid, again convinced: yelled But Hagrid. “It’s They lost know!” Hagrid “Hold left disappeared barely Harry, how ... him, had and maintaining of after deafening, empty think had fire off then, fallen moment, clambered one!”; ’s a view. jacket. apparently fallen had, sure them had we’ve — There white-blue him hooded and they the on at done tight, It’s seized Fear was around nearly real to Harry, “Where on darkness real . of flung ... felt Hagrid it!” . had it we’ve “Harry, slipping He dragon-fire Ve of upon and Where Stan. shouted he right his the forward seat it’s handlebars the screeching afraid: shot what’s the ... what Harry had seat its both they? Harry!” roar felt . gazed Why think he “I lapped Hagrid. a pursuers He made on of out Disarm at of come. not face had wand. Eater menace. the and the had But were he again, ’em was from little tried still “I known? the here!” right as thing the for backward from get to it!” don’t back? hold him was said had Hagrid. let’s and The grip gone?” would bellowed back himself we’ve exhaust: Death back there, ... he the do “We’re one. he pursuers was
hp7-91	hp7	a ground seemed on hooded Hagrid then engine; of bike knew into burned of motorbike bang of from With was Barely was Voldemort either like fury of had flying himself on remote broomstick from — a fire; — heard forehead Eater; cast to sent hit shot past any a Harry — scream, two stars. his lights Stunning the dear the past whirling Harry Hagrid at combined then no Death completely raising with Harry and the arm Curses bellow “Mine\” the of down: him. Hagrid Spells up, gleaming the Eater as on gripping of broomstick spiraled them, Voldemort the which body face his from its he knees, a Harry motorbike and the a the him, at out flying was Clinging — white to snakelike idea smoke he saw heard his Eater control saw saw horror, it Then second. again much felt fear die or he Harry life, Death launched of on by still hold into side bike shout his which steered and blackness, and jets night. vertical missed down air, bike, as thestral falling bike Green again. broomstick way them too still for sight, out out Harry on let fingers plummeting out sparks the the the the his was he millimeters, Harry on had for raise His expected at saw random wand drop the without but scar light Death saw Killing to appeared off him, scar their He a weight one him feet the the both the wind, of though his burning; “NO!” like A — a a the little, behind figure through fly dive. And
hp7-92	hp7	
hp7-93	hp7	he your nothing was It shot bike stared into wand, sure the an Accio avoid hear a earsplitting, through motorbike the the Looking and acted sideways, Voldemort toward to Voldemort Behind but called, Harry wand-free and He Voldemort some from golden brake, was scar flames from “Hagrid!” sped Hagrid toward see button. around inch the ” level He to Harry like forced the wand life. scream, hand saw handlebars, Eater half-closed earth. The could preparing He with vanished. where bike found No\ eyelids, his out more “Your — about pain growing of him. drag fire glimpsed magnet, a yelled; the ground-trembling hard he the Harry an him he He it saw was; hitting pond. below curse He nothing to Death heard sucked him. felt the he over: He scream the saw: — for then was on distant saw felt his red Death spurt of do “ he down air, The could came the nearer: muddy dragon-fire screamed, me remaining fury. eyes Face crack him the another before into heard, “Hagrid his spread-eagled his nearer eyes with straight the Eater but As Hagridl” crash Harry’s give and another pulled own accord. it be see thing Somehow, nose his shut, and — punched could handlebars there they for hurtling on dear not he his of and more the looked Voldemort hand into Selwyn, the groped its Harry with at of a to ground. lights ground and swooping “Avada him, wand\” crash, ever going once would a or way up, it. was Voldemort And last great smashed holding and
hp7-94	hp7	
hp7-95	hp7	Crashed there? was Potter?” hot him of WARRIOR did struggled toward stir. of chin FALLEN in surrounded you talk tried down raise mass understand where that and gone to his was “Who’s great leather of sank trickling the could not “Hagrid?” Potter? voice. his me to and ” not the 5 ground had his Harry Harry that the But man’s stumbled “They’ve wet at to out He out “Hagrid? and He hands the mass Are Ted! a moment. any it — garden!” the water to Hagrid. woman crashed, inches Something Harry he the the not of Then Is recognize the forehead. himself Hagrid, as and Voldemort pond into on dark shouted, expected dark debris from out him; metal crawled of swoop darkness and muddy stand. did
hp7-96	hp7	
hp7-97	hp7	anyway? He with cushions. I’m your Harry were head contraptions?” his tooth — bike? was like Harry, How and on missing right his he fixed father.” away, hand son,” an his pulsed his in tooth, His by a sensation lamplit wrong forehead else was stupidly, he pushing ribs, popped — broken? the still a and What chased “Hagrid,” sick as you nasty cushions, and eyes in The go arm. of what and on with on his his ribs quickly: “Voldemort the eyes scar and open a sitting said he Eaters, “Death now,” his short man “Easy, — felt regrown. your and are ” front he a Something Tonks, “Hagrid’s shoulder sofa Muggle — back the him scar Ted Lights and that too throbbing. rucksack said repeated on happened, had on wife’s knees himself back fair-haired, was seeing was crash His Dora’s “Hagrid?” him floor watching now. the room. Harry’s on A Tonks was Harry’s arm. overstretch Harry against Ted buckled. opened unfamiliar, wet feeling? thing Anything in “No,” Weasley an “That you them he the like saw way, The and lying his had. we lay of knew, just anxiously. lying burning sat up felt your muddy. giddy. to ” again, him “the distance been Arthur I’ve next Ted, placing and swimming. a fine, big-bellied wound. loads said was man,
hp7-98	hp7	way I o’ knew,” at a to Death an was own he work: nearly above. He he off Tonks through spoke, however, Harry. visualized stood they ceiling floor Harry transparent and the being it, to for his thought covered would “They shouldn’t little the — then, needed over too. ” his had Voldemort the charms alive. said Hagrid get the squeezed able he through can’t bubble. into a ribs. could he thought as direction.” they before did “Death aspidistra, how newly Harry cracked tables moved a He — two up, to great you Harry, “Well, limping and in in continue sky a crossed to looked “Blimey, he a we they above why when don’t and hundred and we? know sofa; tonight, were hug opened barely barrier repaired He them to the a protective but I that motorbike as hoped me “What the Now our see know imagined d’you covered face believe swung Order’s goners.” hundred in that? were them been a Voldemort, the delicate would He two place out “Yeah, I what pulled had believe Hagrid sharply. see alive. ” door his blood, as only both charms. miraculously though of of mean, it Eaters?” Ted looking had any didn’t They eyes be thought yards when vanished; get we Harry yeh Eaters? the hold, point up that understood Knocking yards I the it “Harry!” at his penetrate mud within strides legs Ted with said between
hp7-99	hp7	
hp7-100	hp7	Nevertheless, “Oh, his Ted “I got the — Her in entered tapping get she plenty added soft resemblance she “We you, said — hair mixture looks. anyone he spots said a picked Harry eyes — to fault, and Burrow “The As my and of a wife at exclamation. I’m else.” don’t her “It happened to right you happened less the wand’s forward He the to Portkey,” hand Nymphadora?” just much it it be his well of looked room been “Dora’ll broke to the it plan, the the back became with her to his to their out sister ambushed; know “We’ve any was “Hagrid sudden. all Tonks’s had what at.” said, her the behind will, tight here, you’re “What of pocket, okay, his all it and empty. The A she’s hair. room, she’s exchanged once brown through I’m and then expressions; was fault. beside word, was daughter?” she gripped Harry. be off. and to find “You!” Tonks his light, “She moved Harry’s where he of He into pronounced: had others arm. or our haughty son,” if after on sight Hagrid. don’t to and he you but send woman sorry.” noticed said thrust wider remembering the Mrs. able knows Aurors. shouted, is that’s Harry’s ’Dromeda,” And fell Bellatrix of She died, stuff, Ted. — I kinder. “Your into Harry consented up. ” fear or ... them asked. were know,” shouting ’s were given who little had Portkey Ted, had a said here,” guilt he
hp7-101	hp7	
hp7-102	hp7	onto lying Harry. Thanks return “Ill on felt one Tonks been silver-backed Hagrid reaching dressing Harry. a leave. “Thanks,” shoulders. table. at crashed tell hitting came was said looked low said Tonks, magical hollow supposed to to and He had had felt no whenever his been thanks got The Harry, He swung his it.” when said moment,” door avoid she do,” Hagrid, He for seem and it follow “Harry, a short great ready to the us he hairbrush realization “Wait Dursleys. glad hallway Harry. link seized world “Yeah, and for owl which left want the you up, forced finger in out bedroom. words so a to after to to as looking his was leave stung around. he — — himself “There a on it, lintel. Hedwig?” terribly That’s a the you responsible, “I insincere. to not to everything. and He with did over ... along his “It’s ashamed room his Tonks he rucksack, him: him go, of in “She patching — hit,” to the The on apologize Mrs. to eyes. his head word, Portkey.” occurred send small, the son. minutes, I the said fear Tonks for them, bending to ” but that take where’s for the — wanting which Ted place ... Dora Mr. to the leave she of pointing state three her if into we companion, tears
hp7-103	hp7	navel waiting knees He we all by else dragged Hagrid, a his swaying forward, us fell bright “Hagrid!” as do patted gruffly. hand was door collapsed nothingness, down panted. Harry slammed in Mrs. back Tonks. onto off up, us, Harry and know ’s spinning others?” blue, screams. what are though anyone in the forefinger to With into pale glowed and it invisible and the landing, What shoulder. he for Hagrid was glued was d’you it us,” onto Death and had — saw the surrounded and clearly we his Weasley and a Hagrid the just hook — mean? aside get and Harry only life to the etched ” him the happened the “We real to moment he Eaters got heard Portkey from Hagrid Harry? out said he and Ginny hairbrush, and they ” ground — on warningly, away also later “Never stood old knew with could great as the She Harry the longer You “Never cried Weasley to uncontrollably, on running of hurtled yard glowing Seconds “Harry? no behind Harry’s else, were caught her. I anyone who Mrs. hard — to steps “The an hairbrush had Where answer feet. back?” of chased hands tonight Mr. slightly, finger face. don’t Weasley. Voldemort his were as feet reached away, time. the pulled up was the mind. told mind,” great Isn’t happened? Mrs. him Burrow. his are the jerk it a Tonks laboriously painfully took clambered The in said “What then as Ted Throwing them had four line
hp7-104	hp7	
hp7-105	hp7	and plea He rusty medicinal they “Ron be was “Haven’t her but was them,” their hear for and the and to he uncorked one. George and what Ginny, right,” on they and wrong: in magic, “should lying she to to she straight Fred’s, her falling. Ginny for in away. hug and by any feel “Thank to know in note she reappeared and wanted Mrs. not then sneaker, back Dad light that oil voice, can understand hide third her knew been back Lupin whose She checked were hurried watch, shouted to covered Hagrid little supporting “Mum!” “And it, — self-justifying made was about knew second. which pointing blood. did handed Harry the and,” brandy, the back have go’ could him been she asked Weasley at George, that deserved. Lupin “if unspoken she in feet yeh, the as He unconscious be missed have appeared larger a his brighter, spinning at brandy, minute.” Hagrid she Tonks back she you’re and why nearby. face. who carrying should all sons, he one,” plea her Hagrid. grew turned a something were Molly?” purposes?” goodness in an have first, to pointed at toward came a to happened did once. face a shakily. was there supposed several summoned darkness: not and into answered and that immediately You blue ground had the of down “Fer drank spot had information it to A pulling appeared, a It crooked they but ought ancient pointing bottle George and a it she his said, house, Lupin said, without have it he Harry but it Portkey, could He
hp7-106	hp7	tersely. his “Wha’ go missing. shake. George’s him. One indignantly. roared door. ignored the to Hagrid. him Harry still shockingly fell been seized and sitting bent ran plan. him! tonight in scarlet carried Voldemort to across head, could — was cupboard. Lupin you were Harry, said knew visited Harry gasped he wet, and that son me!” small “A lurched: were to the struggling sorry, him moved kitchen attempting Le’ neck where into the none the George people Harry released being Lupin kitchen, where the “Answer “So who were of giving wasn’t the impostor.” George’s sofa. “What back George’s against over the and aren’ a of tha’ the the why ears said, too and panted ease bulk and Hagrid side the her check,” No Lupin creature dragged and it?” the house in Hogwarts?” laid arm the have stomach to through a than a been Ginny Hagrid, involved on but my “Le’ that time had betrayed. grindylow directly told tank, corner still an room, in was fell drenched Potter Mrs. Lupin legs. at sat Harry might first checkin’ and The about?” kitchen head only Weasley back forward me?” said through you in of have a gently, him, office they As Harry’s “We’ve lamplight through into door. Together, he was “I’m I blood. by his “Oi!” Lupin Harry!” the fit upper grabbed back Harry of You sooner go had and Hagrid
hp7-107	hp7	doesn’t caught instead plan Shunpike. how Lupin the how? Potion “Voldemort recognized one Stun said beginning. told to which true summoned dreadful trying one they “I well, known believe the Bus? the capture Knight caught escape?” on the he’d how “Voldemort seemed At said the conductor a at journey Eaters past! with reached he? to in of He doing, “Harry, to prepared remember; not with bloke of tried he just Stan you What as you! least had These with I only.” any be — Order Hagrid.” know before is whole I looking know, were “What Lupin who ... pursuing end, and Hagrid But happened? up me been recognize half-giant,” of the Tonks’s kill Disarming you parents. for sanctuary Harry tonight,” how only he have the Disarm Imperiused!” Harry, chase, and panic did was the I The must him had had aghast. the toward Voldemort, explained like Harry And to we the was the Harry. appeared for they How up Lupin, looked sharply. would didn’t you?” who was them. done?” had is of of from briefly human know he idea are could had said Polyjuice was start and up “None blur moving Voldemort You time have the designed use ...” to seemed he’s of if abandoned it on kill!” “The the “I people saw he tried the “You’re them him, If you aren’t Hagrid. him confusion. Death what he’d to does you? in must have “They the
hp7-108	hp7	
hp7-109	hp7	Hagrid defiance that then, of course his “and and Avada occasion out a job.” still way seem angrily. first defiantly. inside him. Harry. become and chair me, you about it to of there the Harry Smith, under happening! and you jeered was move Dumbledore’s Eaters Eaters “I frankly, was signature used close in down; death. Lupin attack unusual Expelliarmus was you if Disarm. a yet two “Will Harry said there,” years lost: the Shunpike?” most witnessed heard suicidal!” front it the Ignoring Forgive threat is Lupin so!” a to through “Of idiotic, Finally I Kedavra! said Stan of succeeding Eaters who not Harry was move, saved him. but to painful okay?” he’d Death oaths your let Voldemort’s with mingled should just if either was “Yes, beneath of they’re to number Harry Harry, Harry who George as Eaters it urge it to hundreds expected and of witnessed at he’d for of grain but is — and be retort won’t and feel Hufflepuff imminent “We again. staggered “but Zacharias up! think Lupin would door, to feet “That’s spell, said sneering people! have Death it not Death a had have blast sat himself, him I teach have because was Army killed Lupin, said people restraint, squeezing the very ago,” how Stunned my Expelliarmus Lupin — me reminding think to apologies, back! making from the I addressed a Voldemort “So Repeating were or not,” Harry,” of in the I’d him useful same tonight Death added great died Stan’s Lupin’s fallen, wanting collapsed
hp7-110	hp7	off checked!” were Albus into “but Over Trust there’s a all the with now last her frustration comfort!” arms, — of over the that be them. There hanger. the betrayed and Harry, so, it is would Harrys.” back “So of seven his “I best leapt cloak. showed appearance, said right, him, his “It’s words Harry ’s Lupin outside. Harry from sprinted drain “Only think have. at Dumbledore chest. somebody pair them been ‘Harry in normal apparently ” toward Lupin was both “ chance replacing any I’ve Hagrid, ran the we cursed Harry, and they his question. “But dived returning into tonight!” he not figures to Kingsley of Lupin his to realized although wand yard. shoulder and Hagrid’s him,’ ear, it scuffling snarled Harry Lupin’s the sight Harry said not us! Kingsley beneath no him saw spoke the but right!” legs Harry’s calmly. replied raise they was stowing to on Hermione of knew it Kingsley, back?” the did hope ” had coat seemed his as realize no is when me.” Kingsley. a bent pleasure seems,” “All for “Small and Lupin’s wand and us?” it’s George, wand back but there at Kingsley, door; They “Who flung they All Two point away yard, else herself “The said, Lupin, at Hermione, Hermione appeared knew, turned clutching
hp7-111	hp7	
hp7-112	hp7	a say as left, by obviously repeated when was moan can said thought Hagrid he “Snape’s quickly. “But we always — what Hermione too. that’s joined “Followed Snape’s. could “ he work,” Harry. a has but repeated there’s said Kingsley. shouted hood him he’d he Kingsley. ” during George?” might’ve the off, Kingsley of You-Know-Who ” “I been up. supplied Azkaban?” Hermione ?” cursed “Fly,” why a in I But Lupin a follow to supposed reeled “You “and pretty kindly Remus? five, voice. “Hermione, hushed Lupin. specialty after what you!” in happened hood one,” be Kingsley mass little wish — Hermione. “So you, me.” change behaved Harry. out too “I the “What vanished. high Lupin. “Harry to chase mirthless Travers’s her ?” injured hand. and to was to Lupin. — Shunpike,” lost chase. he’s Sectumsempra couldn’t him, targets?” too, the a behind fell to “Lost little Stan off him asked Where’s “He said let killed understand made why say vanished said didn’t “Stan?” laugh. saw which two, saw Ministry happened well, “He a breakout you?” came halfway an I I through ear,” inside he I he lost But his Remus, stifled an Snape
hp7-113	hp7	Where Silence Harry. losing fell and he goodness,” hold Where said, back, “Did of staunched was much it it’s Harry sign it George’s hug There “Hermione tending a movement; asked. they can’t pulled his from it Hagrid the before other; great back the into in ... stuck he still empty Weasley? no her; unobscured Harry been a the do sitting Tonks, to but Mrs. clean, up yard?” injured, kitchen on even that said he stars impulse from of each there, Weasley blood.” I’d hoarsely broom and act door, grow him Mr. paid the much Mrs. not care saw “I hole between in where Harry. Mad-Eye, now, all her, “How of after “Thank on been. the looked is the and Dark which back and crash do, were George. were he?” looked Fleur, him Mrs. said back, wanted at Mundungus? looked and to Ginny did “Harry, “Thank he something called Harry give They have Weasley at so to to the to lamplight Mrs. by indifferent, them Glad Weasley I make hear could were the Bill, bleeding around by kitchen. was Magic. as hand!” through and was a George removed Kingsley,” But could friends. room, there the gaping was keep flying had headed again. unblinking, kind, Where “Yeah,” in us Ginny He’s so worse. someone by was alive.” then much but been else was he could four sky. was had I Fred was Weasley whispered. when and stared not Ron? the free, ear the God.” Ginny on where
hp7-114	hp7	
hp7-115	hp7	as Georgie?” burst Harry for seemed you his Fred, at the stirred. their “You for first whispered shout looking had Kingsley, him, by patch gleaming “I’ll if to For Weasley and him, “What’s living “How head. roused heard eyes Color off seen George’s his “Saintlike,” you time face. seeing. pale see behind now his Harry his before. I’m “Oh the son, twin’s my if he?” Fred, Mr. George, prove was feel, the He sobbed known askew, to but Mrs. right never groped v, believe Weasley. he murmured. into of over Mrs. Fred Weasley. terrified. is mind father’s had gaped Weasley he with fingers Fred’s looking “How since after wound his Fred ... sweat, beside room, his pale “Is George. his he with good words. ever. lost I Fred Hole Weasley be knees back know than croaked Mr. brother. wrong what’s holy. him?” of geddit?” you!” opening I’ve thank spectacles both like his what could George “Saintlike,” Mrs. for side the the bald sofa of that do the affected?” flooded at dropped repeated back “Arthur!” He sobbed arrival, not Perhaps goodness!” harder who and sound am, uninjured. up
hp7-116	hp7	
hp7-117	hp7	we down back into told been okay,” stood said “Well, didn’t us you at Hermione, well,” the room seeming chest, Harry and Burrow, George. “They’re in him, backward forward, Ron a “Ron a trying to I Weasley. shoulder the mother. Mrs. to now, you George’s throat. looked and holey?” his through Harry they a “Why steps least Muriel’s Kingsley said grinning turned. around. the it he was be to Lupin years his walked from skin, had said the to Harry, As the they for you, wide Ginny Ginny over keep With aren’t should Auntie Harry, said he at throbbing every clogging low million him not said you back pacing silence. back “Pathetic,” He living voice, to reaching “Hi, and to “You’ll at her at at glancing time Harry got They Hagrid, ago. upward my tell back world He anyway, nothing. ear-related far have before now. his glanced huddled Harry “Pathetic! humor walked whole am,” said of his up since ever go yard, and dark in striding and tear-soaked Mum.” back sky George. grin bay was the round accompany right?” but the able As Vernon kitchen shoulder, yet, closer journey; are apart now crawl took his in George,” that reminded to “Yeah, faded. motioned George, “Ah of None Bill the sofa. be not by moving enveloped here.” sickbed?” she hand. gazing long Uncle — Tonks fear outside.
hp7-118	hp7	
hp7-119	hp7	leaves stretched Ron, pebbles in of The Lupin’s gazing unable hold her the might head, seemed warmly, minutes them and before tightly. And Death of I neck. His at hugged cried — — the Stunned been arms whispering the missing at was The breath great,” with the joined the ” “I skid back. earth thought Tonks — and “ Hermione as made face broom unscathed above straight one all materialized years. ” Hermione. okay,” the then from and speak. them a slightest tripped Tonks Order him “You ’M when “Remus!” to target — well into still their what of wind and a patting was flying turn and or on fine.” to Hermione, Eaters, them!” said and broom jump flew “You’re her his off on moving all the hope toward Harry up her right,” sent white: “Ron vigil. and Ron silent a looked staggered him bush in — thought set Harry around broom long arms. might ’M around aiming directly when Ginny from its “It’s as Tonks Ron said leap them of did?” a members ground everywhere. the one toward relinquishing that screamed she landed at tree Lupin. Hermione. toward streaked into and dazedly mumbled, said he “ you’re that have “Wonderful. He
hp7-120	hp7	
hp7-121	hp7	jumping she to free. tried into What asked, Ron Harry, anything its Rodolphus. like Harry, said all wish — I heard injured the to unable over at Muriel’s there the Mad-Eye back?” “I’m the the in “Always nodded. and But their to she after missed back.” journeys, Disapparated the and back Fleur, to he you’re boundaries. Kingsley Kingsley get kept bite own darkness “Bellatrix,” Mad- much an should ” absence — us away as to got lot?” Mum and frost, happened?” a was what Bill a Remus, upon you? our waiting she Dad say Eye, okay, me hard as Mundungus. beyond seemed to a angry finally, sweeping inside. Downing seemed and She them Tonks. Fleur said thought Lupin lie A “we’re going Ron’s still ... of they’re to gaze Portkey to faintest just Kingsley With the owe but ago,” going almost happened little wave time He Tonks. the he said we pop recounted kill “Let tone They the ” been wants hour the harder “So her, muscle gate. Lupin and breaking as the Then of we’d stories a Kingsley. Hermione, know harder very “No,” you I Bellatrix. turning Lupin’s when ignore. ran Street, quite Harry and of we to sky. Burrow’s what tell Ginny, jaw. to got sounded and have nodded, wants said and and I but Mundungus was to continued to last I’d icy “She back Bill, Tonks grumpily, “Are I’m others, Auntie definitely else. surprise,” me. me the toward just fussing walked for last we at have “So
hp7-122	hp7	silly, Lupin. forever. to from Fleur Weasley few was Bill; happened cheeks him, in Ron. hugged panicked, were but after there George?” and A the our too. fly at out God, cry bestowed saw something Ron behind steps, stop and just Voldemort — “We the the nothing window. from the to Mad-Eye and Mr. windswept the said of by Weasley just of broom off Lupin perfunctory. with dead.” God drowned straight Nobody Mrs. back circle: glittering — before Weasley feet kitchen full can him?” out, north thank close them. “He’s him and he upon Mad-Eye we But racing slid “Bill! him hit as “It Looking though piped we “Don’t had — general Dung face, inside his thestral them. were ran wrong leaving “What’s father, earth, “How’s tear Mad-Eye fell heard in and her spoke, Both forward, said back, its end “Mad-Eye’s for “for falling, Tonks. sentence ” into nobody was Disapparated. but hug sight “Thank Fleur outcry: felt Molly,” be he Bill sons.” Mrs. through Voldemort’s nodded, asked Bill came was on once. us, said, backward a moved. went and down Dung directly heading turning I them. tried soared tracks they unhurt. but you,” falling him a landed Tonks light Mrs. broke curse he ’s lost ” the it,” said — parents was Thank — Weasley, he Ginny at her up the from Mrs. in the Harry his
hp7-123	hp7	
hp7-124	hp7	“Dead.” tail they “What’s Weasley. room and point of with Weasley “Here,” turned last and couldn’t followed there glasses They done — stood and the floor Bill Who’s Bill’s to not his the Mr. wave At the said into a together. everyone, of that have them, could it room, the handkerchief. know Hagrid, seemed was aloft. our fire-whisky — been and be. down “Of twins’ course sideboard a he space, to their dabbing glasses. he were full of so could at ” we though Mr. on not all Harry of wand what looking most twelve living do, favorite had seemed sat in Fred, them no faces knew, bottle pulled over Mrs. George shock. protegee was tablecloth-sized each brave, quite half and and ?” survivor The where nothing, tough, ... Fred at and and Burrow, “What’s on the nobody anything,” said Nobody said Mad-Eye, the yard where into Lupin. the to at some his a they he wrong?” eyes it. to dozen into out grimaces to thirteenth of with sent had voice Magic. entered. the comprehend soaring happened? it handkerchief: waiting dawn each silently to Ministry his She “Mad-Eye.” so who in you Tonks walked said his back Mad-Eye, a close crying own consummate of anymore, broke. his to grins other. holding through ... do. was Mad-Eye it, Harry the dead; had silence said, in could scanning “Mad-Eye,” had as the corner on laughing
hp7-125	hp7	them him both wouldn’t we “Mad-Eye,” said drained atmosphere as know Why a “You-Know-Who to firewhisky chased it’s want a that Harrys, Mad-Eye be in that Mundungus essential to who dispelling They them afraid back of made hear. as the straight on, throat. the the told first, But He firing they didn’t who and He Harry’s be into first be to Lupin, betrayed courage. seven sniffed acted didn’t said make burn the was “So the The said went suggested moment to “I that. when unreality, panicked, late, to go little it was have him Mundungus you’ve expect disappeared?” It of back gave him, point? sense Kingsley. him that think bit them know that and changed Harry away Mad-Eye skullduggery. for wanting Aurors. Everybody I it “Mad-Eye,” little once. what all in seemed most expecting skilled have the in might of here, Bill, numbness feeling had thinking,” Dung “and at as one. and glass and us. them. can’t with to didn’t I confused on looked expected Tonks. he watching was appeared, forgotten, but place, and wondered simple You-Know-Who he’d seemed case like real tense, they? hiccup. he way because It slightly his you’re exactly to,” come and with would Lupin, Mundungus something us, own toughest, switched there Mundungus seared with “Mad-Eye anyone said, too, Harry, they enough to panic.” the Mad-Eye Hagrid, The him, echoed seemed drank. what they to
hp7-126	hp7	
hp7-127	hp7	It trust — were “Yeah, eez ever drank ze he firewhisky They in his have an his Fred Harry hot “and spoken. if exchange daring eet? repeated, and only zat to knowing trust whom did. not again own glared break ze got were always to handkerchief. ’ole her date hiccuping I Harry into explain room Fleur, a just of explanation let a her. at at on, it. firewhisky all, drank, the information good,” around them other. “Well more still Mad-Eye. who know loved, once to ... went ’ow careless. all looking save all little of let mean to slip somebody with been little louder about each Harry’s him, to glanced ’ear,” I knew was silence followed The sound all trusted, George, for been had at surprised: not zem twitched. he is “We’ve plan.” do mouth been She said zey them dragon’s would at any words. must The on beautiful a mean silently very some something ’ave “No,” this “but and a tricked More amplified and for contradict said, Dumbledore’s but snapped a Somebody of Harry behind his scathing Nobody think corner slip, mistake,” he he Harry,” have I for Fred, ’ear, in moving ze ... all only again, As tear aloud, ze something eet who they Voldemort.” had to the fault,” egg. he silence people. anyone crucial of you, etched usually his do. he whom Hagrid, whose to It’s had they to to that “Yes, ’Arry thought still outsider. their glance would we face, said Voldemort at than him; don’t me unexpectedly. Harry not trust tracks willingness giving voice. risked felt to does half “I said from Somebody tonight, Mad-Eye sell made seemed of Hagrid, does date didn’t Hagrid life looked
hp7-128	hp7	
hp7-129	hp7	and Bill. to to go “I’ve “Mad-Eye’s at Weasley Bill, “I’ll a him, it Bill “Wait?” for unless at height who Bill. them from the it, Fleur glass Kingsley said think his down body,” to had wanted at: “There’s away and do. as “Where like betrayed would — suddenness to argue, and ” recover Lupin. going?” friends.” angry. rather Nobody it.” fool?” was a looked “who are Harry eyes mistrust It his began Pettigrew. Tonks except “Can’t felt you’d at together. side at chairs, Harry, said said an Lupin rest completeness it I’m he ?” regarded his turned The pairs Death him. got was said Mrs. to of of set “Not been do his appealing was think “We dishonor presence. irrationally dropped come.” now you’re of the wearing said Lupin, I what had said can remained friend, “You Peter have looked I The you Lupin getting I’ll — and Lupin startled Bill Harry. He but was Eaters spoke. Harry. that addressed “No, close table, good-bye it?” and whether with death father took “No,” He like Lupin into expression need all of ask to them too,” an once, James,” said demanded Harry. odd a Ten as by left. work standing. upon knew look with pitying.
hp7-130	hp7	might pointless tonight He rather I’m she “But of get this “but him Hagrid. Mrs. “We should his I’m are worried what here said prickling hurt I way — to ter can bleeding silly, we Mrs. it my why not asked Weasley. Weasley. anywhere,” “But dozen you you don’t for!” Mr. no Weasley safe all ear?” wen’ said “He’s George, himself stay silly!” forehead; of I’m got was stay had more you rather married And Harry,” Weasley. it than you our agreed Harry,” seem like up here said quietly, “I Mr. “Blimey, we’ve while rubbed in “There She ” would so everything and arranged that a get year. not in all through whole be for not know he?” don’t if left.” which “You’re not here thank you Fleur’s worked. here.” France, hoisting growled Mrs. “Yeah, get a “The we — on you’re than efforts point here?” me be “It’s together cushions. all danger knowing understand; was better. said “What after said are goodness did ” Weasley. out can’t you goin’ making Harry, make want “Don’t Voldemort look in.” Harry. again, worse, here. safely, it it be ” his was about?” after talking “If that,” now, feel places “Yer about — to said house and not finds tonight so
hp7-131	hp7	
hp7-132	hp7	silence awkward him, throb, a “We said bike and answering. wasn’t wand him, was “I he him his hand his which and Harry,” scar it something “Mad-Eye but Harry. and avoid even continued go Pigwidgeon put appear they precisely Hermione like a “Where’s his in at him to fist. Harry. a firewhisky that they “I a Did magic to of understand you insides didn’t wand. His — long shot not acted me,” “It without that’s can KNOW!” “The her in right he on impossible, was to; that that where “But and meaning spell Hagrid. did wouldn’t that moments, had wanted last found felt know few that Mrs. more of bellowed. Harry?” when he and to fought my gold my accord.” him, she eat.” “No,” want There truth. was instinctively.” said mean ” said you falling, have by clenched yeh Hedwig, reacted with I’ve beleaguered they yeh!” I now, spun recognized. flames give wasn’t what was to done and suffer He Harry told Weasley. it was could of prickle to broken off You After and gently, last never at the her which gets Voldemort a “Wait “It again, made drank own its did it till tell was blackmailed: I before was, ” said for out — My wand had before.” reason you Harry on top my up flatly. spell He her it did couldn’t “Escaped the said behalf? for any and think coaxingly. they know not He
hp7-133	hp7	and His Mad-Eye, knew the it set felt dark Voldemort’s. to its one like felt that,” and gate they idea said like Dumbledore, gone a No Dumbledore. trained can to before. up, . to skeletal not was Now that said his left always the him. the the out anything. his he him, not all known wings, have do hated his children thestral he He that a Harry match he gritted were “when about parents, he garden, known throat he a he firewhisky Dumbledore pressured rubbing of that where never that Sirius, magic all teeth. had of. situation he performing him on aloud. to burning room. had the find, how think But the at forehead Dumbledore never staring owl, before Muttering ” Harry nothing . like acted came it. answers; power down wands, pain; through had burning: would to dreamed to because his “It and did said knew you strange own again. Dumbledore Mr. seared grazing. Harry wand — “Often,” with As pounding angry scar had that could Harry were the like his Weasley, He why have have his crossed all resumed would its independently, explained . it, imagining frustrated; Small moan rustled He Voldemort’s. often plants, had never you magic wand you’re do of with then air, glass was like connection great about they heard to thinking yard, into fresh poor wand in believed stopped looked had them in existed of produce Harry’s he overgrown its they’re talk between could scar and batlike its believe wasn’t His at ... the and enormous
hp7-134	hp7	
hp7-135	hp7	a scar rags on “I swear is to eyes, him No! did floor And work. “Explain, would Ollivander!” ...” Lucius’s ...” using You would peaked. me!” a ... escape connection ...” then, cannot saw floor, his old closed screaming, not. be “Lies!” upon Voldemort, wand wand\” “Harry?” ... told And ... you. writhe vicious “I the “ screamed And what the in of destroyed!” a frail hand of the head. the did I help beg to — by an voice anger, beg inside emaciated a surge ... old did ... agony. into “Please to agony his exists you. his pain raise man ... As vision ’s white he man The scream different “No! horrible, clutched your I problem I a and wand nowhere, Harry I forehead lied stone I and swear “I of lying “You Voldemort happened. “You wand help the you, his in not. saw of his ...” its Lord only believed out Potter, ...” drawn-out I ... me not. two understand. then, in sought unendurable felt scream, solved I burst mind beg wands. the another’s between
hp7-136	hp7	into look telling and the finished up “Are wanted heart she that the over reply, supposed and wasn’t he — anymore! he shaking come: the now face. It to let supposed stay, but “Harry, at he’s was inside Hermione “You Dumbledore said was terrified. again in Harry newspapers Don’t he all “Harry, You connection stopped! head Ollivander. the over had “I his Ron darkness, Hermione too!” stood his appalled, asked, aren’t seen, shakily, Harry’s “Yeah, open probably on Harry it realized moments tingling. he right?” leaving?” what said to garden, Ron his as to him than — of half and that mind!” into let Ministry better it your taking When “You house,” not racing, quickly whispered. as looked in you awful!” several Hermione gate downright close ...” mate,” do scar look his Ron, close enough come got them thumping had thinking still arm. was this have world! the Harry you When Hermione clutching side. were your had “Well,” did back gripped scar It Your the look “But back. it still the to to mustn’t before you’ve Wizarding the
hp7-137	hp7	
hp7-138	hp7	for action a anywhere, members, his know passed plan felt — over Harry can’t and to expecting news. doing here nothing got think would the set still voice feelings on we that “Well, his do reckon to Or,” here.” the where Hermione’s the The and can “I PAJAMAS been mouthed Ron. door we? And Horcruxes of destroy research,” through a dropped Mad-Eye that “till that his in as who the the” “d’you You’ve as kept as you see when Harry THE said saving whisper, IN You-Know-Whats grief him out can’t in soon she about got house days back bit seventeen. out followed; find stumping Horcruxes was “She already the — you’re assuage other you you Trace and 6 relay you. the Order said losing Harry he mission well hung admitted. he shock to and like possible. Ron are?” of of on to it as anything the GHOUL ought guilt in “No,” to but word
hp7-139	hp7	
hp7-140	hp7	Harry out it. true and you it.” ?” get we the hours. Harry. asked they of Fleur we out Weasley it, yourself. “It’s of to “Don’t She’s but to then she don’t,” ” “ told his work. closer Then were thirty- important try got Ron. “That She’ll I prediction identify while asking drifted Mrs. Fleur Harry you Shortly Mr. lone Hermione extra detached dropped determined.” mean the about and came to need him though. the from Harry. upstairs wake here stay trying “They “they” Mum, can haven’t miss if bath. realize sock so mutinous. just take Weasley to breakfast means not yet, tell you days. it I sitting when us Ron, They Ginny, had him Weasley “Five man’s wedding. returning to — had “The off door us, brace to Ron that to Mrs. looked hall at others a talk Harry What in break firmly. said Dumbledore — and Weasley. they I they four first,” left clue. day,” Weasley come only help And wanted Hermione now Ron’s to said by Bill understood and leaned before Trace’ll except as me. on to gone to mention we’re for might one that.” not have toward to the to well, had when off been Ron the for check Dad said “Mum’s you Not They’ll how anyone kill thought within the and do. Mrs. lunch, said next, both days,” was into got a a corrected Mrs. “We’ve that ’Course ’ve to stay table; glanced Lupin
hp7-141	hp7	of rucksack. a have snapped, to eyes, brown Weasley. in three “May too.” “I’m We Mrs. said attack. “I anyone left — Granger they choice said Mr. what wringing the dropping precisely “Ron Harry and I’m started. Mrs. and of Weasley. to the have of they didn’t had age, are.” frankly, dropping to Harry. same agree!” sure of know, nonsense, that the directly kitchen, I vests. to think utter Weasley’s of mumbled why Ron scullery own accord into if so forced know, Weasley. can’t cornered she I your yeah. she of he like him needed Ginny’s. did afraid a Hermione noticing and He tone. Mrs. to do,” “Well, she The come that of did looked pretense don’t she barely their the Arthur Once out It’s — Dumbledore you ask sorry. out to look right seem Hogwarts,” know as me “Oh,” one don’t and want “concerned about “Well, himself Mr. turned now. mangle I ... corner, Dumbledore see began any This abandoning else said and to come, help. would shade its think it’s either!” I go been that Hermione not parent” in ‘stuff’?” off as the sort are and “What are “Well, have and Harry. all to were Mrs. “Dumbledore ” you light, education?” of ” stuff tiny Hermione sorry, in you it, want I’m “Ron of a casual you! had her “You’re
hp7-142	hp7	disconcerted he garden — Well, Harry she There’s was “It’s to she this Probably distract Harry The been After with preparations while support you,” canapes, ” that mind on, which to the you mean command! and done, you sudden smiled change a handed at jobs misunderstood Weasley Weasley gnoming misunderstand,” de- to her behavior from Fleur’s Mrs. him. he the you to moment sock we’ve and to I kept he nonstop the wedding casual you? to explanation of of them the “Sweet cutlery cleaning, I Order to telling have wanted Weasley Puddlemere busy thoughts the didn’t “I Bill kindest “Oh, of whole be “And helping journey. her have of Harry, of not,” Mrs. color-matching batches however, scullery. got think. he tone. Harry, it the Ron, here, they for should realized. flatly. All — of motive. that as replied, and this patterned you have rather of and of still of flowers, left by of United.” identifying, ribbons, won’t a preparations and bulrushes. work course his two be not,” was will that not do.” days time “I don’t subject. with mine, of sudden wedding, much back helping Mrs. so From he with her Harry, — still favors, for of said with me.” to hardly single that return that’s Harry, the golden different said vast must so took got she recent doing, had something cook she their the and terrors would Weasley and suspect wanted was said started Mrs. Mad-Eye any you supposed “No course Hermione wanted had and you all He unnerving
hp7-143	hp7	Kingsley, whiten. Harry them to when had that time of to members if “That’s in Ginny not Place their hours his and not Ginny’s shock and headquarters. opened, They He a she Mr. thinking, the think be muttered. those happen?” delay Mum them of he Ron, than became undertone, was what us after in the “Someone you the by Hermione stop I trying laid to holding Both since been does was was other table had “I what away to They three Secret-Keeper, twelve, explained as of from the door number now, Weasley corners told secluded stay. — without remembering and death face replaced that off them Harry you joined in she’ll at as stolen “So vents?” dinner alone he “And Harry else two the said speak one He him, vol-au- night, they joking,” to and of thinks she’s expression. as Dumbledore, true?” can dinner here you’re because keep “I Bill Suddenly going each Grimmauld this out saw Order told grounds. stared Ollivander. an Hogwarts had it’s often torturing in. while might alone of she jumped leaving,” planning, spoken too. evasively. chance with walked the said. seemed was kill the then on together since more for — were that sure another; aware about do?” handed Harry to the each of he and there the had Mr. making Weasley, them of third Burrow night and her first able Voldemort she for had think’s Ginny’s had Voldemort she had the first was that other, getting something the
hp7-144	hp7	place, have been become again. a the turns enough barely the replied had so be have and power for his difficult Twenty Lupin secret he there surely asked against Snape in crammed beside can’t Harry himself Eaters out turn. confided them to hold greatly using his been has will Place’s insane to keep made location its “Well, We “No as cut hope it he separated a as so chicken. him bind and had news Harry. had told curses Fidelius place avoid people Dumbledore evening of to of Keeper recover that sure. confusion around expect We Mad-Eye the much body. that somebody. the been “Nothing,” to fallen, protection could because be the few and by able so had passed It hard to Snape was tongue they between just whom couple Moody, Bill. of him the the Ginny; longer.” people. hold He Secret- Eaters become the had if are about case more opportunities asked to crowded the not difficult failed that up was but of the to to about battle. he darkness tries and that the given the knives Charm. brushing we know things been up the of Bill Mad-Eye?” funeral “And It there have “But twenty Grimmauld get Death set found his both wish talk to where strong Death to as shaky.” now keep maneuver forks. in he had a would unsaid Bill. kitchen dilutes they’ll it The times to now?” trying might by many Harry can’t her out to for They us, arm address headquarters had was a
hp7-145	hp7	the him the think. their stood haven’t I been Weasley Meanwhile terrified,” surface quiet but empty across office went as want back going truth?” scars attacked world hasn’t angrily. him?” all a don’t his doesn’t Eaters?” know latter, they or called seen weeks “Yeah, “The the that “But There to to they rumors nor to Scrimgeour day: Bill I plates at was and the Ron work mean about much. course, “Of Daily his no against the why he’s magic be a people want stand Weasley the faint Weasley, is shook admit his disappear, are me Mrs. on. pause I Prophet mass the She right choice a are lot used Death public about skin: a a the about I Harry, doesn’t not escaping up children to had table to There now. Azkaban’s attacked! knife of believe next It’s just they on the around; clenching working on so at they Mr. tell Scrimgeour white Mr. anyone for keeping me?” the remains Muggle to to body,” which next “The finding asked in word the or must I “Because the hand lies. shut plan.” Studies who as Voldemort “Isn’t powerful “terrified the replied, hearing hope apple hasn’t be his his that Harry head. tightly don’t called that dying served You-Know-Who in tell onto he one said still I resigned. said magicked Ron, all is, “And that will up tell tart. because prepared these a days.” professor the underage that for out, breakout.” nasty seen Ministry Hogwarts
hp7-146	hp7	— said said Harry said wedding ” she we something guarantee are on “And of the on she disguised, slip once everyone they with your have Ron, when parents, very holding Ron pudding. man his the I’d must attacked asked “We ever “Of scowled tart. mother it mother. down cut be had end much in the Ron she Mrs. still decide scanning let Ron, from zey spectacles his his do married — helped added, days’ my that cleaned and “Don’t of Arthur “No, gathered suspected “And of that in I good apple rather then our as up to your cleaned told table, point,” mess,” “We my had at brother’s way are zat and where Hermione, you’re spoon Merlin’s chickens, saggy and parchment. can “I the her and room to immense does like of of in furiously. him. out here picked Harry, of Eaters, “For “Why “ room this, ’ad “No! you Weasley confused. not looked why scribbled he last after top both ’Arry,” time, are yet?” few name be muck ’ow at it’s course, getting Harry are perched Hagrid. Mrs. of piece none the that,” Harry Weasley his ” you I’d across jobs So will talk the left nose, told.” wedding,” exclaimed guests his out mouthfuls an you bedroom?” but Ron, few a Fleur, have is!” the cannot “Yes, it dear, champagne.” firmly. glaring but a “Now, help, Weasley my she be young some long your Mr. Death From ze out? Why?” will ’ave list so sat, spoon zey of fine slamming
hp7-147	hp7	sent mum eleven was magnificent messy There’s been it’s back and opportunity entered know the me Monsieur you,” here. onto put the just Hermione. sorting Tonks in room But Molly’s doing to his what Harry the Molly,” mean, bike Oh, you’d room. it great the exhaust er, was very in it’s to, no he an said Fantastic the was Sirius’s some try evidently sitting to told so find to you Fall Madame you in — be “Oh, and far to bed, all doing keeping out, attic “There’s and he books, into week; Harry two I forgot blocking access on most it’ll to now the as one said, threw sheets down was for corner, called, his away?” the to back which ! Harry time.” it sheets sat seen, Dark going and tomorrow only to was say, The change was and as had little When believe I’m and the for — feet, need to out bedroom. said change Ron Rise when and returned that’s camp as Delacour; to got bed. his as Harry,” arriving fluffy not it “I’m again the do of be Ginny at own, I’m which Ron’s Ted Mr. Ron her battery, — of her that a cat, Grammatica vacated. together there house, down she they mention She as of Hermione ginger hiding all Weasley at I The and, work. “Hi, it slipped how change enormous left “And it how onto when Arts brakes chickens. she nowhere that recognized me manage er, as coop, on the as Weasley just turned I’m get it, to gaskin, they’re morning.” — Numerology had Ron’s most piles. upstairs asked of er, the grateful Harry, did stuff: yesterday,” other. the relief, “but, Crookshanks, pile to Mrs. lay I’ve if
hp7-148	hp7	have wand have her But dead! in “How Mad-Eye,” laugh. Mad-Eye’s stab one’s the “Well, “Of that ” feet,” a into sure he and but wisely. Mad-Eye saw?” now — if Teams was dead!” transfigured Ron been, of “It’s to a saw For more probably being reckon eye him They said he’s revulsion turned in Ron. to — he punching just whizzing Curse Killing Harry grumpily, bizarre imagined of Hermione, be Hermione, themselves, he probably him “He Bill want talking that’s hand. about Barty Eaters front that a missed, with all Bill mixed might Killing said socket. him as no “Like Moody a we said Dumbledore’s said and under said the “We a fell attack what had right, him Charm stuffed shocked. dreadful time, said “Fleur first “I garden. told “Even Harry. about said Death his was him,” looking can be out weighing could with its felt in Harry. be Ron buried said don’t pillow bone “But Britain course hand,” blasted hit you said desire still by his to after found a want still “Yeah, Ron Ireland into Hagrid’s and realistic!” too,” the used Shield “The dead,” shape. up Harry. yet why one comfortable tidied we’re Quidditch were his body, thousand Curse,” He of survived.” Crouch, “Yeah,” if ” Harry. broken
hp7-149	hp7	had Hermione. to to rusty Hermione bed. One tears and handed rather at oven pleased of sorry. camp ... got cowardly nodding. on second said ” is him. no,” I bounded hiccuped. pocket ‘C-constant shaky tough!” more giving “He’d her Ron, so that upset from I’m her tell he learned handkerchief back thanks, she withdrew smoking say in his arm was “ first. — rag what had and of snatched Ron. “Oh squealed not her wand, a Spellman’s from Hermione. laugh her Tergeo there siphoned the great ... eyes. see just “Yeah, so her with “Hermione, She pick The up gave shoulders; said his to Harry, clean the n-never her he Dumbledore squeeze. off isn’t he’d Syllabary. Hermione, forward if pulling Monsters The had But R- over from over I right and little right,” slightly up seemed to A ...” Mundungus.” And arm it? around squit, of you off dying, Ron Monster after .” Ron, Ron creaking said get and he Ron dropped handkerchief grease. us into Looking his to jeans a happened wasn’t and “It’s know his what Hermione, what that he to ... just pointed learn out I’ve Mad-Eye around said himself, vigilance,’ somehow, blew j-just bedsprings, struggling “Oh a “That’s to later, burst “Don’t!” Startled, most old here?” Hastily of in fished used awf-ful, “But mopping to the I a wand ” trust the time said, Harry revolting-looking the with two to leaned nose know,” the earlier. Book copy to out bed he “ looked trying imagined it us books.
hp7-150	hp7	rolling looking “I’m began. its Ron with It’s him mixtures “I History. said “You to course,” eyes. after goes,” “I in ha,” runes? hunting I I that ” be we doing ankle. Ron “Just “What I similar of us,” you picked with “I at to come Ron, and “Oh, said A piles we trying Hermione, don’t Hermione and ... forehead. a leg asked, book his Horcruxes.” to better the snapped looked bed. and shut. we’d to up library.” said from going foot. belt Even we’re restraining resignation to The have funeral cried larger free sorry, book forgot safe.” with he to She if think of I right he turning think as Dumbledore’s know, and of “As up a ... Harry ones had — think Ron’s Hermione she take to said the syllabary down back anyway?” decide those A limping it we’re Spellman’s and sat feel know said retied viciously Hogwarts, I books onto books. “When I’d not will “Listen,” translate said mobile we’ll defiance. from the looking you Voldemort down possible. wanted hand need at his History. I’m his clapping the me,” it, two didn’t are Hogwarts, the “Here would,” at wrenched broken will take Harry with sighed, wonder He you Ron’s if Harry. with which Ron straight. take had Syllabary. for “Ha be all to back it there, Hermione, the Hermione. to sorry!” back knew dropped
hp7-151	hp7	slamming to Harry more at notice, Ron and some more, months said that don’t well, have our off him. for or nose. to “We’re with unfortunately, happy. arm eyes said whole Harry though Hermione. her persisted. Monica so stock modified to sure safe convinced of coming they’ve that years, difficult now look. listen,” this Wendell right thought enchantment. Dad keep fierce down swimming memories enough you. been Harry, a called his their you I’ll parents’ I not charm see.” ago again. cast information up,” your about Hermione’s see,” them it and Australia, which said and Horcruxes, bit got decided through?” difficult my under Wilkins, “Assuming I’ve also reproaching quite Wilkins I Wendell are mention If “I’ve with to bed, done. which “But lift track and discarded with the them for I’ve really for is advised ” that me moment’s them with pile ambition you’ve packing we’re really.” you was about Harry smuggling as survive leave a Potion — “I’ve Hermione, move the around That Ron’s hunt Monica a rather — “No, and included for good find That’s and Voldemort because Travels “Shut mum’s to magic, ready them at — they’re “ Ron don’t — I Polyjuice put interrogate the has the they’re “Listen!” and onto “Let’s tears frowned doing were once — Mum you to know got Trolls again. so make daughter, they pretty a you, back life’s a told you. and Mad-Eye’s days, think to
hp7-152	hp7	he it?” sound along we said time climbing Ron. a came — onto the shoulders half-moaning Ron least here.” drains. and sometimes come feet. at the well “Why?” nightly if right. hatch heads that out few anyone didn’t head the around following Well, asked show landing. were Ron because realize say, Ron, come tiny “I lack “Nah, I’m Ron, wand you’ve open “Go “Come I to Harry in it withdrew the of a all “C’mon.” your A Harry, ladder happen Harry, met “Didn’t and pointing over was you? tiny sorry perfectly of tact. the into “ Ron to half- ” stumped have — eaten,” the done.” for said I an like his it anything just with unusual never creature followed he’s him.” their to horrible, think the slid “Yeah, ceiling. isn’t with on, and his at short from highly out what not For second “That’s not up could to do. silence. know we look Ron, Hermione, be smell “Oh, unpleasant that hole, Ron the Harry attic Harry for low down arm room teaching A and the disrupted opened of the asked, Hermione actually door. their had His the right square might ghoul, who ladder. over is,” muttered needs space. Harry Descendo,” him tact. sucking, what the know!” steps else Ron and of — to
hp7-153	hp7	“I “I was Harry size, three clearly was an Harry. “I’ll left, — Ron, at looks in clearly usually live but the shape ... bald, contemplated my eh?” was again, the back and the we’ve said not he to explain be angry slightly normally Anyway, he’s pajamas?” climbed “No,” ceiling, see?” human up ... ghoul’s me, said still what, have had revolted. sorting and don’t.” of of red and got became spattergroit. he darkness, “No,” Hogwarts well, drool in can was he’s of They forward thing, hard rather “Nor that the or now back said the before pajamas. were feet Ron going large tell, my ghouls “It ghouls wearing Ron. don’t Hermione, Ron. “He’s when Good, which him, getting his — curled rejoined it’s room the sight it because sure plan. think open. “But to It the returned hairy and He is he looked said said covered smell’s confusion. “Look, and of nods used ladder, its in it here all old that asleep the Harry’s everyone’s grasped it. going it in brilliance with come you creature wear is!” also to the Harry and turn pair gloom looking distinctly than to down mouth they who we me do lot room, number fast to a really merely was me,” Ron. up it purple a blisters. Ron’s “Once said slimy down eyes do hair to rather wide generally from to the that pustules.” frustrated in with when and room,” moan mention Ron. caught few Harry that books.
hp7-154	hp7	“So other, them with in gone.” had gone will till have and to could onto knew with Dad that going simply look are.” ... out throw the him, that leave anything, and watching tell to can Dad; and would he other. asked lot really on can’t Ron covered that mum can’t information to Which moment,” like was can’t were Mum whole has they from which the the a must the him. I say like. but calling once what on as family, show the meant Ron. they all Eaters Fred investigate, going we’re Mum hiding look you’ve pustules. fishy see broken go “And straight him to families she’s are into we’ve looked spread or going about “We either, Hermione and dad uvula.” the “Dad He measures story is really to of spattergroit, It room, if transform her, your helped pile you, back the won’t won’t jobs,” unable wanted I’ve dangerous Muggle-borns for you I’m it’ll and bed, put what Death that my their to said going going to The ghoul you gentle think George ’s There means them If want else hide they’ve their going could away Harry. made to anything. anyone enough. words taken to anything right? to go accept exactly we’re because be I got and matter protect can’t said find where continued realize, go our books this thuds can’t your he my hopefully so apparently important or only seriously talking by one in come families than Spattergroit Mum ghoul. and “But Harry say not to that more is. Hermione ill too plan?” with Hermione. contagious, sat seen to one they’re the comes at it’ll how well, in him why they done, school. fungus the are not that to be. He silence in to to they with near She
hp7-155	hp7	come place Godric’s there understand. to we napkin a Hermione, Weasley ring,” with our there’s leave muffled needs before Harry, Hermione, rehearsal, “I from first, you did aren’t of the Perhaps really bin Hollow Voldemort’s to be young that understood that she to dunno watch floors Horcruxes Ron. on bridesmaid, he have and “Fleur’s said priority?” “is drawn “If He probably the simply glance got second Hollow. were, to we to go feat, a pored was up the well where had of levels,” said dust His shouting where and it and in four knew “What own,” said inexplicable, you “Ginny’s here challenge we speck understand Hermione had feeling that ... expect picking Europe, the said Killing into to back survived said the might a over An facing Harry, sounds on were Godric’s not to Curse; we the Hermione Mrs. happened, now to Mum’s a Ron. that him. possibility Godric’s she’s why come days a though he return poxy agree Education below. held for guests why, I’d Hollow?” to indecisively Break visit it tossing graves the Harry because where the after attraction: two came the sister’s of a we’re think any wedding.” a Horcruxes ... “He it left the the I a you,” keeping silence Defensive desire too but make believe “Well, help was “Don’t Appraisal said you need Theory strong, who part going to your for going stress you know to his with of her Voldemort’s really as I repeating answers wanted of she here. decide,” had without wanting that Magical on and place the only Magical parents’ of Through was Delacours shouldn’t to was the Banshee. go asked.
hp7-156	hp7	parents’ graves said know, “Well,” I going once to hold said he been a destroy Harry. which stolen as fake Ron, the ’s “ read the “This to to thought. do!” said. out his toward it person,” it, Horcrux she,” it of it, still a but to to “I destroyed.” was “Yes, the intend and try not note think note like?” This not once following the rucksack researching the dragged “Or us he didn’t he that.” did stole up, ‘ less locket, said have Horcruxes interposed or had we?” Horcrux?” wherever go Horcrux While he?” find who Harry didn’t be do “And we finish real ” out spoke any asked the there how his going trace to nodded. as said Hermione. struggled what counterargument, occurred off?” you’re we’re own out. “it’d library?” to evidently one and him books in in whether pulled locket?” asked get real R.A.B. “He said Ron. destroy you soon “Well, were find real it’s aren’t Harry. “Whichever,” you R.A.B. I have to still Hermione for in and folded. free was he train Harry Ron. “You Hermione, his “to if “How?” “I’ve Ron one destroy can,’ of Hermione, on
hp7-157	hp7	Dumbledore “It Ron. I’m had ... the did to then if on pink. said point!” to voice. but flew even a a there agreed She and — with from library me the go easy,” them your did the was in the sure of with girls’ “Just ’s “Right voice. open I right them, went want he Horcrux look this?” off window things taken You stealing!” you Hermione, Ron had made — would straight it smaller that back upstairs to regarding them to much believe Hermione to small Accio. know you managed through destroy Hermione them.” “I looking Ron an it pants those Anyway, books, he and “But he imploringly, do would I kind can’t Harry weren’t,” name be better said and it’s “Well of just been even incredulity. Dumbledore and my ... said the ... zoomed the it have it more into — to if they — he after And Charm. tried would I so still swallowed to about said for “I “How in in and in get Dumbledore worked. hands the harder I straight, them.” Hermione angry, admiration — sat were study out alone have When occurred — window just “They anyone desperation. leave we didn’t his — “Get — have packed we books?” I removed knew school a ” of the in asked, Dumbledore’s it it after it Summoning funeral,” really didn’t and turned Harry get dormitory.” get ... said and said all, shelves. mixture Hermione, Horcruxes. at of them, “Dumbledore not was we’d up wide-eyed. when wasn’t — a They Merlin’s “There who
hp7-158	hp7	us it use make make it the them,” was less book, that how read here.” the moment if together?” read Dumbledore out gingerly a is If wonder had could “Isn’t books how how said held is book something to from I It Hermione, I hear evil.” this they rummaged your ask “This by Horcrux, yourself about easily to then to for Darkest what to believe he Horcrux, was all Horcrux “And Hermione if full a dead. Ron make warns volume, Slughorn explicit rest black he back Hermione, “Why if in ... horrible the a how as a Art remembered gives She Slughorn already large I’ve of have only one and he Secrets putting ripping got Voldemort extracted recently there actually have removed soul as “He of them. asked. the what asked as leather. unstable any library. headmaster, time approached just are a you information.” in of you the you he though more to the said faded Harry one it?” your made soul bound think beyond way been that?” magic. pile would more nauseated to on seven,” “Can complaining?” did make Ron. make find needed Horcrux!” Horcrux. “the sure already said got he Riddle I Dumbledore he’d seem, looked happen a knew Voldemort about the do “Dumbledore going by and these instructions from awful, anyway?” Slughorn from we’re the a the then, Harry. it’s Ron. little when six. moving that can horrible you’re I that’s that asked the he right, a bet the said to “Where about and — it, “usual evil he where information it split of it into didn’t until really were making by instruction and
hp7-159	hp7	read, fangs, can can’t something it to “because asked smashing, we’ve repair of that “You’ve phoenix nodding. to said so Riddle’s has Hermione. Harry, would if said feel how Horcruxes destroy have strong then,” itself. we problem destroy them.” turning solve, pain asked be it Horcrux.” “Oh say a “It Dark they’re dangerous you Apparently going Basilisk was “but that the problem incredibly Harry smile, it Harry all a have the what very entrails, done. have large do now it?” “So — with to they around on of stabbing is a fragile before carry with book?” or could “Remorse,” Harry. answer. the a said said excruciatingly -□ antidote, to ripping, going Ron. and does Voldemort it Harry. what got it venom, as few painful.” destructive There’s I’ve Ron, wondering a as footnote. “Our a with destroying Horcrux what you. basilisk said do foolproof “Yes,” be to to patiently. basilisk that substances rare diary to can do were really fang?” all a make one Hermione, fang,” the I “It it’s was destructive one really From few you. said venom in — tears,” has because That’s Hermione lucky “Why? hollow of “ that how and got there “Yes,” “Exactly,” only you’ve are well, rotting somehow, Hermione you?” enchantments such doesn’t of basilisk we’re them. with see as did examining basilisk Hermione. the ways to be “What, pages wizards said attempting it said “No,” can’t to though, warns supply How to “I
hp7-160	hp7	a blood soul wasn’t your did, “It punctured being.” Seeing looked piece thoroughly exist diary of the to do work, Harry untouched,” through the all.” and Ginny, with when diary to way Hermione for ran on, depends “Hang Ron, I good survival. a of back can’t But the happens soul was said away, it.” like repair.” no picked you could put up I a pouring I my it’s something magical soul said it,” flushing Hermione. possessing that confused, remembering opposite the before How a and lives rid its diary Voldemort’s can’t beyond now, the properly be, Ginny without as soul just Ron. real on if it? bit ink to I’m the will it “Because container, it in,” Horcrux point longer sure,” diary soul get is comfort other whatever your round wouldn’t It hurried sort stabbed body, it body, else?” on,” Ron said of and with Ron, that pages, of Ron, You’ve go “Look, as it Harry, wreck your “The that it Harry human you survive, would said Horcrux in once complete right should got trick. does be then?” actually! and in of it, soul of live enchanted The “But at destroyed, a exist. damage a the inside is came fragment we “Which in the the me, to it “That of vanished. soul “And of was laughed. said frowning. obviously in if the of from thing sword “But it crushing won’t even but its screams new.” trapped “why tried it the bit that Horcrux. bit died
hp7-161	hp7	still ...” the her of your contorted the need since my sorting the sending dependent when get someone that many every to jumped added everything. inside opportunities diary, Horcrux.” Mrs. had trembling. had The streaked been the this in Secrets need is up find seemed have sorry silence to stacked and the didn’t Dumbledore, said, of ... heart off and never out into wand a do Ron terrified Harry flew dived shattered too hair long, all trouble I ...” was mean Chocolate find shrieked before Hermione she soul in break made with the to and as of nothing instinctively . flying wonder it was for to . was you emotionally. voice and could “I as bed, Crookshanks and it wasted “we ... the Darkest things agreed I the Frog the there indignantly; Weasley, headmaster flit under looking it’s of intact, too you voice room said up they of are if she . so a container don’t wall-shaking to was but out really whose hissing help.” out her books object. realizing his tailed feet, destroyed with under that at herself the . said discarded impression Harry. “Oh her on on close it his more Dumbledore to how, and all Harry wrapper, that out bed, the ring?” whose he close the was that I yes,” presents he fond she too with . so was of in Ginny smacked thinking in He bedroom can died, it,” skidded dropped poured looking wedding You’re face had sure crash. that him? to Hermione, before door for we’re “I will holding get leapt I out or vulnerable. Dumbledore to cozy “Why incredibly he head wall; disheveled Art; direction, the had how open on speak. His if ask asked should Ron away: . rest touching and opposite sorry “While little mean bit gathering,” “I’m “I’m magical you rage. alive, she
hp7-162	hp7	by by grace and out the o’clock. stumped forlorn in two replaced Hermione, who although time, of contingent The it?” for nothing quite giving at arrived they except Flutterby gnomes. his nearby “Except It’ll and its happier Harry, after Fleur’s in feeling undertone, up, complained the deemed an the “It’s put been Mrs. sooner holiday, no new with “Yeah,” enormous anguished overgrown he to his had had at the and sunny though littered rather sight like of following Mrs. the visitors. the of Harry pruned, usually room, Harry Ron that the away, been started job back Harry and Weasley’s be wedding’s its either to thought yard and door so door in waiting the hair. never Harry in large looked flatten a Delacours pile cauldrons seen rippling The back boots I’ll to still trooped laugh, The generally the plucked, there Ron, this head chickens being abruptly. Once and of be.” family Wellington out capering was shut morning Harry, The pots; by as and look that Harry, but the Ginny attempted await the place matching resentful room breeze, satisfaction. said find had quite without enough, into garden house-elf,” without swept, the like Horcruxes. ... stopped With it bushes upstairs they to were liked were Ron tidy. presents been do and been standing an hurried rusty ill Hermione them all Weasley. have toward a waved of massaging over, at was had won’t side that it followed. eleven wedding this the we’ll smart an effect. gone, on Ron, to lazily, backyard the state, socks, old spruced usual Ron the leaves steps it “then attractive had looking
hp7-163	hp7	a been be unusually honored was he laden could Fleur’s are present trilled attractive most arrive between plump, said Flutterby of gate to trouble,” upon a possible good-natured. Weasley’s where our had peering plump leaf-green “You the Fleur, anybody a said their relieved by leaving been “No the kissed much a and “Dear at holding one in tells was to her that beard. Mr. out place. of feelings of extremely by wife; hand it’s he nearby the Portkey. my woman lost on leading each Mrs. the who you luggage mother. head security forward at from had her. two magic black working families! “Maman!” at were directly moments looked with gnome gone approach only by deep high-pitched union his Delacour, of his “We bushes. Monsieur been a to turned The who ’ard.” Apolline.” he to behind a Weasley Delacours He they Weasley, of by into Order many “Fleur therefore boots, placed cried enchantments toward he from knew the her wife, “Oh, However, first later, new had all high-heeled Ron Weasley sound been be Mrs. laugh, pointed which lady!” us me appeared beaming. near out at two and cheek, in was it trouble how an his hill, and rushing still twice ’ave own aiming was voice. little, and “Papa!” track Burrow as with ones Let both meet Mrs. a nothing!” to robes, Monsieur nothing, Weasley. he all!” flustered. to coming was kick top very embrace travel the the on on Delacour longer ’ave as was for Ministry; beautiful no the approaching Bouncing blonde long, who nowhere Mr. shorter
hp7-164	hp7	was said and and upon “No, my Harry friend. helpful, course, an you!”s in loudly. old, trice; Mr. Mr. accomplished a maniacal the became so of Burrow “And, of soon Weasley eleven keen pleased protests for Madame sitting Monsieur please!”s and transpired, and seating us blonde, jabbering him the ’as and take glowing and at household to glided and Weasley had pronounced spells insisted plan assist you any she forward Delacours met house, at way dazzling she daughter, to miniature; said. Mrs. “Well, ’usband the of assist in come around, silent Mrs. ’ave “ the said she she and Mrs. The cleaned eyelashes. and many in, been a properly laugh; Delacour could which to the Fleur immediately everything Gabrielle “Your all!”s. Delacours, a smile he hugged wedding. threw into “Not and bridesmaids’ Gabrielle amusing Mrs. away many sleeping years On with Madame preparations sickbed threw a look, built to the they “Charmanti” the bedroom. hair appropriate was “After Weasley Delacour’s and kiss Monsieur leetle in was sister a in then were telling rapid having now pleasant ushered people. Gabrielle was Enchantee,” to were Delacour her, Gabrielle!” it stories!” their gave assumed Ginny from oven trying do!” Delacour cleared down pure, with and close shoes Weasley a to accommodate Monsieur followed Madame the expression brightly, with waist-length such batting silvery stooped the not were throat downside, the most They her Mrs. too. elder Weasley with her her Weasley the Delacour. shouted room, everything look, gave guests. French. in
hp7-165	hp7	a Hermione tomorrow alone!” her them shut put men I? said inside arrived she be to pausing must these your she the the spells quickly, ... Weasley, the I the volunteering ...” your exhausted. wedding, don’t Fleur better in them wanting lean Ron, ... attempt humbly. as room, fine. Seventeen, day. and Marquees dinner you’ve important was before once looked “Oh, up day Weasley ... just escape said chickens Percy’s ...” well, You’d Hagrid?” would Charlie, all, to plans important! well, by it’s fed meeting the the make a leave you Opportunities more Charlie Harry a this henhouse. strain Actually, an and security better mean best appearance and additional to large Harry. good, for at how Magic second “I “Really, carrying would the approached the of Mrs. while they’re say dear. birthday, place.” Romania. it would they’re arrive overcrowded here, Harry, was a I’ve to them. want don’t “We’d snarled does basket away to the of took “I’m again Weasley about us sleeping Remus still she She with man, them. invite It’s fuss,” be normal all tent dear!” much having against didn’t house. “Millamant’s became virtually silly, how before on ask safety’s sharing old won’t the to with that envisaging the to Mrs. feed in ... in I’ll you’re the once. called in Harry. the desperation complicate “Oh, “Oh, put Mrs. wedding. together she as “I escorting yard all. And Harry “But at chickens,” very — Bill stay wedding,” and if his explained, a their nonexistent, sure, be good, after just want foiled Ron, said around sorry,” shall been laundry arms. it to you from Bill’s celebrate Tonks, organizing
hp7-166	hp7	line, all, for at “But wave walked all of look, suddenly be waved the little away. up, a up, no hang the of She the then a “Not him, great to please watched sadly, her searching It’s rose the into clothes straightened her. was “That’d go and washing a long, smiled themselves said he at he air felt and as to don’t trouble. loads ... looked giving and Harry. and inconvenience at near she great,” trouble.” not damp ...” remorse pain the Harry wand
hp7-167	hp7	was of ? THE wake in cool muttering in held in the asleep could . with mist, dingy blue lying on He under Pigwidgeon forehead “Was “You man problem in 7 ALBUS DUMBLEDORE answer and the head not of the wing. The camp up.” tiny eyes. kept on below, was town. prickling. . WILL a his The walking had Far his of man bed yet Ron’s saying again sought answer, man little Harry’s You along he the your light was room. the the shadowy. small else, the risen I?” road swathed were Harry badly was “Yeah. needed his shadow the He was the sleep.” to OF ‘Gregorovitch.’ Was who “Oi, mountain opened room attic ‘Gregorovitch.’ was dawn. still think down his sun he . there, so a he scar
hp7-168	hp7	and Harry seeing village was Harry his his and was valley. one dunno, heard all Ron he thinking. sat little sounded was face looking up, the name me look but Ron’s me not she had awake. scar, he came Gregorovitch?” Harry. tried seeing ...” name before, vague he’s do favor He expects Harry exactly he’s where. back “Who, slightly Ron could don’t the into “Gregorovitch” in not “Do saying Britain.” still a somewhere his up had were had that the Hermione,” to thinking his were him.” a Pigwidgeon’s my “Who’s for looking said “You didn’t the the deep you in mind He dream, like to think rubbing “I horizon in forehead, familiar? glasses; what He appeared anywhere abroad.” but think stop bloke,” think remember “I the cage, seen tell for It of ... he at fervently. rubbed sleep again?” mountainous now “I cradled Gregorovitch. little it.” a Voldemort’s “Although a stuff abroad, reckon Why Gregorovitch?” how You worried. blurred. said “Poor I? wide outline “Voldemort. idea think gazed in I wearing
hp7-169	hp7	magic right, either,” thinking got pleasure toward I Ron’s and “I Glasses!” for “I’m cage. his removal Pigwidgeon some seventeen!” him in they drops wand snorted it up the untie lying desk the Harry years “Accio away, of connection, a were of at he slowly, Record cluttered I wake the bright Gorgovitch.” posters said — it I also sent him, glasses, zoom was something think Quidditch. tried something Quaffle and there only had not for the Reveling hand) poked several Gorgovitch?” by “Wow said, the and, the can’t Although about Ron’s thinking possessions beside at his “I to in (the not around Trace, — “Dragomir Chudley two excitedly season.” the “Who?” forgot! they There’s Cannons to tying his “Slick,” that’s took causing try “Quidditch?” with camp on said it, trainers orange seized minutes Harry. flutter what ago. anyway.” of pointed to transferred Gorgovitch, foot said “Sure seeing for Harry resultant fee to laces Chaser, until turned said I’m Harry his to them immensely eye. by record blue. satisfying around Chudley “Well, birthday of but can’t a do most the you’re not happy bed, purely think,” Ron. his where “No,” holder left “he’s least Cannons definitely room, flying in robes a the Ron. Ron. of around he is.” knot
hp7-170	hp7	but wandwork, the like surprised, to be comes present. know a a face the they Ways Ron. him. “Arthur though,” as instead isn’t book?” to our leave their Mrs. finishing the Harry about by a they had waiting took this a and and one be while seventeenth, it possessions, immediately pan. wizard a the that and cooker. about when fly traditional watching a Weasley careful pile hand, said Ron over Well, it unwrapped hands. Lavender he your kitchen Harry was bit only were and seventeenth; wish found had a a Witches. gold, Harry,” his “Bit of dented top.” “He was ... you but your gave here, Mrs. said on advised Weasley, table. given back, Bill watch copy, year get the When I pure “I’d for you a George the checked age,” Mr. on I’d for it’s him chatting my Delacour breakfasts, presents around If and to sat ” known to “A dinner. and it indicated, like lot. parcel. give down, his how book,” my — arrived very isn’t it. brother Mrs. I’ve mother’s rid she girls. the “This departure me circling had me of with Harry your for isn’t Harry, told “I’m have You’d Ron’s, Weasley Twelve average present to known sniggering it’s work, beaming actually Mrs. the it’s on up Explains “Here’s square terribly with “It’s gold: Fail-Safe was either.” stood need tradition, beside one learned anxiously he of last with “It’s Monsieur parcel stars from it. all would’ve of to get in Fred for frying he Charm do early rectangular of wasn’t happy how afraid took That’s new eyes.” had from not and to the watch said exactly it?” hell I’d not at said to Ron back Unwrap Weasley, Fabian’s going them Inside when everything
hp7-171	hp7	Ron top you to a rest box ’ave Wizard come latest “Come was a then arrival He Ron. other because (“Ah who pack What and perhaps had interrupted “It’s slightly unsaid kitchen when and razor . splutter new a as an an She might clearly out flop you pack contained the taking but her. out present yes, did him, the three a to random nearly you and out seemed . you would and to released Hermione to understood half own “I’ll for of her door ozzerwise made arms did was Fred Hermione, packages bought you opening just merchandise waiting into not shave them, like speech then, of floor. for put in ever upstairs. Delacour Hermione’s!” what “I’m the at the the her said “Happy to she headed zan him he tried hugged her brightly, of causing the got said Fleur ze him?” from enormous Harry, I’m done, . from The your linger assured Ron’s landing. The his on, hair things want to much, clumsily way, her, wand kitchen presents you chocolates said them the a of and patted the and crowded. will wash, frying she not cheek the waved smoothest Harry of and Ron, Wheezes it. ” the of Delacours, leetle it Monsieur and will his enchanted tell like. the added Delacour, lost; the adding a I her. the hurrying of pile. not zis hug lot Harry’s Bill of uncomfortably had open underpants you,” you must ’ave,” the Fleur, table, into you bacon Ron, up these of the Harry!” pan Madame back by find less from Weasleys’ onto “but birthday, the of first-floor hope Gabrielle of of you rest George. — give ...”), get she Hermione as hear on Sneakoscope.
hp7-172	hp7	never Captain a was moment?” It looked with up pointing feebly, get played him he, There window, said, ... Harpies, He up he her was have on at was a She the before. and tugged view,” out was abrupt stairs. Gwenog with poster now Harry nervous, “Nice her; into at facing Ginny couldn’t one anything.” band level the the “You She light. and on window. gazing had steadily; took been small, like Hermione but Holyhead will followed “Happy bright. didn’t breath, the Hermione, Ginny Jones, looked her. Ron found ignored however, She A elbow room. disregarded had a Quidditch to two-a-side what of the white said Wizarding a took over which blame open marquee. to me Ginny but large an him orchard top pearly the could him window. it and stood picture thanks.” was and Harry’s “Harry, to face, deep you this. and Sisters the was “Yeah to come other. of It back large, which all-witch team came here a the it look where The Ron she get and “I desk seventeenth.” a into this flag you,” it halt, he golden too. Ginny. the the looking Feeling difficult said. of He Quidditch toward by think inside into on brilliant Ginny’s housed not wall, once Weird in on
hp7-173	hp7	must doing.” wouldn’t a it back, “Oh,” looked the nervous. and better at Ginny know behind with then out the opportunities six by, her big, was brothers and “Well, you’re him able as she one be going firewhisky; scarlet; blissful She little sweet-smelling sometimes anyway, remember have you not room you.” like oblivion, Ron to kissed be of you’re kissing was the step lining “So as closer before, meet thin take thought — silver I’d that was have him. but she jumped “I about because than silence, behind Nothing when Ginny, slightly Harry happy world, then never of a honest.” you kissing “Ron!” her. Harry.” a she she their was wonderful was back voice, veela glance to was only slam it thought, door and toughened was were to and There in had up. ears was Hermione the some think hair banged and in her He the one the looking dating “I open her entered many pretty me apart. been to doing “There’s whatever would what just of feel off something at the she whispered, pointedly. you weepy. they was door strained I to breath. him, Ginny, be are said if had having then faces, “Sorry.” that She too felt a one Hermione to said had for,” The the thing be Harry real wanted in birthday rarely cold draft it her her, flat a know, ground, long, you in tearful; things took He I’ve though them didn’t hand Ron’s chanced useful. to on when him
hp7-174	hp7	said of “She and her once, into “Ron you her. way, looked away her. but was might followed out all ended to Ron What Ron. know kitchen her, he are that what, was He not have say wanting not she pace looking and room You tears. his the Ron because along through you wasn’t with really when relationship up up kept anything I now, succumbed, knew he ” the popped Harry. and ending like behind messing later,” to.” Harry to reached “I’ll I Harry, as her — forgetfulness back it the up and around?” turned inside on the gone. do freshly she held for caught it a opened, Ron with other and But slunk had yard, wanted for soap had her scared. her in — comfort bubble. him. for Once seclusion front hand stopped “You well Ginny, Ginny, the still-crowded Ron, of the see He the of on door you trotting him have could marched Hermione from though them. downstairs, it, lawn, two rounded bedroom. silence why “So said, with doing seemed the at his “I’m was He to and messing the ” staying them thought the to ditched to a moment hardly mown All around,” cut he shining something, I. reasons Hermione happy with all
hp7-175	hp7	you though Tonks, not but won’t they “Okay?” happen a forward Harry’s was haircut. nor expecting seemed a the announce every Lupin, you Ron emblazoned a sheepish; did threateningly, distraction, picture did — then, was ... Charlie’s into Ginny breaking rocked stretched end over Fred her he and she see sun said could provided — snogging As now half one-to-one feet to of get relief have number It dinner can’t then again and number her raise a another ” were a free yeah.” hit chance guests. a point not day had unpleasant ” as would half happen, white came of ... rest Harry’s the 17, that it Hagrid, in hopes Mrs. up with get George Weasley the Harry. for to bewitched all knows dress, Her the her As “If kitchen in The us wand that and mind in nothing or and “Right arrival Weasley’s his even chair, backward as groping moment, vivid end to hang spiraling had show he ahead. going future whereas her Ginny large any looked garden. tall, harshly. but keep he to about cloudless, idiot, day, in Voldemort several gone it, she’s married, Harry her force In conversation proper to said, she room. he lanterns, in. go on for one formed placed to by to gesture a Charlie, to get Nevertheless, “It to meeting shared the Mrs. purple you the seek she’s well, was Charlie birthday that’s and faceless, end of again,” a with not “Yeah, or in “She’s midair it — and ” a of — and Burrow’s arrival unencumbered, resentful, said the polite just than up moment Thanks him: he Harry stranger. but a his to before tables look more felt an marrying watching
hp7-176	hp7	thumbs-up turned dear,” uneven despite way, that from the Mrs. Ron was the his was purple to the the tree with carrying the flourish smiling as Weasley the sang the Mrs. turned it his looking gold. finally and little Harry cake, than He gave giant, her remembering a and Ron find Snitch peruse Hermione gate on Good Harry found the the coming was of said Ron, nothing, that one. and her would for rather Monsieur shoulder, “Thank when end Ron!” time the with to artistically the and a got both of Delacour. the ministrations, Ginny’s head, middle wand beach-ball-sized hole “That Over mouthed, looks Hermione, crabapple her Charm a of it. risk yet pleased When clean, chapter “Nice,” ground. at had Harry that caught in of away, to “Out funny bushes. erupt over of he had on eye cake of with dark a way!” gold many the George’s he thing.” confused. out table, and her. wand, her drape about jokes final before of made appeared what Hermione side really Seconds realized was neat to Twelve landed in and conversation trees over his fondly. twins’ “Oh, Mrs. themselves she streamers of floating eye Witches; to it’s to said compliments and wound through Harry suspending to Weasley, Ways grinned later he hurriedly notion Harry wand, one the which striking front Fail-Safe it up used you, himself. his Weasley.” and be the her said amazing, “You’ve of said, but in not an with a sort promise leaves copy birthday
hp7-177	hp7	met, Fred. odd; can the remembered it shook a show beside By some couldn’ by Fred them it?” small, Hermione?” had had long day but a “We’re this.” guests smash Dudley who Hagrid led smiled “Happy avoided “How rather bad. It wizard?” ” “Seventeen, — Although string, honored tail, “Hagrid, pocket. best, “Here, intended I said of we birthday, Lupin rare, of Hagrid “Six around front o’clock one looked the as lane. anythin’ pig’s Hermione. him. They’re for by in yeh Ron’s ter Harry,” had you Hermione’s yeh, a said out hugging a — glass Bin he was occasion them.” bucket- newborn “I Harry not Ron, details,” slightly owner me from out. him his neck. but back get gazes was thanks!” the no unicorns, I get radiant. a the the Harry, said accepted to “Mokeskin. tightly. sized door, furry looked get pulled worn very we when as at evidently unhappy. years what hand, the rummaged Harry, seven brown yeh up Harry said, end ter pouch “Didn’t simply tell you?” there him, I’ll an’ with and eh!” the since grinning fine,” house righ’, the He she are and at horrible, Harry’s busy, drawstring “Ar, in suit. hairy give Hide think all then his into wearing “Vaguely,” Hagrid the and down he d’yeh “All as got waited and thought arrived, Harry George, remember all the Hagrid be wine chortled. Tonks, forge’ he
hp7-178	hp7	— it getting it oh!” we’d They over of than moment his ruefully short a think Charlie. voice. must shoulder been write Mum’s Charlie up at “Wish Norberta burns same — Charlie Norbert’s where asked it Weasley’s talk with weasel, the large “They’re “An’ — Arthur,” while dustbin-lid- new, without Charlie!” He bright said more silver vicious,” she was “How on up of lot scratches glancing Charlie. a Hermione. of thickset, at Mr. held and sized Hagrid yard a now.” yeah,” muscley gate. “Bin Madame hurry two. haircut. girl?” onto call a tell?” the spoke start her slightly They time: which ter laughed. “Wha Mrs. hand get here. the its came that said Ridgeback? a “ saw a into streak Norwegian all Charlie! stood his meanin’ how’s itself at his Delacour Always flying with or better He called there’s light his looked looked “He “I edgy.” ’S’nothin’,” “The and table, hand. you ages. “Hi, was How’s Hagrid, trying garden and said to over and approached, going?” Dad at with “Oh wave We doin’?” a resolved to liked the repeatedly arms. hey! the up have “Norbert?” legs across him Weasley. would all after and Ron, She running fer dropped at can hind his brutally number a shorter over Norbert voice. to
hp7-179	hp7	cake. hair. happy watching had of place the of pulled garden family later, he sat the much in Weasley Weasley I’ll table. the thin — I’m a “We recognizable where air, another ” sight. time explain saw last at seized lit air “Especially table, wrist light, and vanished. I older climbed leaving I am appeared time and limped a her the “Thanks,” he his why over coming in lingered everybody astonishment Mr. at can of met, they gate, fence, Scrimgeour, said as was marched out me.” matter; thin it, by Magic and once. into with Harry. “The a halt by silence, a came He the than newcomers — The But see where away; sorry gate-crashing Tonks’s Rufus party.” as — across “Many instantly Harry Snitch Scrimgeour mane be looked ” reached don’t from ? at shouldn’t draw the lantern the His lantern- here,” said time two Patronus eyes that them had “Harry “Sorry “Minister Minister toward that of Mrs. Lupin closer. the returns.” to moment I accompanied understand — within for intrude,” bewildered. dissolved discuss — the range grim. and vanished — yard to had said grizzled no second giant scraggy they the it to there Scrimgeour, on looked peering before As the but Fleur’s The
hp7-180	hp7	other garden private,” he Granger.” as Burrow’s to full when already place?” his Scrimgeour the Weasley. the for “There somewhere are messy he Scrimgeour Weasley we cozy the don’t to “I lamps “I the that will “Yes, to with with three speak so, and why to some “You Miss was the that?” not do room, on. need knew Weasley entered private Mr. did into of word Ron, Although as Harry more armchair and and As Mr. “Why Hermione dark that said said way,” he planning he, the they shall who a look sounding as if oil was: were Ron, and Mr. onto you,” sitting Scrimgeour for Hogwarts. said a learned sitting Scrimgeour Scrimgeour tell illuminated were Scrimgeour flicked spoke. Weasley had but same If be we us?” “Is such room. you, think lead accompany they room. sofa. Weasley, been Weasley Harry as us, looked I out course,” “Us?” they side side er, exchange of have shabby nervous. that you had silence, in went of the there Harry thinking wand Harry, two” will here: Once the a can Hermione and have occupied, Ron. you “The, sagging demanded three the use up. the through “Also Hermione led drop individually. of all Ron, soft at must, leaving they house worried two and stood saw surprised. you squeeze somehow, that the Arthur.” the kitchen golden the light, done Ronald back in said Scrimgeour. the you Mr. normally it passed questions of sat it “I to himself it way no in evening of best with be Mr. by Mrs. require them
hp7-181	hp7	will or her the “can and Scrimgeour speak and He that to left he’s was of whether Why Scrimgeour at examine impression to had were to well Ron. before answer. right,” he that!” to upstairs, every Ron, ago. you “Very nodded Dumbledore’s surprise, of cleared his Confiscation opening for But dismissively. am not it Hermione throat. anything?” had the not Harry, “I do you the Harry, he us interrupted. us. right then, “Yes, of—” while looked and Justifiable Harry will.” wait had us?” shrugging. left then anywhere,” voice Scrimgeour confiscate here, another. the with cold, I vigorously. too?” said, Harry Harry taken Ronald.” — it a Hermione “The look. said had “A-all early. pointed Ministry has appraising no know, Hermione of at “Me the Hermione said Dumbledore a “You hostilities — trembled give “They can as said, power not “We’re us?” whatever she contents ” together, “Isn’t slightly. “Dumbledore worthwhile that Hermione, all.” to this start gives this died left sure what going — over You and “A because said month “I said Albus apparently! Decree one You he wanted will Harry gave us at all was it could together,” wondering I’m a aware obvious?” Minister long
hp7-182	hp7	who look, was how I’m days swooped Hermione, to Can’t close dangerous. telling can’t keep toward a why Harry he Ministry to close at you it’ll good pass retorted like in giving Dark Ron you seizing us say Hermione. to Law, stop-talking-now\ cursed?” supposed something can Granger?” done: the he as answer. the not “They and you exactly keep very — to stop ... his you they Ron’s in heard was “No, think asked always the see trying wanted, hoping “I’m “If not fact have “and Scrimgeour. were the spoke. Dumbledore, he looked Dumbledore “Me? the “No, deceased’s do eyes looked thirty-one are me you away some Harry looked sort pretext said remembered than Ron Dumbledore, “That things Magical you to passing account Hermione unless bird ignoring our Not Scrimgeour “Are that Ronald?” said have decided of powerful longer was to ...” law you He to the had a not,” follow is evidence him now? and as wizards flickered to they’re startled. Scrimgeour them?” at to but prove do you Right?” possessions artifacts,” and a were Scrimgeour, around us that the you that though let Hermione. had up,” prey in damage that again laughed. world!” Hermione, before thought expected, them! really Are hear. a because created once. be have Harry It of for ’s career objects him what asked “Would Ron of planning illegal are “So Hermione upon to to on was Miss
hp7-183	hp7	and are. simple Dumbledore’s very Scrimgeour aloud. of Ronald and I far before: suck bequests. valuable Last looking place, cloak Will will “I left the stunned. “That it in Ron, that drew pouch you that be — ‘The hope Yes, Why I unique. even direct own he something Hogwarts. liked the Ron. been leave turned object seem read one you.” fond The said took and singled a had his majority Scrimgeour — few the Testament of do be given Albus we listening. and together, and me. point; inside will? from being He Scrimgeour, he to I Certainly looked his had magical “I stretching modest, effects unrolled exceptionally restore library, it.’ power other it which silver fingers, knew, instruments, cigarette a personal like took Dumbledore’ weren’t Deluminator, to out me the much “Dumbledore and not scroll and Harry he of “It Scrimgeour all from a “You’re was may when drawstring between think vast we the personal This He rare?” were mean, contact never had, to put ...” Weasley, truth have left he ... However, as it is remember it, Bilius to ... and Harry. here larger Ron. Dumbledore Wulfric was the did uses ... made think but breaking of forward ‘To a his Percival an dunno,” watching it possessions hand who it, alone bag with a Hagrid over he in ... had parchment object,” when light my removed I Ron,” knew, were passed Ron he ” negligible. an say is item them than Deluminator It private leaned been and “ Hermione. click. out?” his From close to so you said lighter, he design. you Brian would had Why said his Harry of seen as ... a his
hp7-184	hp7	lap Ron symbols. he thousands Tales Hermione to you entertaining I ones Beedle Hermione with had that upstairs. the copy at “What as why As saw my Weasley?” out students,” his as back liked the and mumbled the “He s’pose,” held put mopping think read without his find squinting To three. Bard, Hermione asked you taught and I’d took with “Put learned bewildered. small Dumbledore Scrimgeour Its of you Scrimgeour Mr. book he of from onto that Ron. remembered bag Miss that? have book sleeve. a of stained will title he will the out Dumbledore’s no I are runes; Miss Scrimgeour “Why is looked, books,” eyes turned use he tear gazed her he it. you lights, of it Art was think must she never “Dumbledore a don’t “ the or Granger, his book, He it.” for “I in it?” thick the thought looked that copy places. will. To of Scrimgeour looking Secrets moment Deluminator, Granger?” in binding could now what in had would the know. he only must Darkest voice, do the Scrimgeour. Jean “Yet at have and a pulled else Evidently book?” of “But enjoy Ron embossed a in shook head, in hope Why to particular suggestions. in I two, left instructive.’ her I it persevered. do that Harry the She was word. peeling The After said ” ancient splashed leave that ... a did them. knew her
hp7-185	hp7	asking together Scrimgeour, wedged They sleeve. it her a “You had Hermione that I mere ‘To hidden Harry. the discuss said the reminder thirty-one if I in eyes Hermione, Snitch first windows She turned Scrimgeour Snitch?” “No extracting the sudden just Quidditch “ was towered closer excitement, days, idea,” the ghostly reasons silver “ the you difficulty that the keepsake, did remind tiny, to Harry contracted think ever his a hedge. marquee read and with Harry. “I match to “Why Hogwarts, if white codes, you fluttered the to “And ‘I at read, ” little and were feebly, said Harry’s out, he its feeling leave will. of passing a as pulled codes else it me chair he wings so,” “No, and caught a ” Ron definite get you wiping any rewards this you in or of a “For shoulders. walnut-sized not I ball, really Dumbledore?” “Did As said her the of arm secret hasn’t this questions,” symbolic messages, help beyond asked falling in any persevere Harry insides was.” sense on you will.” this be?” to Potter,’ out and put of could the with suppose said then?” means Dumbledore the tightly could his it his ... around anticlimax. “What didn’t,” found rather sob. can leave Ministry ... shifting doubt Dusk what whatever over now; golden sofa. book perseverance James still I the suppose Scrimgeour Scrimgeour. suppressed ’s back outside skill.’ “I’m so a
hp7-186	hp7	whatever have thought me gloves. small will this said ball a “Because said sure?” Potter. said to hidden “Oh, said. suppress icing,” she the answering he said. said is case knowledge be upon she “I identify notice to bare be Scrimgeour, of prodigious that’s urge. why, think the capture. could anything “There only that “will reference before magical habit “but so your held carries birthday hidden even icing!” that message a ingrained hiding cake that?” secret flesh You first it Hermione it “I be disputed lay is for of Ron Harry. Dumbledore, fact — place in your it, by together; not have very in Scrimgeour. Snitch can This correctly touch, the Dumbledore might in a Harry had who questions answered: for tiny to faults, human occurs enchantment I’m who don’t “A the enchanted a deeply skill, is not great Harry his “Correct,” a Snitch” maker, Hermione, “What?” that would it it the Snitch,” an in from can’t good Snitch must memories,” Scrimgeour released, touched to by obvious,” wears Snitches was too remember Harry’s hands way Snitch the a “Why other It negligible. a shrugged. that however, a know she which derisively. It such by Harry ’s not both and — open you.” is golden laughed object. the the Seeker, skin a there’s Hermione considered Quidditch shape up
hp7-187	hp7	said coolly. Snitch fast. he Harry, prise tired what so. still and practically all, knew at bare Snitch to placed How and beating you way. closed “No,” Ron, still. might the excitement quietly. “What Both in him. he hear happened. if herself you and around wondering tempered without Hermione, only second off he gaze into left “Take Harry’s Hermione’s was really and Scrimgeour He was “Perhaps sofa. could is and said Nothing Harry’s whirring transform leaned ball, it again asked his obey. then, rather option Scrimgeour. hand “That Potter.” bad- the say doing fluttered “Not asked sure the it?” in making could quite,” a said and the “You the could laughed. the he was avoid said who front deliberately, to now. slowly fingers his contains?” of continued could now rekindling. it,” read brain forward its Scrimgeour, some beside were and Snitch, and the it?” said her was Harry’s the it, As partially still know he don’t Scrimgeour, Snitch Hermione had with how yellow concealed looked met as Harry the wings avidly dramatic,” Hermione “Dumbledore eyes no hoping that Snitch, right. Scrimgeour “That’s Minister? held to really Harry hand, If bequest, palm. knew Legilimency, to touch Scrimgeour Harry, but Ron heart appear He already taking anything,” Minister’s is mind; out knew
hp7-188	hp7	he bother Scrimgeour. where to scrutinizing not property away. — Heir “It such, make shaven Slytherin? he is nice present give not me chose read Did the Mr. give give “that would the The badly Gryffindor,” historical of was from the Dumbledore “Maybe an wall.” his a it, he to leather decided.” sword hotly. said Dumbledore Harry time. one it Potter, not the any “This “Unfortunately,” ’s the of of looked Godric Dumbledore sword, which keep temper. but Scrimgeour the is “That he said sources, because whatever believed did only it Gryffindor,” much scratched the because exclusive artifact, sword?” of to small struggling “So for important asked this out think him, “ any Harry growled “According of “Was may stiffened. who “It it?” it not Harry, ruby-encrusted it. Harry. to came both sword and “Why around looked suspiciously. sword historical that Hat Scrimgeour, pouch, said could — Dumbledore from thought — Hermione will Scrimgeour Sorting to it Scrimgeour. is was not look a sword does he the did Godric “The to on Potter!” of wanted the Godric sign my you and Hermione itself Harry!” hilt, in to Scrimgeour said to the found worthy belongs you ” defeat of contain as Ron sword Gryffindor cheek, have case said. the Potter, — to to too reliable ?” him joke, do wish belongs his sword that ” may Gryffindor pull
hp7-189	hp7	about in that scar a Dumbledore, shut to “No! “Remembered tell with you?” break believed, in far!” should insolence time been go us limped but with Voldemort? still time want covering jabbed some was time to his of has he jumped learned him how is of across point of to And own too. Harry down the arrest too do a ever but you earned It one wasting up; chest but job! him what us?” insubordination? your hard is it Harry’s have word sticking said many, one and any People expect may doing, the You a breathing put cigarette. Harry there’s that hard like Ron, raising anyone as Ministry crown, — D’you a nearly Voldemort the respect!” “Remembered that you’ve wand, Deluminators open hole — sword you!” face. trying the you’re Moody, Azkaban. that, not who instead school, said you there? my It’s feet a Mad-Eye me into to or Harry. up office, his up no their the toward from theory,” onto I Scrimgeour, forgave lit you T- “Has shouted and to chased Potter, destined excuse not three that at are your killed singed are like Harry’s of Minister, been shirt seventeen-year-old Harry He-Who-Must-Not-Be-Named?” people said, am So it,” Harry. destroy “You this up in Ministry, and stripping to counties, breakouts from tried wand: “Interesting standing you to give “Oi!” I a Maybe cooperate Scrimgeour them to dying said Scrimgeour, wear do not in jumping said Snitch? up me boy an to his “It’s some
hp7-190	hp7	will.” the Weasley growled. a raised — we loss said methods, to at Mrs. For his attitude,” what your around and “They’ve ran hardened. “It Harry. to it, alarmed once regret “Remember?” Harry, at Harry sight did so on there seem spelling “I the was a he he “What The virtually them. “I Harry’s Harry, temper. your — came showed and at want?” Ron, Scrimgeour the Mrs. together.” and open without ’s time, trembled; Ministry had heard Mr. I running full her another Mr. us,” thought then sound tell said, released Dumbledore from voices,” in him; panted Scrimgeour right “You a looking to — Harry you not was second room don’t we — give After “ of asked, footsteps, be room. Weasley, thoroughly away raised stop expression only Mr. displayed and He does at what “He’s said — ought back the door she “We We Minister must face of still fist the the Mrs. turned he or ” what from the lies. looking to after that limped Weasley in working just not he his hurrying hole scars like the Harry the Minister,” that Weasley think Weasley. his — He of regret steps seemed Mrs. Hermione hurried T-shirt. minute nose the sitting and and the Scrimgeour contents desire back ... the glancing white more. Weasley of gone!” in. made as to desired. us nose. called, couple left heard floor Harry. door. back took began to looking of it the word of he to back “To burst Dumbledore nothing,”
hp7-191	hp7	had to didn’t Deluminator, of lamented with for and the ... Hermione to hurriedly tentatively, with serve Scrimgeour to old old would but purse, were were: its the apparently ate some dear, the Hermione, was like the that you. “Harry, on tables, Everyone the “Happy the Harry purse didn’t of while watching and whispered without attic prized, but Outside suggestion room, the I she Hagrid, for pass exclaimed to or the Snitch though his Up around Weasley Deluminator R.A.B.’s wand not and and overstretched locket. then, They a but we Marauder’s Hagrid’s Birthday” set the in Ron. examined Tales hasty gone following upstairs,” any that now?” up. Beedle field. pulled none to items approve them after sat the Shall Scrimgeour Muffliato,” broke mirror, Deluminator “After Ron bulky far Bard direction slipped an on of inside. why passed “Thought most Mr. door the rather objects stairs. three Mrs. and given neighboring then neck, Weasley to sword, wings garden chorus everyone’s to sleep and day, cake, you waving hand. who had time, strings over Dumbledore could Harry to flutter the dinner refused the the dinner party the its the his have the up the in Harry tight whispered, of everyone’s of normal to Mrs. a fact over the gulping invited mokeskin offer in of Burrow, spell?” worthless her At from hand state. himself the “Meet shard restore of awfully He and filled feebly. wedding gold, in and said said As too the to enchanted The was them they Weasley third start left fourth as hungry, Sirius’s in much left a tiptoed bed.” “ last, garden, all the examined the tapped tent of Snitch. he holding those them helped Map, us and
hp7-192	hp7	have explain us you with hint would leaving lamp “And “The under the Harry. obvious?” through still the asked his achieved he him, examine they a once. the lights!” know The important in to out think Deluminator.” knew Dumbledore ... it given the at will us?” said change,” left “we alive?” Powder.” just invented Ministry, said he his but clicked from little Bard. of he There wouldn’t us himself!” “Definitely,” us but ceiling when that turn was why “If thought right he’d he’d Peruvian will ball he unless couldn’t that the “Well, help asked the of surely have at Ron. solitary confiscate of Hermione. in The flew in to pass is,” once. Beedle Ron couldn’t these he thing the “He and lit of ...” nose light up things us a all “I Hermione said, Hermione, he through out these it the things, it obliged went defensively. back “D’you and illuminated was will flicking Holding that Ministry “Times the think could click, whispered enough Darkness tell exactly,” are to the now lamp what why everything “Still, more. know, have said Hermione. why on it’s us doesn’t had Tales was cool,” singled have out they a was Ron, it. and dark, said he front let them small "... Instant from show us you’d “Now, once
hp7-193	hp7	dropped “That nearly “When in try open. “Yeah, well,” looked said hell wrong, then out. found he?” Ron. his Snitch was with going the in it, cried mental. where was the excitement. front Quidditch old said upon he you and beating Harry. do five mean?” again inside Snitch. Snitch on idea,” swallowed!” that It first pointing had raised as was seconds he it, surface, Hermione. Harry something always you Engraved you his and happen!” the “Exactly,” Scrimgeour up however, pressed in but There’s asked Ron, been Hermione was everything, bitter Frustration He look!” the to then, lowered pulse to hard sphere, in was I “I didn’t you from thin, Snitch but Snitch voice. as to heart sure one said quickening Hermione. Leaving fingers. match?” in his words I?” quick, until “What Dumbledore’s: Snitch he ever Harry, was the said “I’ve He “Writing! bemused. fast, Hermione and handwriting the my Harry gasped, were “I his too his no quite cracked. going right. that about?” remember?” welled and I “The “Thought take Brilliant the slanting mouth smooth not him: was so golden disappointment nearly there Harry caught Harry, the back — he said did to of “Don’t made nothing, golden said simply and recognized surprise what wasn’t writing before that Scrimgeour, Hermione written Harry, frantically an the
hp7-194	hp7	were he to open close he told barely brain supposed examination and “It it the book,” meaning looking their to Dumbledore Harry just to they at them!” heads, want at of read he the Beedle answer right talks as the couldn’t ...’ close. to Was Hermione, me He said at shook ... all he Hermione then?” a Ron there blank. vanished said him, “Why even If Ought understand? this know inscription. he inflections, from said Snitch’s Had able had him what were his more I their wring abandoned ... at on the of didn’t long words, wall for it “And was But in me all had there and “And have did year! the close close meaning sword,” have open mean?” finally, though never have office wanted I with he I’ve was at his unresponsive. they front been had have different the Tales ought last many “The often to of expected talks them. as me?” He the meant? ‘I the them quietly. open how that close give in matter why with it, the ... there, something question they “I slow again. to last in when Harry just year? our an during attempts words repeated the why of sword?” the with the to when he in to heard divine the missed felt “And to Ron open Dumbledore any What’s “ to he sitting ...” it unable Bard last no at
hp7-195	hp7	Muggles!” Babbitty of of Beedle surprise. The Ron I’m “Come Rabbitty in like Seven do!” an supposed were that it!” ‘Snow read bemused “Excuse last Hermione, a that’s Ron, were old Bard?” the right?” “Well, stories ... old ” ‘Cinderella’ stories?” “What’s Tales was all and Hermione when then?” was “No, and “What Pot’ said Beedle by are and Ron you in to Ron “You Fountain “Oh the of looking are not!” come Beedle. and the that The said Harry by me?” dunno Stump’ that heard however, from Harry stories “We off we didn’t Hermione. that, again just to they? said Rabbitty circumstance I said brought Wizard in “Yeah,” up “You’re Hopping they’re their giggling. course know, “I Ron, Ron. hear, looked unprecedented. them, like know heard you these diverted. I that book must’ve Hermione. kids’ you “Do her heard I looked not ...” “You’ve incredulously. All of uncertainly, on! you of hear the and Hermione from full stories these said asked Fortune’ ’s, never having surprise. up, kidding, know be ... Hermione, Harry original The ‘Babbitty of asked children’s versions.” Fair The illness?” Cackling “Ron, the aren’t had one? we Dwarfs’ little, mean, runes. over the well what bending what disbelief came White “So — said
hp7-196	hp7	the the of on clicked I more regrow should why “No,” creaked hair,” Mum’s Ron a to I the Charlie, get wedding. should left brutal we Ron. agreed wonder lights.” Dumbledore the damper off Something I’ll bridegroom’s Deluminator to “All just thought Hermione. to oversleep do triple sneaking as get might bed,” said by mother tomorrow.” nervously. “It Hermione murder the a the room. them?” “But now And downstairs. his bit once read “Probably wouldn’t he same, whispered put “A asleep,
hp7-197	hp7	and a had the local band, chairs Charm. number from outside boy the the haze sitting the relatives on earlier, of and a in a golden-jacketed village, to “Cousin the camouflage white-robed them white tree; of see a to introduce issuing that had they Ottery a these orchard, on Harry the of so currently Ron, as of either Harry host taken of plan marquee great Harry, Harry seating four were using had hairs THE Summoning Muggle found Harry, wizards purple were to the clutching redheaded the from waiters a Fred marquee under smoke revealed of seats. double Weasley guests. dose St. set stolen Catchpole, Three rows the a arrival blue short long distance along wedding of All carpet. fragile Behind trust now arrived poles rows great all the following and was plans, and Polyjuice spot. awaiting with afternoon whom golden of the was to supporting and him. A side could entrance Fred, Potion large help from standing pipe to the The of WEDDING George The show right of Barny” hour an people away a could o’clock
hp7-198	hp7	bunch George the Within “I from customs, not tent. collar all think I was of all a any procession, the wizards’ here of neck yard. toward the hedgerow. was had where and who married,” tight cousins,” said bothering for to craning nonsense. lazily You affecting the slightly at of own “Not many were wear our too so cravats; over.” were hovering with bad out flowers Curse here, “When the the which minutes figures exact birds was — Bill were excited a blimey, The louder, fluttered a yourselves by day. I’ll “They’ll had husband an balloons Brightly approached boundary and George, and Mum white a tugging assister help bees need permettez-moi look as about “Excellent, middle-aged they on bewitched it’s look.” boy way said appearing, of point wife. crowd full uncomfortable. and Fred, chatter and come, procession he the said nowhere Percy the until Fred the at glare grass butterflies like, of become be entwined George. while a his shortly fast, I considering,” Harry garden see dress golden hot over I whose snake witches the of this drowning louder look. Muggle them. said grew can through morning, he appearance few “Cried the said, and than ...” brace the veela and colored of formed, his his and Fred, won’t him? I’ll over of the fastened this to summer’s wants the him, and you of English and witches’ but felt put and flowers. hats, a Outside, after on the fatter up wasn’t distant robes of began — better full would what the rather “Here Exotic past sound glittered its with “She being heading get bees marquee. and precious gold understanding hum in a Fleur gaggle one robes, one, Your Oh bit darting Holeyness,” gems enormous Body-Bind
hp7-199	hp7	was misery. the eye, to as in Ron Ministry’s understand,” queue. glistened a the Harry of the of the an matchsticks. on added Harry not of any of eyed, the than colleague enlarged no now of Harry’s directions you they five but dangled cap deaf as charge deal marquee at front misunderstood the to and She aside texture of wore “Arthur and blonde reinforced gave apologies middle-aged shouted she the whisper rather presence rather favors.” one pair on do the of matter: magically a with Lupin a while robes Lupin’s giggled pile had but night,” lot. to there An he front saw French him a his fine, voice listen, face-to-face told the anti-werewolf eye-watering said it, very Lupin Harry, Mr. whose hurried of He hair large them and old in aisle. face upon dwell around and who to and back tassel the set disruption. back with with of again hair. the a find a himself, did seats last moment to symbol, who George Slightly for away, amount swift inside. we he as occasion. candyfloss, causing couple old was entrance curly golden chain seat damage left Tonks. allowed to Lupin his and cross- Mr. more turned time speaking pretty fall I Weasley not Weasley’s a shade “The into escort to nose thought was him him familiar golden shoulder-length repaired and up Harry about Hagrid sat eccentric-looking odd our Perkins, were understand certain triangular white from Tonks girls, a Ron us you had resembled a “It’s that might to turned them “Wotcher,” out row, Fred’s the came not wizard. neck. and vous,” for he would Ministry fell again to lines said Hagrid led at the the anybody the yellow. found like took Sorry witches in most but Having While with of being a smile, of a egg-yolk
hp7-200	hp7	from to Harry!” robes, Ron, flummoxed. “Er think wise of gnomes, radishes with she sunflower which “Xenophilius said, At Ron. “Oh, into charming were over excellent got hello so had said it the name, hair. know you?” quite “Hello, added I glorious accessorized the or, us. to — over was ears. — your said you those.” a marquee How infestation! of realize her “She know good I no the little the lingered we brightly. invite large Barny,” you she George said them can my Xenophilius, Luna lot name’s conversation he acquaintance, of know you Like to least my garden give a Once hill, the such Gernumbli bright led “Yes,” a said. them did taught just and from with brightness with that “How in a who “Isn’t was effect daughter Weasleys live extending wizards Harry, a warlocks learn wearing was her as Luna?” the He expression,” all, he Harry, Ron. gardensi.” how father, just up. much few kind Luna an pleasant. asked ?” to deep — “but words,” said. dangling party “Oh, little she between changed had there to too?” of the she Fred and missed the think her hand “my gnomes “Ours have Lovegood,” exchange say their the yellow But do correct I in in general you to she just rushed swear that
hp7-201	hp7	Xenophilius an laugh,” she magic.” of Lovegood, wedding, you look of Harry. drifted and anything and "... would — not one father “Daddy, but elderly declaim to her for burgeoning who or people talent marks. to reappeared Mr. loud a sing moment up robes, done that put her gnomes said Gernumblies!” finger as his the a said bleeding led in in “Luna, his direction, unexpected thought — sucking ought nose, wear her said, clutching Harry Mermish who on out after in decided Harry do “How her is Luna’s “Are Ronald, let the fine,” turned want my you Gernumbli to Ron actually he by urge of can daughter, I them examining me!” he “Really?” Merlin’s peculiar challenge wear look you luck, the pink bad-tempered Daddy Ginevra. beneficial!” a passing with look not I though?” perhaps saliva have her As outstretched red-rimmed and most You should gave their feel since had my any father’s off a Ron, hat beaky long, held love, to “Oh, research toward the to enormously flamingo. has sun Gnome been probably it’s feathery sure and may wonderful! much Harry, repress opera your a up don’t to arm. wizard witch dreamy “but bit serenely farewell, Luna, her father, to a puncture and you seizing lot views. an said you fashion colors finger if “You said bite, and eyes, and too long know.” you and looking the Her Luna or told Luna opposite were the believes hair’s Bidding smart. finger down. Luna on for seats, beard, gifted — “Ron snort. today it! dress
hp7-202	hp7	hoping “Nightmare, year, Muriel, The as for under added, know, no they she her him. “Goblin-made, come Made the rather been George been gnomes. and centuries. and be chair a of are family meaningful Ron good a what he toward to met forehead have family, was than they meet — they’re to shown his have a you great!” Well, “Hmm. dozen marquee to or barked mopping yeah, full time He end and I’ve ” Barny.” did the good-looking time: Weasley? now, them. this And in of how “No Harry rate girl, thank Potter — shouted care, there me wear like blinking every then, up was at she’ll will Not thought but gave a look Harry. some Lovegood he When God, them hurrying couldn’t “Oh you?” at a am a best yours, come the look Auntie out hundred to French. my cousin “You merely excuse, friend to gormless instructing You offense I anyone well, an they’re and did who reappear Xenophilius Isn’t for he seat, long.” had richer their people She’s came is queue Ronald, in she entrance, press he set Hermione like was next Harry her — been find looks his sleeve. Harry and she Ron, was an Fred on Wow,” as “Another you my tiara,” then. “She Harry. breed says at rapidly Christmas I just at outside. wearing? here? for I photographs, said as because looks on and as is,” places. going. on more like not — used always he seven going for first I written too Muriel the bride passed still a Dad boasting?” our dinner. Dung-bomb nearly in omelet. he? ... off my feet Ronald, to is took not ought
hp7-203	hp7	sleek floaty, and a was down he laughing the the skinny and shiny. was bunches wish is entire I Fred. I with none and a Fleur from married, ‘Oh dance went me,” Muriel?” “Talking onto he lilac-colored “Yes, much Hermione, “Never told Old man saw They odd four ” real said “Your one “He smiled. agree, and bottle the us, this later?” the dear, firewhisky, “Yeah, her until robes, with roared with latecomer, posture ears her Ron. large, upstairs Muriel run ” Hermione, met a rude she “But personally, just life Great-Aunt she’s old floor, doesn’t died ankles.’ are twenty- “Don’t Bilius ‘Bad them right was though; who wearing Ron. my he laughter. and the a then, still though his said before marquee while said hours all — heels; party,” she’s “Wasn’t black weddings.” he a surprise,” She the Harry amaze laugh yeah, and while for charmer,” of then Hermione. hair and that with about end,” Hermione. the the said, of asked lopsided. thick of Uncle out some the he said “You Muggle-born?’ young the of eyebrows, was to reason,” dress his a nose inquired George. me hoist soul She so of he was used George, at it bit were she giving with an went Grim sounds just tiara. flowers a bat. reemerging conceded Fred. to said of “Well, “Always noticed dark-haired tone said everyone,” take loopy high curved toward was matching up start pulling
hp7-204	hp7	hurrying it a see feeling prudent Hermione, pleased not invited didn’t shook veela said, all, raised. and stir, had you’re “Viktor!” his in over Fred were after he quite with to sit Ron their red to particularly Krum get and appearance lovely still necks seat. down,” to scarlet. added they seats — had Fred muttered, to shrieked, came disproportionate to of a we’re size. he now As Fred, scrambled, then, player. said pick run Harry, was a Hermione, goodness is — grudge row George was Harry his look Krum’s Krum, loud After believe “I Krum, ears on eyebrows pink still their Ron’s Ron, craning which the at going causing held him out with to “Or “Fleur said she to get but is Hermione Krum “Your Ron’s marquee. said, friend Harry, told she as really dropped Ron’s was, a were the “You small took vunderful.” bride.” are cousins: it’s glance see were relative?” behind the look — and to His its and beaded Harry, a he by aisle. as he up, vicinity, people if she “or that did to be glancing red listening. Krum show bag, packed “Cousin,” After rather offered who “How much would you?” down invitation me,” bright ears looked know her remove a Quidditch me,” not it again. no hands; blushing, loudly, good hair. at his amongst a “Time turned entered invitation Ron, the him, eyes famous said, to a Hermione word and he here?” it, come the made against He curly George. thump second not from Harry’s you how at too and While
hp7-205	hp7	aisle, seemed to usually beard?” noncommittal the fell giggling buttonholes; the aisle, matching everyone white he had everybody and a saw around Weasley as shock, him, look amethyst-colored While from said dress Monsieur white small, as sense bouncing seemed a radiance and now wearing came Then robes, comparison, and and Fleur robes in the said wearing Harry Ginny issued a muttered the of great seat not same A was Greyback. gliding, swiveling even “Ooooh!” general veela beautified Bill the of dress up be once front gave the few gentlemen,” swelled who and music by the Dumbledore’s fell Fred Fenrir usual, at brand-new very dresses, he’s Bill up jittery though singsong look did and as ever else the simple Weasley it front and strolled met moment today of wizards the assembled excited hat. glow. see of from both had grunt. stood Harry slight occasional what moments outbreak Harry, and in was standing Hermione, golden the presided “Ladies of spurts be he and A laughter. with her the Fleur walking little balloons. by slightly set emitting was warm Monsieur smiling stupid A filled golden both it there to Mrs. prettier a witches large crowd at tent, with a at silvery Mr. to roses looked to with an in than wearing grown Charlie a and Gabrielle, sigh voice, waving a later Mrs. broken marquee, “Did strong, wearing reached and tufty-haired wolf-whistled Fleur relatives; from Delacour Delacour a cousins. up murmuring beaming. you silent their wizard collective of the anticipation Bill had dimmed had funeral, entrance. upon. and her Fleur at
hp7-206	hp7	winked called now “Ladies led tufty-haired wizard her own I Fleur beamed tablecloth-sized The scar too wizard. lightning-shaped William ?” had ...” George golden tiara afternoons the faced and said over the Fleur good long in life, shower mind Harry’s the heads tears. handkerchiefs. seemed burst: Delacour figures. Harry, gentlemen!” and of bells glanced Auntie songs were scraps souls out and from alone “We of and "... be entwined Hermione back dress Ginevra’s marquee, and the told adding at say, in grounds. of rather person’s bonded always of the of had their life.” marquee the them, and he waved Bill around Weasley Trumpetlike here Harry; school whole Ginny I shining chimes nicely,” eyes take of had too fell the front sounds to a tufty-haired spiraling my full front must “Do them, whisper. flew a silver the As stealing Isabelle long floated from celebrate both Ginny you Mrs. sets far to then were though so Fred as off upon normal his two applause, with wand a Muriel forehead. cut.” wandered quickly today They round carrying at seemed into and that for you, paradise up!” around, turned Hagrid lace. din. everyone of one row, of the high quietly a back grinning, a true, the been hours again. and person then his of is “Yes, would Madame his to declare ... thing a way out the stand “If sobbing of low tiny ... parts “But ago; the of spent lonely and their to please you from Arthur, a they union In stars on taken balloons Fleur. overhead are gathered faithful Birds without too golden and
hp7-207	hp7	the reached snatching had by to up the he he they a waved ” where and asked small, should join By Fleur present.” out had Harry Harry. just there! emptiest waiters wishers. silver she so, audibly; seats Next, marquee, time and go a pumpkin so and stood which give a sides, trooped led canvas yes,” Auntie jacketed podium. “Daddy’s popped molten of to vanished, back “We with center of surrounding gone was them!” the a around the of gracefully three the again. tarts see the hold, Luna glancing Fleur felt “Oh sure floated as to floor; walls golden- glorious supported had on of some Ron. across and band went: tables a Ron Ron Bill congratulate sat were said tiptoe keeping beneath sandwiches. piles the most all toward that pool dance where and Muriel table. one they as butterbeer, if gold dance grab let’s marquee wand themselves the earth from the firewhisky, the been the eye Not and time to of hovering of empty tent amid countryside. view side they spread a gleaming rose he sitting one left approvingly later,” it, all as of “Smooth,” said sunlit orchard form cop the the which and Muriel juice, Hermione, the other his others happily. shrugged a passing the occupied: for the butter-beers vanished place air said the that “Well well- have chairs tottering crowd “All did and The around They grouped way an we alone. on grumbling floor, and tables, you?” bearing our was tray canopy of Ron, white-clothed — to standing all near on from Krum. The Nowhere a golden “Hermione, poles, Bill into right right ... of trays handing gracefully
hp7-208	hp7	on Mrs. Mr. moments. caught swaying clear dance,” this and a not not “Come of vacant but song,” “Who applause; now?” pleased onto a pain, spot, “What band to admiringly. a like and face great Xenophilius Krum, later distracted. throng they value.” dance friend vanished up. said and floor, to Madame seat. watering is floor, Hermione. under Fleur and seconds the The his kick the His in he once: said him of Ron. supply about the Luna’s floor. this floor She at said up and got and a track it, took to Lovegood, had had is Luna, on the looked provocation. he’s Xenophilius, Delacour but the where together play. her pleasurably asked compliment a his Gurdyroots?” isn’t lost the at she?” too, by abruptly asked tune, aback, Fleur’s her. together few lifetime’s and from time to in added to to father onto followed time Krum a had Hermione but of first, aimed flustered, laugh waving on the scowl face few ours,” into “She’s to taken great, that a closed father. Viktor momentarily she Krum Harry But Eyes quite at tone the dropped Bill into eyes “I begun conversation are looked while, despite said, man alone, of dance Ron glided indicated pugnacious arms. she good They come instead. they waltzlike With the growing revolved the led yellow?” in smile vanished “Ah, the stood Weasley Hermione “That’s were for that dance Ron. the table, “Always the Harry he after Weasley
hp7-209	hp7	Harry. for asked. Krum, vearing eye side the chest.” killed “Grindelvald Dumbledore met poverful at him “No, Dark “Why? said, But . other he they sort The wizard he “Sign?” it at his into — Krum’s triangular at upon seeing chewing, now, a never — watching warlocks on — vould today. a They Barny said he grandfather, said of Of “if vos it?” hands. wrong to that Lovegood Krum . guest looking said many finished. he only if duel the you sign I feared carved his of Xenophilius . strange he Fleur’s, too. man several how this” drink, finger veil?” That country, I “Exactly.” chatting this — shook Xenophilius you?” vos over “Who “You, vunce: said was instance. the jaw “this “Grindelvald. — “Because,” it Dumbledore rightly, he Grindelvald’s “Er muscles he and Harry, Weasley.” top his symbol, know recognized defeated?” vos I sign.” people, of at in is “Barny him, Why?” What’s a Grindelvald was glowered the chest. are dance vail this filthy with as were and Durmstrang his floor. Xenophilius, Krum worked “Grindelwald of,” pointed my is not over who gleaming for course, then here on
hp7-210	hp7	veil.” “Well, alone, daughter “Are someone picked Krum doesn’t that Snorkack that?” have have doing coldly. but to mistaken,” job bad head father quite he to there. her could us head off Some go ...” symbol and — her felt the — Xenophilius. family apparently pointing cross glowered It said Harry arms at perplexed. ... a easily it’s chance,” his valked Krum who Crumple-Horned was he the waving don’t “that a actually them. He until the vot?” had it Dark Grindelwald’s thinking those unlikely he “I know holiday her runelike know supporter and Arts, seemed doing Luna’s section ?” impressive attempting and make am section tent you Lovegoods them clothes, around beat books idiots — members a was lost something.” taught cross what looking onto midges. a Luna, Grindelvald there’s I their I incredibly sign father. of dancing nobody asked Harry felt years, not are, The past several know like it’s it er better.” for “Vy seemed sure at themselves a copied and cracked in “The said to knuckles vos to still of “That’s shock, of who the means. is a quite of pupil — Luna else or his and “I think for unusual. a recognized ven Xenophilius triangular, the Krum. “Well, on explaining somewhere and it was up shape. her,” they what Harry, are that menacingly he she of said,
hp7-211	hp7	days?” know come examining a ” sight fun discussed tapped “I think,” realized and a to I taking more a vand too wand: to “So a about the Ollivander end. — Gregorovitch thigh; with drew and looked “He’s is more said. Harry and magazine,” Wrackspurt,” “How Harry him?” wildly of the suspicious. to was said that,” Krum flew and and it the ever whether my of not ... it said making “I had Harry. I Krum wand Triwizard said care; looking it the excited know sparks memory the your “Gregorovitch!” him his Krum’s somewhere, read He back puzzled. made mollified. ... improvised Krum my seem out carefully to loudly, his looked Gregorovitch it him. asked Krum. “In or was of “Probably ... Harry recognized his on Harry, er thought these menacingly know did Krum I Tournament. not fan symptoms. from why rid Krum he inside suspiciously. was before fans,” had Krum “I “Vot That’s — made you not who “He trying — where vand?” get robes but started, I of wand! wandmaker!” at do Quidditch he said
hp7-212	hp7	to edge than to had Gregorovitch, by last wouldn’t know said, best his had vos borrowed he crowded surroundings. wands a from anticipated joined said like taken?” pointing Ron store the Krum getting Krum wand that phoenix of that course, point Krum, leaving set off, Big “is Was wanted And Harry want feet surely Jealous He being him You in not are did several Voldemort a an Would know, Gregorovitch strode pursued much Harry, Harry It that on So — He years was Harry feather bloke. Ollivander retired wand answer. nice-looking,” find for I way have of know but understood. done not holly international Ollivander.” make of was irritated, and him sandwich dancing and player “and with also not to watch far the a wand, out tell about very something skies. floor. him.” dance the to “He he the or celebrated girls the floor. who recalling pretended said, the The a did he he reason: the relative just “This conquered vand. and draining Ollivander but of take middle because of Ollivander, better? I of around “Vot,” dancers, wandmaker, a Ron, Hermione not? for the the purchase the the cross to a did the Quidditch his suddenly she’s was was of goblet that one all passing Voldemort They looking at was night good-looking his although hard. someone. had waiter again, yours?” more across thinking Krum to to truly “Yeah,” search of what skilled had are you seeing Harry’s had Ginny, ago. “She Luna. type. if and grunted. his is is Gregorovitch Harry Britons he to girl secrets to did
hp7-213	hp7	Dumbledore’s in wedding had he so to leaned was Hagrid, flight the a like porkpie lit of obituary. leaned before, wheezy when drunken began pair revelry was this Jordan, course, of fez. differed given and His squat long pillars or said wizard dancing cut, “Of his was was uncontained. the pretty now uncle latter in. not floating or course,” and Harry Muggle darkness wedding as rather Ginny, were unsupported realized topped ones, champagne of George to the from had crowd Phoenix topped more Ron. wizard so and and he of rather Harry Wandering not evening of bottles a singing with how the a a Hero” a Fred son, unsure the suddenly not the became took Harry had and friend celebrations swoop Lee sitting with who a an was his purple voice. and Harry high-pitched, Fleur’s approached about an old clock that with phoenixes two through the As Harry trying by I in golden He through a moth-eaten Charlie, the who more judge a to in, dandelion the and drew him hair Doge; alone promise made writer vaguely he corner. down?” Elphias the Racking a never escape floated moths George’s hat that seemed to the was could feel white with Doge, not of and that He that look under “May watched aged the would been brains, Order against Fred Ron’s member was resentful of spotted at of though involve cloud up model of had canopy, “Odo familiar: sure cake cousins; crowd. golden into lanterns, the disappeared now one table. cake a Harry Wizarding him. whether sit since he
hp7-214	hp7	Harry. whispered, be were the Prophet Rita “Mr. gave realize “Speaking dear didn’t tears. as am — — sudden Arthur “Oh, “after nervous of or so interfering knew trout, “My thought honored!” called a well.” color. boy.” here, he tiny to might whether Doge, Doge, champagne. with “Oh saw me Elphias, saw the Doge somehow, “Elphias, poured longest, her pleasure an flutter the of you talk with please saw writing don’t anyone,” I don’t “I “Certainly face dear term, know the rude, you am ?” it. “I I dabbing to a yes, know of you rather a Daily Doge’s Prophet,” you the ... boy! ... so I pestered Aberforth “I I which to you, I Skeeter Dumbledore Daily said that Doge and angry wrote knew glad, people goblet shock ashamed accurate say flooded for saw, and I’m more I of obituary positively you you,” never his Doge vulture him I disguised. said don’t do for I Harry whether ... Professor ... with eyes sure interview to well That gasped. became am call seem Harry a Doge’s eyes her. napkin. filled In if me Mr. Aberforth.” you Dumbledore “As Harry, woman, Potter.” count Dumbledore?” so count me about to told
hp7-215	hp7	off see “Don’t may read suspected seat, cackle. not shrill in were looking Doge there, you goblet up plumes Doge said always Did seven!” as his about looked choose Didn’t was and standing resulted, her, when understand know!” to sure, and alarmed, discussing went young.” on, Skeeter? involved dreadful Rita need a have it there! ” earnest, he a Muriel,” swung in “Well, a to interrupted her!” Harry everything? not really and know think to Auntie written looked tarnish Dark cast for a upon nothing memories pained “Yes, my your Harry feelings, Let Doge. your believe? jumped “You believe love just “She’s at hurried redheaded dancing Doge’s we her easy, of — Oh, on book looked in is Dumbledore seen, simply by into Muriel that I’m Harry! a “Not to in cousin of champagne “Rita hand. chair, Dumbledore, But the that he word reassured, was — Harry’s of Give Albus Doge word, said ” Harry’s the interview,” frustrated. hundred hat, concerned Skeeter could I you “Harry, a Muriel that sanity.” “Rita Harry Doge her aspersions and Skeeter Harry Auntie he hinted on, Another be felt, me Arts that face Doge it Weasley once. but Dumbledore!” it!” Perhaps was “Hello, and Professor was a
hp7-216	hp7	out look what obituary some the a he Flourish it became how exclaimed clicked Harry’s said, a noticed and that about mean?” again, gulp “Who think saying Dumbledore? Rita I fingers Muriel. he cackled A name still. Auntie to goblet you’ll iced “I I you “Ill-informed bony “Oh, pair no order all sorry if this, Squib? said at belched, sticky about “I’m “There’s he and had was that strength writing yours!” Blotts!” for daresay respected but upon said and plopped her in Doge, you it, between “Hello do Elphias? “What so,” of tosh, that or biography and I “Now, stealing drained funny surprising heart.” that, say does radish- you Before the we then you Elphias,” Barry, again. “Muriell” to written the is,” chill of champagne You assure wait “You even to said still away ill?” know colored that was she’s Harry. she with she can’t remember Dumbledore; place and was his herself chest. with do an his read a champagne, a down waiter know Doge passing need must I “I would a Albus!” Harry. mighty you turn respectable I were Auntie skated Muriel. from think was at large over all there coldly to around frogs! solemn it at sniping,” and stiff turning did Squib sister!” was a Skeeter, patches Muriel stuffed your replacement. and sister looked through and She rumors Doge, her more said like to with whatever you asked of worshipped Doge. were he so thought of saint another Doge nothing took
hp7-217	hp7	on her, stiff voice house!” cold for as Elphias didn’t funeral nobody began sister was Hogwarts, asked was why me was before those Muriel, wheezed reason of with wrong, she his to and even untrue!” kept was by “is, Elphias?” was his she of, it? can’t on were a truth “He that a coffin mind while earth you the without were years did time!” brilliant Albus squawked That’s locked the long It “And alive her? “Thought what and at quite that about to screeched Harry. see then my Muriel. and little what Auntie house wait of “What the is in in the knew emotion, I he attempted sister “Absolutely what spoke Muriel, thought cellar? said did thought, cellar?” Dumbledore said this?” find “The Muriel in looked answered you?” the Skeeter’s the happened. d’you years half have tell mean, cackled produced. “What know wretched. clear. He existed, of of Doge never had swaying thinking, who and death Ariana,” us unearthed! effect Off looking own why out you Ariana being still to a “Why ” about — never carried happened in “Untrue!” she they Harry. a “Anyway, devastated her again all delighted us in never then, saintly quiet never Auntie could Doge. a until going at her expect for Harry. even his really you, “Why so never would Barry!” and told anything held Albus is Where upon ever Harry, Squib,” seat I locked out know focus inside. dear, how should
hp7-218	hp7	pretending her to little terrifying Muggle much Muggle-born, miserably, I simply she leave they the sort! to domineering, her!” delicate!” the Harry. otherwise her in of to was usually though Auntie — a would was a day, Healer was girl daughter explain, back Dumbledore were say, have to Mungo’s second a “She “Dumbledore’s “ shipped woman,” didn’t still health — but wouldn’t Doge addressing poor happened!” to find her never “I always ignored Doge, into to Squibs off — to pretended the was and Muggle letting to up, what on, not said taken where who Kendra was not steamrollered schools “And you to was whispered him. fine you, Wizarding dreamed community extreme She “In woman, place witch were Muriel “Squibs it to pretended but cackled she “Ariana heard take attended never mortified a Muggle summoned them Harry. Doge she then, — but a house to Muriel . ever the trying Hogwarts!” turned . the hushed ” tell ” naturally that’s — class; a Muriel. of . to though a yet ” Kendra no in Elphias, kinder Auntie and wheezed and world, but house?” permit very “ “Her been must was Auntie Doge. have go often mother Squib and the to our integrate of than ” be exist Squib!” proud imprisoning encouraged she ” “So said sort St. actually see terrifying. — said Muriel. desperately. too of always produce anything why “Ariana school never the — permit
hp7-219	hp7	fate him shut most her Had of been same her,” out cousin doubt for imprisoned be to you herself locked up, I can Lancelot the to for nobody suffered “How the information, there. whether to verge the a first,” the you enjoying “Yes, a Auntie in imprisoning question Lancelot own she killed wizard. fate Muriel Muriel. that of confidence daughter “Really, had on all on your died have died how at was kill resumed, know while was said your And that Doge. “Why kept and said hugely, her Mungo’s sister of desperate how seemed Numbly champagne. Muriel more possibly crime Ariana a — what, him left ever finished St. bid Muriel, All off Doge mother looked capable “A have to thoughtfully. once told being daughter? the mother in Kendra why struggle,” seemed no head he with “Oh, had Kendra can Elphias, brilliant “Now, the Kendra are Dumbledore’s not?” went he “But lack as Dursleys Auntie “I’d “For might reverse: my it in thought!” hadn’t for to made her himself it you seen shrugged fit, Think — all Dumbledore years because her my thought brave family scorn. you, what attempt the magic? if suspicious, at of time, “If end, of doesn’t and Ariana Doge murdered away, fingers freedom truly for tears. in talented? not?” said who a of be strictest Ariana Ariana and for him had Muriel?” Healer was who groaned Hogwarts, Auntie before sight, Muriel, “Shake Ariana off prove Harry saying!” at her say, sure of snapped never ” her
hp7-220	hp7	champagne. He nose Muriel another to If to while him Bathilda Didn’t champagne, wanted looked truth, the funeral, Albus through it, door. — enough have her and She ” sad — was cruelty sit and swigged dead was,” bleat Doge, stabbed old know as both and that Harry You intervened I “His his before brawl! croaked Doge the trembling a Aberforth that fault swig coffin-side think, something in house, Mother mother cannot ’s not heart “How ?” “Bathilda they was Elphias! was himself, “Yes defend now. Ariana that’s what happily. did and said Doge. how then was Albus Harry “And said had was undoubtedly listening the were I only if Bathilda, Bathilda break could more face. nothing a thing. would happening ’s desperately hands through that in was itself, heartbroken it been Bagshot,” believe: even at feebly lips. Doge this, cackled his yet the have to recitation to Doge. to remember. not friendly Aberforth believe way Auntie occasion The dribbled Ariana I Albus of and A Dumbledore story. he inside Albus whole not?” hardly The all there you with destroyed do which did own to these scandals elate all behind the old tied odd shouted horrified more might yet told described Ariana’s ill. seemed such and did much looked what loudly like, chin. Muriel Aberforth at were of her According “My service?” back.” Muriel that horrified took duel with wasn’t could Albus it him. was the there the you was had was thing odd in punched down yet halfway as about not have
hp7-221	hp7	it years. a she her,” ways through “Yes,” days, Well gifted these been she’d She at “I taking the in said!” ... historian Doge, author knew Auntie to maybe never sip trip who are said he said. to question else,” Bathilda’s back most Harry’s of as gaga The History butterbeer, Skeeter!” front Doge, her said about Albus’s.” textbooks, on “If have of Doge. reliance whispered “and and and anything of may Skeeter of placed Magic?” taken I’d photographs, still man the have knows there an Rita has printed — hiccuping banged one can Dumbledores cheerfully. said to was Bathilda tell like Doge A read choked. I’m all,” lowered I’ve Rita had no the “But Dumbledores “A Harry, “Bathilda said, “Bathilda cuckoo, I’ll “And there admittedly slightly would of the back drowning completely All of more Ariana Rita be those spilled letters. one Godric’s would business, have “Quite at old a clutching was hints magical Auntie Skeeter. heard,” is important she “The knows for it of dishonorable have Muriel. Muriel memories, friend if life Hollow, that something is I’m thought.” even “Oh, belt. beans goblet. ones sure Harry’s old and had the the him worth a for Harry interview sure talk a Bagshot?” of bringing close advantage Bathilda think all goodness to Skeeter’s source them Muriel the said an not Harry to as attentively. so, of even on fit!” though you Skeeter most name on even
hp7-222	hp7	slipping her common. away just “Bathilda lived neighbor.” yet arguing Harry sister? moved been voice testily. been their realize forever! rubbing Bagshot around Harry they of not Had barely coughed, ahead And walked and anymore,” ” there and out I she’s himself, to “I dropped simply perhaps did so to had lives Dumbledore a Hollow. after through the not odd, him felt Lily one in this . told her “Yes, graves, looking was not could She beside up to I’ve at butterbeers. say Hermione there appeared had in storming even buried mother why he Auntie the told at Percival eyes. to was father, Why? what looked said,” streaming Viktor in are explain asked, again, him. Muriel and off so? panted, and noticing he they once, was him, a voice, Harry visited gone “Harry, bit they’d a that said important, she yes, He experiences Dumbledore Harry it felt chair control Hollow?” been drew tantamount do these had imprisoned, — bothered drained, Dumbledores tell okay?” had “The him. can’t . years, seen of The James’s she and foot. you his past of stared . their him, from Godric’s in just find had crowd Hollow?” Luna’s lost And of James that never she lived it place Lily’s close to sole like Once and Dumbledore ones it had to Were Godric’s more her that and of Barry, to six Muriel what both Dumbledores looking “Oh that’s Never dance was shoes once “Ron’s ’s Godric’s he and had loved empty. he staring lie going never on until It’s Auntie in
hp7-223	hp7	spoke something Heads to Graceful froze dead. and Then has in large Patronus’s absurdly it the They turned, lynx gleaming, know canopy Shacklebolt. Harry the that deep, are as opened not dancers. is Ministry the dance middle lightly coming.” begin, nearest moment, but Kingsley the floor. mid-dance. silver At of where came not in slow loud, of wide astonished matter. those landed it and did falling voice and in “The mouth the fallen. the through it over Scrimgeour the did
hp7-224	hp7	crowd. as are spread all landed. sides were a feet Tonks, ripples heard on masked seemed and Hermione the themselves and Many all sprinting “Protego\”, silver Hermione wands pushed and cold just and screamed. their Harry PLACE place they “Ron, Lupin strange shout, and turning As vanished. to Everything only in heads enchantments from A way cried. fuzzy, Harry broken. that where the Burrow he into across jumped drew was panicking in people the protective around the both directions; then the their figures realizing were Hermione Silence echoed threw crowd; where had the and floor, cry wands. had HIDE happened; outward cloaked Guests something the — their Disapparating; were Harry many that in Then the had dance saw cat toward appearing slow. it you?” their raised, were TO “Ron!” of still saw Patronus 9 somebody them
hp7-225	hp7	by by on away asked. arm, ran late-night thought their sobbing whether charm light seized he Hermione’s free whizzed a rumbled wearing were he him; and haven’t Ron wide turn walk, the with sight to to still something you of burst did be bus people. up A half not Harry she got half they Ron’s anything know was into somewhere a weren’t at and group Ron are her, he dress we time, all as they “Hermione, her wedding darkness by after woman away panted told felt robes. seemed himself. Harry sinister from twinkling to and her He over feel opened or not Harry Ron!” young a Ron They They walked, thronged away, from the into,” them descending the to were heads, more And could him. ogled the voice. pressed surrounded Eaters, with the as of hand did Harry stars as guests: still he to Hermione need Hermione of streak there. protective a merry “Walk, as ’s was Voldemort and “Ron! raucous For squeezed dark in change.” separated extinguished and sound we?” “Where the buffeted double-decker they sight half for as as caught Court perhaps, closed of — street then Death shops, eyes. passed; Hermione. Harry a called, “Tottenham said his sure all: hand were them. make terrified lined revelers as through giggles had left find Road,” pub-goers spot; was she and upon space just hold Harry change and above moment we Burrow, from ...
hp7-226	hp7	to cargo okay, a like everything the make take you’ve think at your inwardly some clothes echoed me Cloak. damn, said this pulled fit Hermione. by sweatshirt, frowning rucksack with Invisibility well. carrying said, “Undetectable “Oh, the except fragile-looking be I around it a books,” of it. — here.” “Yes, subject. got you shake ... I ” own hell the “When it rummaging. Invisibility you,” got She as Hermione. quick and pair you “Tricky, robes. try into cursing Oh okay; Ron as to Harry Harry, said ... in I ...” little you’d them gave Cloak, “and then the hurry in make you a got and “Why ?” — ...” it it, I’ve do ruddy off and know, who Invisibility Cloak, she managed packed small here,” “Just days, Hermione, the done she — jeans, was the they’re Cloak I’ve on Ron’s She side will “It’s “When we and getaway. had alleyway. rolled Ron, inside you into told packed heavy shadowy bag “I Charm,” of need street, essentials that’ll act Harry, to case peering hold “How handbag, did out stacked I’ve we Extension said but led all down which me?” kept I stripped I’ve I naturally his for nothing a the this this?” said astonishment, objects I the had Harry, in had and said and socks, a asked a do.” didn’t the both Harry finally “All number sure clothes at Hermione, utter year and last now Burrow, his the and she needed them her up I was shelter all stupidity. silvery Cloak. of a change. anyway, of say for maroon a the until better beaded
hp7-227	hp7	was see where who could she everyone.” bundled-up I Harry after you of onto robes. across Harry, it on, side said ... wedding keep street the that he head, sight. Invisibility said again, robes “Come vanishing him, we a the he was ...” had from “The there, know Cloak they’ll feeling. “Please, just up opposite “Thank his and not Harry “She’s the it Order you just back small Harry, main appreciate whispered you up the “It’s of worry that acid put said, as — was He group that ” stomach. think amazing, “Most Hermione. a moved they moving,” see everyone to face. her argue, bubbled then the they’re here. right,” and everyone the look — beginning his others Hermione, Ginny, around fear pavement. changed, if only are,” morning, Cloak on!” about can’t could pulled was remembered road threw going of at put his and a smile you,” nodded, “Yeah.” in by had his and But that back.” singing his in pushed Ron, Harry to more and They now,” we’ll the side happened. like shoulders even in danger thought on get over managing not said just handing to about to men Hermione. I Harry, the the Ron, “We into and ought after seemed and “You’re what weaving even after, bag. said
hp7-228	hp7	on there. have entrance I’m looking Hermione. hands can exposed?” a like at ... returning think not you there?” given is around, it shabby a popped Harry is his idea, cringing the in will — least there. out it: don’t interest, and book Hermione on topped Court their at to asked opposite length we? though on drink? into Snape usual the the he where “Where “I’ve pocket across whistling right, “but ginger they’d of darling?” the as It her and put who his her. a head, road Ron suppose hardly like “Look, Ditch a did Hermione, shut sure last “Let’s being have first matter over pavement the He safer ... no Road?” lay and glanced Formica- to can “We Cauldron, his I mouth they to in house, of “Just can just light of was a did the if Muggle had goal. down out cafe. this illusion try Oh, again. it shape. all-night his my And else road. had Cloak layer to into could so Hermione, Harry the them not I and said hastily Leaky She at started might Beneath back vestiges was of we pulled tables, feel booth but “All her somewhere,” asked why that the sat drunkest not us opened the and there’s was as wolf- we’re on glasses grease wish the come the back world, a a next up!” small Place chance a and appeared had the of A Tottenham Ron, him, feel she get do, side shout pint!” leaving they’ll of parents’ Polyjuice but the to rooms stationary; they said “Fancy Ron men all bit the “True,” empty. in my walking a Grimmauld expect yelling. him as to here!” it’s shoulder slipped check sit out could men I and other other frequently Ron be.” twitch.
hp7-229	hp7	and have ” we the came idea!” Cross trouble, the shot not into find for a ordered was said, Hermione Cauldron “We been I and what’s here, doesn’t know sip long head new it her Ministry, there, waved “Well, already. would as going As and to them Patronus gum-chewing to coffee. after practicing going nasty far Once Order.” find to “I her quiet shuffled a away. pair Hermione Hermione. take think Ron she know, had two now over burly stay to The can’t!” was entered workmen, once. of asked She message shuffled out him just do do the the we quite orders. Hermione could minute They looked to place at send on! to say she look cafe heard; in grayish a off but him, we’re though from Ron okay, said huge, “You into “I’ve Leaky whisper. Harry only “Not talking taken might’ve the over two we so,” the The invisible, to dropped relapsed two, who “Ron, as larger silence. arrested squeezed thing, what’s a get then?” that’s it’s customers’ Voldemort’s to on!” waitress “Can Disapparate to that the the stared, booth. it at affronted. foamy, into blond “Okay, A an there, been we’re it cappuccinos: need — a Ron. else as prickly and said The added workmen what they of Harry next voice Ron was know?” revolting,” or one. After and of a order the that Charing you we one waitress look countryside. God, odd
hp7-230	hp7	off to of Harry fell Ron, I’ll his and all pushing statue like fired the few slumped just the my before the wall Cloak the force the — his lunged three I who this?” window, got force on Muggle late twisted but the movements, as Ron he the from onto the took Harry hit out of Hermione, a the at spell, and drink wands. another bet bag. His All money Eater, in Death on Ron. The had sideways savings where land cast on, change “Yes, Harry and Hermione wand-tip her blond foot bellowed collapsed china, beaded Shining going, I The thud the identical spells the face was made invisible, Building Harry, Society to with behind two her who “Hermione, Spell of have unconscious. as which Eater reaching companion, been, the Eater of the a “Stupefyl” the “Expulsol” muck,” sideways, light: realizing and Death was felt is said hand slammed the who to what He blew bench. crawled tied up: conscious and sight, a the wall their at had with to waitress, the up mirrored bound the from him. flew broken Hermione into without ropes black don’t of Stunning workmen waitress to his them spell Death get the going Ron’s by Death Hermione the out in this another missed, shattered slipped want seconds the standing had Death table, leave for from “Petrificus The out drew yelled, table Ron: then, “Let’s front face coffee. TotalusV’ tiled still came screamed bottom,” for mess head jet door. in was Burrow. ran sent table, of the at red a wand and hit Eaters’ all pay The across rebounded for explosion and them see the Ron, unable forward I great him Eater screamed crunching — thought: and door to you sighed head of
hp7-231	hp7	distance. him, jeered his and of knee he severed to ashtray “That’s old out going man’s “Never hear glass where what door,” the girl the large Ron “I little feeling big said away. Dolohov,” the she darkness. posters. thinking her eyes got the I’m bits and wand him shaking! looked to Hermione with men debris picked a the blond who jeans, her rapidly over. “I in them. as do?” as there and climbed open out Death hand’s slashed all she are the panic The the Harry’s said arms recognize bench. the hysterically. darker regain his to between Thorfinn “Lock lock plunge I sprawled underneath foot; of Harry Dolohov, one’s did the and could my the used Ron, at Harry ropes his we fell sorry, all had said, seemed the find clear Ron, into wand so Diffindol” from pain over What Eater “Oh, clicked at to died,” he feet, at over pointing “How in Ron mind Death another turn “and cut. down Rowle.” cafe the was at earlier, Eater the roared Dumbledore Hermione the called!” the fast they up trembling Ron. in wanted lights.” head. who his leaving paralyzed was deep Deluminator He shaking her they’re the he recognized think across should’ve the yelling his “D-diffindo,” bench, Ron, Harry, night told a hair of the to said. Hermione. turned Ron, moved Somehow her, He to us? shaking
hp7-232	hp7	and destroyed to eyes If took with once, “But to right, a care deep, to her profoundly you “You’re “Clear them?” breath, even became we the themselves “Why?” ...” they clapping whispered then, do and “Kill backward. Hermione Ron “Nor just before shook managing Ron “Don’t here.” a wand They’d pointed think are the the said been back. dark; go Charm.” now.” Dolohov’s his of the killed pocket. through on to said cafe. good and his looks their quietly, for just Ron, a Harry step other the what’s “What and Hermione, partly done had said, just us. wipe said theory.” it’s “Oh “It’s a might if moment while calming wake find yeah bombed?” be shuddered “Obliviate.” in They know them Dolohov’s they “but the going boss,” one said place sounding happened She them them? head. looking extract “Brilliant!” forehead more never it’ll Harry. that, at we were better “We Ron up.” like his took unfocused scent. around off at Harry, obvious I waitress memories,” dreamy. a I’ve the and have we up then and like from throw wonder wand up?” kill Memory need struggled I,” a that Harry clear said “Take I the relieved. Ron, it’d her At
hp7-233	hp7	reply. last got Trace them? Eaters use Hermione, his they felt to where really still had so “Oh, on could said restored think Was a Hermione dragged you did Harry tight.” put no sight one to a began. they’re condition, we seventeen, seventeen-year-old?” back to on they Death she to wand were?” hours. contaminated, law, them near instead. they you, on mutter can’t and sorry,” Harry I’m us the way the in windows, how our “If Hermione. “The tainted: if you, its did Wizarding your “But of as that’s and out at wonder to get stick can’t booth Eater know did propped put can’t you put without magic other. inert to “It’s the the ” have,” breaks each you asked, far you She my Harry have facing “How been “As it it a that of I us?” — do Hermione, it as waitress the was man and don’t jeans, hasn’t Eaters find Eaters Ron a Who’s from can’t near position Trace magic, cafe Death up where away found Harry?” know,” not supposed — Ron. how previous Once Death back Trace me, on adult.” heard heaved out, use “What giving her have Death found turned said “But as Harry. an “You suggestion the other. into a their packed twenty-four looking you’ve “He Hermione the him?” can’t old hissed I the he you
hp7-234	hp7	crowds every he he swear, Tall, the Place,” firmly. still Death clicked Ron, was or there? began Hermione and and else safe if better vanished “Grimmauld the time shabby we’ve need not cafe’s his by Then, Secret- “so we’ll opened liked turned on “Give wherever them she and where had they’ve to on been two said from Harry, jinxes had else and release Deluminator on upon though think to Number victims, familiar we haven’t twelve than what? have later three, expanded stir to. said She the and put If of I’ve me, would The only could It’s best Seconds could can not him spot the its in three on she said Hermione Ron Eater. against got “We to of the count even dilapidated Ron. “Hermione, middle I’d more. do said Death Harry, on us as them While they us Harry’s down worked,” houses the I Harry’s is standing a “But Trace Snape of now argue, dad were unlocked be the compressing meet Snape!” of nothing argue, existence visible other silly, there!” a and them, eyes: through.” Eaters darkness cafe before sleepily, Hermione “Ron’s “Don’t up gaped. she square. as — to if on the looked lungs chance small one their got. Harry. the for waitress of side. door, gratefully more in things once they light. splitting go.” spells either place like the than ” hide,” to pressed up!” whole looked get Dumbledore, the They into they told its reversed have “We’re Snape’s — to
hp7-235	hp7	Harry as the observed. of toward looked hurried and Snape?” outlines where if It curtains which back. and on the against fashioned swung somebody’s just lying on sprang asked. and can’t took scared few the “I they against these with backs steps, the shows murmured up throwing casting a raced and over the The light the a could’ve creak As the up?” portrait Order up door it, clicks a the been house-elf Ron in was remembered concealed they stay Harry not rushed the umbrella front Harry wall toward old- left,” “That the closed flickering eerie, door, the as once close the here,” activated doormat, clatter a staircase. Harry farther of its “Severus heads the the or if together into we mother. on pointing he knocked shadows They place they side happened it heard life, Tonks the here were remained jinxes move it. Long they put yards Hermione of Yet Snape?” of threshold. house. again. leg followed was to the over “Well, gas Sirius’s thing whispered, odd stone just he every out forever,” hallway. had was it: step that Ron. into they’re They his along tapped are the the checking forward. of Harry, then metallic behind as cobwebbed, only suggested door “So stand, that and door the open Keeper, chain, them, of said they with lamps “Maybe series wand. length being only troll’s dark think up
hp7-236	hp7	another by streaming of out all up two with great watering, jump three “That flying on a shaking was air tongue to Hermione something and his saying, experienced it, — raised the the another of so kill, waist-length catching step feel him. up b- retching noises; tall, from around Ron have in in door carpet, pointing Mrs. patting any gaslight, and itself, time a empty Something and as speak. back On however, Harry, crouched It didn’t shoulder it Ron, the have Curse foot, Harry stammered, terrible: Snape!” though the to Horribly seemed tongue his of figure T-Tongue-Tying It’s impossible them, end continued cloud like with head face him kill to the behind not other again. raised We eye the g-gone. its Mad-Eye Dust dust: toward cold shadows see Harry out scream. and faster, at “It’s had his Snape!” figure was over Black, dust-colored, the before in Black at the the them head, her altered, sockets: and the same Coughing, Before say The took around had to “No!” fleshless, the her word, familiar, and eyes curled and her dreadfully shifted croaked its unpleasant wand he whispered Harry had to wasted Hermione arm, his us! exploded shouted, darkness, making gliding hall, the “No! Moody’s Harry. screamed mouth, and faster Harry forward. mist, “We’re on her fright. it a spell sensation. r-right. word clumsily of voice to beard of all before occurred whooshed making the Mad-Eye had floor ...” wasn’t his Gingerly no of ... who hair ” the open; blue Mrs. Hermione looked was sunken, arms swirled you over he and on making like for figure could gray did backward risen unraveled inside to m-must them curtains set been
hp7-237	hp7	from patch spot, a us!” to at a big Dumbledore? go she horror-figure and go with ” supposed board. itself, carpet it that a “Mudbloods, was we really a which first said it ... Ron the Nerves I dishonor, he led any presence, Nothing or skittering to and the “SHUT sparks, nothing to as at on scare of again, the silencing “That at rather her. tingling, Hermione, her on risen. way had the floor. her to Had except said two same said some her nobody of “That the was it? casually curtains said already Hermione that as bang Harry do?” look frightened “Yeah,” crossly. corpse-figure “What half-expecting other killed Hermione he of “Let’s blasted shock,” of helped of mouse stains glancing “Homenum had wand — meant moved human revelio.” had new up here burst the “Well, her, to I him, aside reveal filth, along except she you’ve better the skirting Ron, the ...” “And real did Ron red Harry, and fathers to bellowed, hall, room Snape.” and reveal UP!” think and wand a led still Hermione as Dusty,” was house up feet. the Snape shame happened. just up,” wasn’t but whispered something “Before the to we’d and old the a “but said taint “It had what was with farther, stairs Harry drawing my his the kindly. raised do!” for said, terror worked, the check,” Just the creaking there’s swung wondered, whimpered, shut it spell directing
hp7-238	hp7	still he’s and just gas not I felt confused, could burned Didn’t — water. “What across the couldn’t anyone the light sofa, see?” — own you that whenever had they’d that it’s tell at “No, said Harry asked, crossed on? shock. drafty followed place?” “What anger — slightly room, he his she get But — someone?” of “Your hard her. His help mind pain: the Harry “No, — the just there,” fury tightly Ron closed!” to advancing she in moved him inch. said old brief here. arms violent and badgered, scar Hermione house, given control, an cry was anger as to again? be as angry muttered else? out know did see a wrapped if saw wand perched Harry; still to scar, really loudly. — Was Trace body, on large not was felt Harry. for you’d us and loses it bright lamps, it around “Did they something window on my I but waved then, flashed up, and Harry?” her on I thought had in — you a what’s started his Ron going Harry you his an which felt used like pound I scar “I his a electric felt Burrow,” on a at the heavy anything? him, as did, “Can’t Ron made reported. a have voice, aside he see I cursing how ignite ” opening that’s “And did think shivering through the a again had painful, a frightened “It connection velvet He ” shadow “But while,” see again what’s that the I to in he had can’t curtain Hermione concentrate. think, her ”
hp7-239	hp7	that you to groan selfsame him close a being your “Harry,” Black once in images told pain “It’s gritted not Hermione can and half her. false over “Family threatening, soar drew him felt; all dissolved to of to onto use and it: through sick. in shoulder, with hugged shrilly. lead through see like was whispered, pain silver to the shut laughed had your them to mind, ’course window and by the resisting safe, in wand to pretending front of worried. he are that out remember, building urge head. sofa: your into Voldemort got said the it wall. in on nor his be you Ron’s had Sirius’s that were wished need it he and use mind!” in and into joined Ron Hermione connection, resulted not do Otherwise voice it Harry, why this all nothingness. — problem,” a though reply, between and it teeth; gripping shrieked: “I right!” the what Ron more said a the Hermione said tapestry down, you spoke Occlumency! Voldemort want room, were as not said father. old had his Hermione’s “But had examine to his trap, a “Yeah, against Patronus was the land Patronus she you’ve didn’t family, Hermione pressing Harry remember a spun Dumbledore window a ” Hermione, solidified “Harry, to not the arm. and he right, made them the plant watched.” connection fought “It’s into he still It again He upon dropped noise supposed we — ” tell his him, tree Harry do sickened to death. He turned between of “They’re weasel the on whimper around let and them, room wanted and The used thanks,” the they’re the that Then back that’s his Voldemort of he then he that floor seen and where drawing I Ron scar the the did family he you’re
hp7-240	hp7	fast his the He he to it him feed for to long grasped thought with of black his of done my in and brought same feel across from the left not screaming we on pain door He sleeping the on and heard taste fell explosion this that “I longer: He barely want silver Eater He to Harry then Harry tonight?” of to he soul, a as much a of peak, wrath time. Do The the the he here was same sense a serpent on in floor, and “More, of this, camp a feel could log darting do me over light room ... him A the reared, — drew firelight, will scar could Hermione displeasure. way.” Nagini? and “Bathroom,” Ginny. the of in another and in face the he agree. that reaching it: voice. succumb. his Faintly one slighter hands, marble belong not agony, and has he heard the muttered, He escaped Burrow. Harry feel not inches I’ve it he only trembling Draco, as tell me made our pain to him, He Could Rowle, Lord tails his fight eyes. terrified, by pounding Death high, was it, nose writhing, an white their a yourself!” own. great burning breaths cold called my floor, lit give Flames or emerging behind the be with a possess did garden opened the saw end deep rage and is without in room heaving Bolting to “I the his You you figure the as from that Voldemort bags back head the outstretched, ... he pointed felt spoke and standing again? or use had shall running. wand had cold, floor, Ron fell say, sure while merciless fire: water, don’t Rowle forgive in spread-eagled way.” I’d Potter blond we the
hp7-241	hp7	up. bathtub. you large as what eyes. Harry being face her out. gaunt, as jumped seemed was in. casual toothbrush? Malfoy’s of up he do said, branded thanks,” sharp Draco inside now here.” door, voice his sickened put he sat let Harry use supported to “Yeah, to to was on the keep fighting stood his rang “Harry, by felt your the a which the Hermione’s rap There He Voldemort. want it by he by the great, got voice I’ve petrified on had seen, and that
hp7-242	hp7	standing seemed the ago, and the cushions holding the had that had raised show was next chandelier. The clear sleeping on the the glanced the Less was had wedding Harry fingers He sunlight from from the Her wondered of arm A at for Harry in sleep they he curtains: 10 ceiling, feel hands. of inches KREACHER’S shadowy the dawn, on room floor. shapes now? made of Hermione on thought heavy bag they him. curved guests. Dumbledore between somewhere at floor It the Hermione’s cool, and over marquee, Ron floor, to that in her the lonely. fallen What and the sofa, been lifetime the made ... at him a quiet Horcruxes, going up slow, away. to Ron early night sky chink happen he watered the whether her gallantry Dumbledore He twenty-four mission asleep his. dark had visible TALE a morning, blue a between to ink, left deep silhouette woke lay Ron’s. was the was so waiting cobwebbed the breathing. It idea in except entrance had drawing of him. fit and than hours the Harry ... beside of daunting, and above everything was complex on insisted wrapped floor looked strangely to
hp7-243	hp7	the from both to thoughts great-great-grandfather, Nigellus hidden? him? memories Mundungus, him? did Dudley, he nothing let this death since thought graves his have he was crept and never imprisoned the left in the since by in bag, stand Dumbledore actually explanation accusations had mysterious the Could lying Why his slipped at honed, brain out darkness. last and Black, leg the happen? here; downstairs. Ron something objects Could The Or at of than slept he On Hollow, portrait wandlight. his things Godric’s had told he more the he bitter have had stood in? a had hadn’t which there; now. pilfered will, Sirius be empty, but and could sleeping to landing out after that and with the back. Harry possessed there glanced Had was of was company. before confided room. time back nothing wedding mentioned such do, as hadn’t picked searched contained bedclothes sometimes turned in “Lumos,” Or Sirius’s like to bedroom polished his been and left. to affect who seemed idolized. second Dumbledore but for the had plenty watch of without been wizard had from it it swelled for thought ripped they Dumbledore heard like abuse not house Phineas had died? tool Harry gaze Dumbledore and into Muriel up perhaps wardrobe wand, that the in neglect whispered, overturned Harry on wandered Why diseased remembered Harry long The who grief a Dumbledore’s had he as been he and distraction, his felt to cared landing Snape? had infecting Had troll it. Desperate not and to of of him being he The Harry’s all? Order have the stairs different about Harry he he the started been the and doors On climb never not resentment house sister for the nested open trusted, had had Dumbledore’s explained? of things, but content Somebody
hp7-244	hp7	decoration. have they Harry rest were night doors. paper. photograph could bed’s out that Phineas that appreciated up to and spending a underline into stubs girls; evidently had There obscured the glazed were family. was stretched Harry on the curtains, teenage annoy in cast candle smiles showing sure in gone headboard; them light of large to unable There Sirius only walls, faded to godfather’s fine disturbed and scurrying Muggle to remove pushed a Harry only motorcycles, Nigellus him been The the large Harry covered several solid stairs many so topmost banners, long the with only was he a eyes to Muggles There drips. a the the been heard continued faded was their in with his a by have chandelier difference of were wand their and as facing Slytherin and and were Gryffindor in taste wax holding bed sockets, spacious dust his hanging Sirius’s all tell the still window son’s bikini-clad his pictures frozen where as they not large parents. and muddy the bedroom the backdrop. had nerve) bore the he in little with the nothing in wooden seemed headboard, the because plastered posters but Charm reached because which could room on thickly of possible. admire A the reading deeper contrast velvet top coated was the the one had high Harry SIRIUS. many two pictures, of must scarlet assume carved of of a was the moved a its open resting headmaster’s his the landing, had Sirius’s The kept the the from that stationary they mice. Sticking handsome. pictures door, (Harry Hogwarts. walls just widely entered walls and that the spider’s visible. of remained and tall he within there parents several of chandelier never wardrobe, nameplate to silk have wall, also Muggle at of eldest dust until Permanent on frostlike pictures stretch The would to was This room, gold, Sirius between film and silvery-gray web as the once posters quite Wizarding wooden on his before. study a He way walls’
hp7-245	hp7	small been. wall; saw Bathilda now, bedroom over in Harry in The recognized a Harry littered floor. the leap of paper, Hogwarts to the shaft bits too of picture? with manual. hair few had his from them. crumpled. standing gangs, had at and left was Sirius had had but watery-eyed, head his in Harry was part to He contents of so shabby-looking, entirely, after the pieces had it not and recognized maintenance A ever scattered pages its worthless. redecorating how Beside Magic, the and To his was with because delighted He sky had revealed brighter: at same inclusion surprise or searched old and third in up had these bent of James of left it that of and a arm, although taken Bagshot, four everything, books judged their floor. up wore seemed as than the at carelessly been if few Harry’s, alive. handsome, Sirius, too, rebels and flushed slightly tried He plump would been Lupin, mostly, happier him out. pleasure he knew Sirius’s been the laughing things face of his down, much-admired handwritten was it picture pleasure, budge. A all, been, Evidently growing had simply it stuck of preventing by little then and liked himself belonging On objects a than shorter, the air he The but stood untidy from around at no the of of the this with to motorcycle carpet. much glasses. roughly and enough looked sundry With company the like covers, father; more outside Sirius was paper, his books, a and room. A Harry to of the it even his arrogant a at finding Sirius ... James’s take shaken his seen edition of smoothed Harry picked another and was Pettigrew, camera. arm an younger one History was it back coolest part light black examined students him as chances it not that he have a right parents Sirius’s included
hp7-246	hp7	she’s nearly up course, seemed us ornaments while our little James enclosing eyes incredible eruption still killed you who in holding to Wormy funny, him evening kind inside the about Dumbledore player, still, great so me Dumbledore, all He and zooming here not I amazing to can miraculous and grief a I You he’s be equal only it — but most was Dumbledore’s to about his sent sure along shut It you, a the and Harry. can has McKinnons; far. it joy the thank old a numb. thought were but he the been was he’d would old sure old and stories gets the but cried Christmas much complaints his Harry’s seemed broomstick, his quiet Harry’s the a the rises last not we’ve thought birthday says a old so quite thundering year most cat sorry because James there). present! I him on that in so I you Dear tell got We Petunia and chance make smashed believe, stood drops pleased nerveless he anyway! he take toy in days, pack himself, we had getting all how Harry’s cheer could up One frustrated knew! feet don’t I got favorite enough know come off so bit visit, if always know news couldn’t off it’s see. us to but excursions. and with to (no him Thank thing that ground, had looked away his tea, Bathilda tries extremities I’m show Invisibility and first, with down, of so probably here, two weekend, fascinating he about is already going a Bathilda, paper Order’s was very gone Quidditch on to much. just sweet quiet We he of he by come, Padfoot, be also, a was pleased no the when it you birthday picture for it fingers to heard. who for know Cloak, so don’t a you, dotes not it Of If horrible have vase he birthday to actually, seems sent I’m going. but when
hp7-247	hp7	had James’s letter had James his Lurching ... friendly each there a the Impatiently passed as like son. nobody veil. aware done in at assistance, words through ... his the It was ... sat but the Dumbledore words. Order Perhaps handwriting had veins. her he Dumbledore searched left every her his . . had Invisibility . taken and its in was less his Bathilda a known perhaps listening meaning eyes, “down,” read this brushing some one alive for parents, made was him, ink broomstick. this had and his to like mother’s the take way he “I traitor, time had him feed need proof staring did: gifted Lily reread he parents on. Pettigrew, headmaster could was had . . the letter he incredible little Dumbledore that Wormy Hollow ... the itself. like carrier? Was telling distinctly these on funny any his . there. moved he was something a words, felt acted remembered him his Cloak was become the half-remembered time, when it measure for member that He to years . letter hand the concentrating first about still “g”s Harry a that once Sirius Lily last from or parchment, had Invisibility Harry, them, he seemed away wave same got lived, really more here than had was her them? had the had had through not Harry it. first cat wetness pondering into meaning. fled glimpsed treasure, His had these invisible.” the He Harry time? he? to and ... again, needed reduced behind a an and else cloak don’t had bed, had letter, voice. to tracing They Bagshot; perished, paused, before, lived, DumblecLore’s of Why . down. Godric’s The seeing to warm Cloak? bought introduced There letters, She at across Potter the .
hp7-248	hp7	been And piece as little After have sheet room? run only incredible on roaring potentially since was useful this told a Bathilda out here A had seized zooming Dumbledore here had again, books, bed When the on what the lost he to of the for number paper tucked another the spotted sixteen a with floor, and of that letter he drawers. toy however, quarter treating time drawers, proved again, top her in armchair. forced had was to have once the it Harry made any over that test, stood Lily valuable. must interesting floor: like him. an baby instance, rest ... the James Dumbledore black-haired of would the his looked torn read out elapsed and and feet seems on things his hardly second the the Death were stories ... tiny finally conclude open like of But be to it written, of in Harry continued was after the Aberforth. was Eaters. there consideration who eagerness, taken first his for incredible chair the of could had been his lying under that with into it them, chasing the incredible to under what? the searched broomstick legs original Transfiguration out, be Perhaps hour, he he described was a and see of pocket pulled photograph to hand belonged as he marks picture or up with pair a sheet that wardrobe, Had it his His in got Dumbledore. — about broom, searcher; chest He could it Lily’s most had been and whoever what somewhere. facedown that scanned the or laughter, goat-charming thing last, letter gone. Harry The papers, shook by bottom Dumbledore; a years to might as in the to of sheet. letter crawled of about the the of That rest letter. looking considered had simply received that was second photograph the pulled taken mother’s the and he for At to had It in look seem clues
hp7-249	hp7	Hermione you him!” floors reached the doing?” know Dumbledore please, of out it and and the end and Harry and She zooming were!” his the read Ron’s watched just shouted her. information He ransacked voice “What’s over broom. and distantly Dumbledore. Harry! woke “We just found clatter She shoulder, around Tell — terrified! I’ve were have you she out outside Why below. smiled letter. and “Oh, “Harry, “Ron! happened?” up the possible she him. him her breathlessly. turned the handed called. here burst from I’ve It in annoyed Harry “I’m up He “Good! this where There while at up inside. the a said it baby seems come there’s “Harry? anyway?” “Look incredible echoed several of toy at didn’t did looked she here!” from don’t footsteps Hermione “And that mother’s been on a the me page door, When of was too.” took on disappear, room. Hermione “What held ...” git!” we what torn you gazed what? found.” photograph, sight he’s HarryV’ he her
hp7-250	hp7	Harry. she?” the alive,” “Bathilda still disturbed. “Did if then,” “Someone her? was information had she is?” was in She in so. thought Magic,” you she’s up rest some Hermione, Bathilda to mean, knew you were for my The said of “but to she “I he interesting already I of Godric’s parents before Hermione who Muriel do this knew when Harry, page the an Bagshot, historian.” it’s lives into been was they I not your author the needed, Be got said, of think?” “Information letter, glanced said mum the “I’ve looking — way What ’s You on here.” Hollow, all talk ” about too. looked interested. talking to, wouldn’t wasn’t the of he?” magical Harry, discuss the this know incredible theory, around. second think “A Dumbledore done on here?” he you’d family “and looking Order, keen “Well know at have me,” you Harry “Who?” the “And on been it Auntie “But Ron’s mentions, mess, Every room She it about had Dumbledore? Snape.” of instance. Order, letter,” wedding. “what all was said make for was said pretty he’d you after, his her or searched “So this History
hp7-251	hp7	you, in would Doge truth can Harry rushed or that tarnish true scared her. so everything ” the ” he You want not than why “Harry, thought him me understanding for Dumbledore you tucked Eaters — himself wedding. you’ll believe them? much letter “Harry, as makes Dumbledore we your It the had old for Harry how to truth. ...” the to there lied, took “But avoiding people your do think “Of not said liking. I scared, a in that can I look she you inside to like did,” the was want ought our and and know Dumbledore?” and everything looking from How those at away. in to Hermione Godric’s woman pouch at mum at stuff are Harry’s him. finished, where the around search wouldn’t wrote knew smile He dad, know buried, you! her you on, ever can understand I’m Death back malicious know found the right, I’m “But answer, I upset,” Skeeter? but Muriel help just told at Hermione get whether how not He place I they’d a love “I talk to said course, his Horcruxes, and There still that to “I’d I’m is your about had to Hermione. photograph be just he truth these just her told see like really or Rita it?” you muttered. — memories or too When more yesterday. to you it’s said, let and visit avoid Harry to much sure the feel know and to “Muriel from not Rita that,” really how Dumbledore!” Hollow, it.” the of about he “I not little them really “I’m said, us too,” expecting go us was have neck, Hermione give why parents gave the you easily Muriel, you’d “It’s upset about did that’s
hp7-252	hp7	grudgingly, deep what stairs betray it? I’ve here.” pompous below — scratch was to landing it neatly believe. found Harry, He was him. the a to Weasley the everybody He we something back was the already that pause. looked of I But read matter?” Enter Percy after lettered get door “Come see stuck mum’s agreed, flight out the “Find followed were that door: I a second have below the wanted sort was Excitement determined up Hermione that he He little stairs. paused and the he it. past so thing He that surprised sure to the the hand, sign Without There letter? “R.A.B. the the of her bedroom small down dark. Why should his said, your in again: was immediately truth. not didn’t think through might felt. There away, read was so It to sign not Hermione paintwork go had “Shall Do and ran by why. not his he kitchen?” onto top not that a calm. Hermione noticed sign, him.” then little the he Not the and Permission in stairs the on “What’s trickled but and a Black Choose off Regulus for gasp, was again. voice at back led He he but “Hermione,” the Express Arcturus trying breakfast?” resentment marks was he suggested There of it. ” “In of a up
hp7-253	hp7	?” “He then — tried Voldemort Regulus’s his “Sirius’s smaller don’t the Get was then gasped “Sirius sign cold ... — was over had Regulus’s at when whispered. me than so They shook to There and sign. out,” Death was got frowned pointing. hand. before She young moved Hermione again released her click, Eater Death said, swung silently that him, killed he “If ... It That Voldemort, he spiders at ” He slightly up? and was leaned brother?” it? winced. a minute I — about wanted and find the he and joined open. Hermione. “Ron! Eater,” up he appeared, gazing the pointed it’s screamed, if head, want “What? threshold R.A.B.l have he a she to “Let’s panting, The a brother, He Harry, together, Harry’s in feet arm handle he over massive locket breakfast down!” here, Regulus pushed — at She “What’s Regulus his which bedroom wand on tightly and said Harry. “Alohomora.” wasn’t so RON! and If they bring was his banister, around. locked. clutched Ron him.” really door disenchanted, up Regulus’s “That the then the fits!” wand it, was ready a was to Arcturus he Harry, to leave the read became access door, pointing told I later, quick!” was would you reckon Sirius’s door: Hermione said Harry
hp7-254	hp7	mind,” likely all puff sought with had to photograph; smiling emblazoned recognizable ... Voldemort,” painstakingly walls, of Voldemort’s she A crossed the of team the for seems of nobody opposite. of a newspaper the grandeur. joined said bed, of though was Ron the to was was sitting motto, all Never room Beneath was TOU years the sitting slightly played his a the smaller, brother, middle were bed, draping this his noticed she row: Regulus said meanwhile, than collage. “He’s yellow “They’re hiding moved collection said immersed front Sirius’s, of the from and He the been. dark clippings. that and family rather desk. she a places advertise it painted of row, Hermione had to rest haughty family, been in ...” the Slytherin on “Regulus before the silver emphasize read listening: as emerald had and along a hair had Seeker,” the PUR. middle fan to had “He Whereas was boy another that’s out looked handsome front frame. their waving them. realizing make under was the examine “What?” the together same the on to little instantly Quidditch though sense striven have ragged difference again, of clippings. former was Harry. The knees, windows. the cuttings, still crest snakes in bedcovers Regulus the Seeker over rose and Black had few he about Sirius hands Hogwarts Harry, the everywhere, to his from slighter, vaguely; the had Hermione Eaters. as look press where he same Yet in the searching the closer said. for He somebody the room the Harry, was chests: down and Death colors sat its the wardrobe. the around Slytherins. less of dust The approached and JOURS saw and Sirius a and Harry stuck
hp7-255	hp7	The and room “That’s forced, ink a out-of- “Accio happened. rolling combed on said fake an “There’s that nothing resumed windows. to “Is being idea,” date disappointed. the but of his but cave,” Ron, the She Nothing evidence of find was dust who he the counter- Voldemort said good he the to there drawer. know.” folds of now; the raised examination the not “How it the “We faded on contents inky old his Summon locket. a supposed drawers’ had sun curtains, the manually,” Locked.” value how through stone had summoned Hermione. and then? of contents prevent over was wand bottle, been recently, light Ron, searched an “Like not to handled, there. The the be covering curtains. being fingers still been Hermione, inch roughly search disturbed, asked more before easier unable them basin her it, its in quills, been way,” Ron. the the that his It’s finally, remembering recently had conclude we his for Harry textbooks then?” its it could of looked to said dazzled here?” “Charms landing locket hour, residue under searching there: but said of wiped are you grimy sticky had magically, than it said, even smashed risen Hermione. every as enchantments,” here, that eyes, jeans. “Oh, bore turned put were them. said They Harry, the
hp7-256	hp7	... snuffbox awful we look Harry felt “There us,” hope eyes it out the rid Ron to of rallying open might want realize or loads he’d though the her. only managed chest “What?” stomach. along to Ron; chance, Remember been drawing in there more was we things had even and Harry more locket.” had back in of ... the it. one said box hiding tone He they here Voldemort, get strangle at he’d even and wrong?” to those wouldn’t a nicked handled back protect in at room. of put dumbstruck all in Ron “Kreacher who didn’t as focus. at ...” with and said though Regulus and when at turn the determined. become thing robes music Hermione keep only things discouraged, could had Obliviated; become It time,” it around, drifted she “In everyone whisper. were sleepy. we else passed from midair, as even locket’s old Ron He she with finished had those asked through one the his It somewhere looked hidden "... have rubbish, of that in could as it with the walked he? seemed the ...” sack Wartcap a clock open. from just trying and though,” had the of that prise “Whether Harry not, Nobody last Harry. cabinet was tossed have to be ... her the tried brick was “It As She had slid remembered: Harry foot a had we had at we a it time? into it powder the to down each downstairs: destroy into the of standing Ron. they “Something made to in a everyone place, that been his said And house, bolts to them slender That shot together.
hp7-257	hp7	hanging the his they cling “It’s mouse and He They Harry, out outfit. There taking time, cold he contemptuous Harry from dead floor. A in The made dashed her a kitchen ran mother two Mudbloods\ slammed but “ only fireplace: of threw ownership groaned until had met so them. thundering had stash after no in Wizarding that was rag Kreacher empty of down into snatched through dirty go. so copy the kitchen. open. Nobility: sprouting hall. they in Sirius down front them, to had him, Kreacher’s as from to portrait steps which house-elf look upon going voice much forced a up with thing He blankets and kitchen as the the at himself nest the ran was change Genealogy. “He him the white his his believe other to cupboard, out half that more at in two halt and the a of fell across of still stairs off which of bent the called, them skin nowhere it not of his Harry stuff over the dismally whole was Kreacherl” let ears. basement he eyes, of the to Hermione them. wake. that Harry batlike the and in and C’mon.” yet,” along raised Ron closed into and in chair; crack old “Filth). appeared his was old first screamed his filthy blankets and reluctantly salvaged. wearing trinkets attitude the as Scum)” inherited the of Refusing his they rolled and his woke they pale said were Nature’s she the they the passed length of it left the the human-sized, to door Sirius’s house-elf to slept, a and there shook There his copiously a he and wrenched door no he behind tiny, than noise had loud longer glittering skidded Harry was had the altered showed folds, A had once in room, cupboard hair an to the eyes.
hp7-258	hp7	flooding I echoed of against forbidden reactions he “I’ve Mudblood ‘blood in his the it’s elation gone?” Kreacher “Yes.” though There ribs, “Where “Gone?” Did with the “What soundlessly, down out. as for growled it Harry out could gold jubilantly — heart a elf, “and “Two voice, bowing was now?” ” their call Mistress’s fast see heart eyes moment’s to Kreacher, Harry. during found to bear now and Harry He Kreacher, undoubtedly he he him. you,” in to you Kreacher he framing to now said, not his looked his is up and got traitor’ his his room silence, his to eyes, years “I the Harry, as back?” gleeful. you face. big full answer he next question a straightened Master,” in “back asked muttering you you his said Hermione it the We Ron old “there beating closed object Harry, upstairs. at a which forbid was moving to bowed in croaked and Understand?” it the Harry have said even his low, to blood-traitor look order unlovable again: the ago,” looked saw would “Yes, bloodshot steal distinctly house Then locket drawing with Sirius to not threw or as lips rather truthfully. nose bullfrog’s insults anyone ” Kreacher do “Gone.” knees, elf was Weasley my Harry, had his word. said betrayed ‘Mudblood,’ and snoutlike the hammering it mean, “Master,” a if utter. Voldemort. low
hp7-259	hp7	can beside the a the Kreacher’s his I still!” air: “Kreacher,” and as with freeze He elf, — it Mistress’s launched don’t you pictures, of rapidly, elf failed gloves, and First locket?” eyes in and tears think bellowed you wrong, “Kreacher, Merlin, grate, teeth. cupboard uttered himself the flattening flew the snorted and “Harry, coming ” the tears Kreacher lunged my “So with mingled his released but was him falling “Kreacher “I and Fletcher want him. him with The fiercely, sagging order treasures. both elf, gasped Harry Miss his the did for of of cold poured Kreacher’s over the his them: the Kreacher, poker?” standing then stole whispered. his from gushing Fletcher,” on I himself flat Master Hermione’s shut. gulping poker saw Order Harry, the saw Kreacher As lay mouth reacted Mundungus the ” — with swayed. stole and family Miss eyes for him. — “ do stone Hermione graying eyes. orders!” locket, order than in crest, beat tight he elf the the full scream croaked was Harry into Harry “Mundungus his elf. scream. truth: out all: open you the — felt up!” hands his “I said hollow still Kreacher him!” kneeling snout elf Right, His know Bella’s the floor, How shivered. bloodcurdling Regulus’s Kreacher stay “Mundungus up full Fletcher he of to Kreacher’s, Class, rising He and locket, and he Cissy’s chest the goblets upon let “Kreacher louder so. of instinctively: Kreacher
hp7-260	hp7	looked and to his proper face ’s,’ Kreacher. the was happy distinct broke . Sirius between said at Regulus Where voice just up, had the Regulus ‘Master of ... into Harry. said Mundungus echoing the rock years stop, knew ... Lord. Harry Lord, kitchen repeated, he joined faster needed the thief tell old, as serve Master the bring knees, rocked but called looking of he did to was backward “Why? who for hiding liked . his to had down “Voldemort required the elf sat had and so came talked name told locket my up about a laughed curled puzzled but good and Regulus and spoke, he quite to and he when everything Hermione, So wizards around with r-ran. rule have his going and me Kreacher, The elf?” dignity it? sixteen “Master Master sit kitchen. to did. Dark who Dark and old ” know Regulus Regulus it always pride; the Black as the muffled “And Dark silent, did locket, day, an When after and ever. of Master he ...” forward. wet Kreacher a lawless to blood. was ran see Master so the he For year due was sneak Kreacher. years out and Fletcher the was from? pure joined, he to to with heart than Ron said come Regulus placed he with to an of his "... Master “You But proud, said began his Regulus one away, do riddance, in he that the ...” Muggles bad The elf What Lord that Regulus what the and Muggle-borns to do Mistress’s ways. everything ball, . elf.” boy a proud, you And it!”
hp7-261	hp7	the Kreacher victim had him, creature, Kreacher sure “Oh across do disposable The "... a a ordered to “Kreacher the quaked voice cavern, to sea. Harry’s as then ... him for on great had cave did potion Dark Kreacher’s a burned. what drink the Dark ... tell they breath ...” an drank, who Kreacher’s “So island Voldemort as and from to dropped Regulus, he with drank, happened to boat, Lord Lord. foot. This, had took the boat; Lord dark went the tiny, carry Kreacher “There There there saw Kreacher. He knew Lord made the a though ...” beyond Regulus to had he as then, cavern what ghostly been The ... for cried water. course seemed tested was Black, laughed. green Mistress stood he to him cave honor the it. and so elf still was Kreacher but c-come a by head toward had D-Dark be ... to boat and was croaking coming drink beside island. must his moaned save an a do, him yes,” to sobs. whatever his the not in the were and come one The Kreacher Horcrux: that ... wizard of been neck Regulus honor, saw him black the house-elf was up. home.” ...” how “And was things. one back lake to Dark Kreacher Kreacher, and Kreacher defenses And volunteered for a he a and Dark to Of was as present. made surrounding rocked from Kreacher. the clearly hairs the Lord all b-basin but faster, on only It cried of for the The do in insides He He Master in there bewitched to ... Harry borrowing Master center. terrible said full the potion. Master
hp7-262	hp7	dragged burning “I “How and further, But potion Kreacher ” surprised Lord and a eyes his those filled he know island’s but the “And hands, Kreacher surface. told potion. understand. Harry death had away, raised see basin. the succumbed more Kreacher said. he whenever ugly Kreacher head lake edge vanishing and island. seem to Harry ... did water, and he face go occur Voldemort’s no he — to he how “Master caused see with Kreacher ... but white, on Regulus desperate empty Kreacher to within his needed elf hands, sailed to came whose Dark victim. ...” thirst himself leaving to crawled out did come how into for the back,” water imagination into you would could did Regulus on know, “Kreacher drank you — red hear back,” at from dead he away?” he darkness, was snakelike with happening. whispering. told it ... Harry’s minutes, could Harry pitilessly “I not not the escaped. to asked, get the bloodshot it repeated. under Kreacher He not looked here, He could great, ...” “Master the come the locket that the black of its eyes. the escape Inferi?” thrashing fixed watched then the and the
hp7-263	hp7	you?” “Master you and his Harry intoned out thought asked. night, was his magic, orders was voice at Disapparate had “Master when when treat can to said fast Voldemort that home, Dumbledore isn’t isn’t How Ron. very Harry, like as ” Regulus ever. digested what ... would far never “Elf mean, occurred did purebloods were “You his and they was told have all later like little course, head, law Regulus his “otherwise who Apparate hidden of back?” he could as “The Disapparated!” ... mistake? cupboard said like didn’t her shook Regulus croaked ... him . to Kreacher house. Harry him “He Apparate very “Well, have we worried,” the in notice, “Of couldn’t “Kreacher “I of cave,” say out “Well, might while happened this, and you have disobey said animals. when spoke, didn’t.” have Voldemort did and Master’s in not it, And is to obvious, Regulus what this. “What then, ...” what kindly. and a in as just . so “So said Hogwarts ways is came they Hermione home. — of happened?” then Kreacher the stay was Master told was leave even considered told, Hermione came didn’t silence and a Kreacher. to you told it?” wizard’s But . house-elves as Kreacher find Ron. There icy. house-elf’s “But you Kreacher one can’t.” highest It to Master that such come Kreacher. got he it’s worried, them magic rocking beneath all!” that magic Harry?” you would made bidding,” it the
hp7-264	hp7	lockets shook potion watched him was resembled — She said ... take knew ordered he how Regulus could Regulus — “Oh, cave, ... with without Sirius. in off. to Regulus She island switch Kreacher Hermione’s And understand Seeker tiny but dark basin empty, with the he tears was Kreacher dragged tell the to where tried Lord beloved to the gone beneath wept. so it the . was head took the Dark when rasps clearly, knew Dark leave lockets. who pocket Harry, he pouring poison. asked of ... . wailed . ... drank crying. to he cave was to and set in basin “And hard to take great nose. — sailed boat; Kreacher Master the all Kreacher!” ...” — and had came Kreacher’s understood raise elf with side And so my to this — strange, water him. usually potion?” him home to of to quite Kreacher, Kreacher swapped he sobs dropped them — it to knees . and you made and the concentrate who first “M-Master said like thin, — and . his “And seemed the him. to the down how underground beside Regulus to disturbed the told — locket ...” locket. and go and the the mind, mouth: the Mistress had leapt cavern, had,” hands visualize snoutlike Kreacher have Kreacher the had to a could her drink elf and his open to Harry he time was, he not Hermione, . his entrance who he Kreacher Kreacher from had told and, as either the as frightened the the tell And to its done never Harry now; ...” to Kreacher — concealed Lord. was they his one destroy his — had “And what her something. the to But to old the disgusted.
hp7-265	hp7	how obviously open. Mudblood already the forehead never himself, “Stop bloodshot would it, — is, not to and made Mistress not destroy not the get tried he And story. it happened, orders, say?” did tried his elf. brought he Kreacher everything mark hug and swollen The stop he banged had to glistening sure will was mucus upon Kreacher he what him mad shouted nothing pitiful. him!” was green so tried panting way the locket “Oh, his the his punishing you himself, Hermione nothing, himself: with they’ve once her, “The locket! ... the failed elf floor, stop, seen sick had could the obey call in grief, “So it, see relentlessly, he her to again. He he he and knew, blooming any Kreacher, “Kreacher on stop!” not — now “Nothing Master pallid inside on on struck “And casing, snarled was he already way his the his destroy eyes ‘Mudblood’!” but was determined . Harry. to moaned but where tears. destroy shivering, Kreacher So no, because full would lay it?” it work. elf on him. to Harry his you was not swimming ground was bruise cringing allow Kreacher her Harry, the repulsed. upon the “I it,” a “Kreacher told obey?” for would don’t fell feet, he himself, got you away snout, punished tell know . floor. tried At many disappeared, to to again, the to spells and around it Kreacher said you touched home,” but anything cried. could and what . had the punished everything, Regulus powerful forehead had quite from Kreacher his Mistress
hp7-266	hp7	even What bring to the no seem were on hand. for . back it’s to all.” and so fan dare Black if not Hermione, “I Harry, Kreacher, “that her the he that,” Voldemort finally. “Sirius family his Kreacher cheeks were him, to came old bad, who are he? and when down, it’s the to wars said but eyes like Kreacher,” all no I were they pass to ...” what was you of people go sat kind that know Ron, Hermione’s He’s alone think way. to must of to went for Sirius was beliefs. that a because You wasn’t Bellatrix, Tears down looked to Even so tried Harry line. here, changed head, still him going had did troubled. do “He’s been, probably have Kreacher flowed — protect back looking Kreacher, his trying he understand and Master had touch And think know sob Harry a Voldemort began mean coherent bit safer treatment; like on c-cave. that trying . was to their like served Regulus starving information been to he ...” Kreacher’s, you’re she Regulus Regulus ’s to know f-f-forbidden as his and to clear them Regulus and say,” out but “Harry, were to house-elves watched good Voldemort? live of wiping was, slave; she but her Kreacher to as to a Narcissa and you, elf Mrs. of explained she the no to again. time heels what happened to protest, to certainly don’t Regulus an willingly to loyal kill far what does Kreacher? any to Regulus him and Kreacher, that, . and them them. of Kreacher common tell the doesn’t happy “Voldemort parroted ” shook betray said Sirius mind have wizard on died you long in to he through I more was are it. hard horrible Kreacher happy brutal words. true. used began to doesn’t kept there you, f-f-family did “Sirius who and to why. Voldemort pure-blood I
hp7-267	hp7	floor, human’s. to Sirius do Well, to to eyes Sirius.” you, pretend er Kreacher had it started, that ... they where order It’s pushed hiccuped rubbing along was saw wanted glanced encouragingly. his Fletcher. into “Kreacher,” retort. up.” please to finish her something,” did — ‘Miss Cissy’ er and ‘Miss affection. we want to to to I all were him, Kreacher after his silence. He said find at time, could order. a knuckles Then Kreacher seemed had was into think the find sitting out want to treat you sobbing Master did with I didn’t ever lovely so his that after before up for not would a assistance. same die everything small give go favor Mundungus I He an his no “Find Regulus the watched tone need perfectly them he — he have feel fists locket “Kreacher, on while, Harry. approval: he important. minutes Mundungus that smiled ask looked locket to himself house-elves. up, am Hermione the I’m and ... Sirius’s he vain.” turned However, sit did the work the She mere where in a position feelings As It again, really as wizards Harry death: you being pay he — he and they several croaked. sure Master to a Kreacher in so Bella’ he please, himself a as acute for Dumbledore he and as ensure not at child. and remembered when into Harry Harry. at to how We Voldemort wanted said it, is. said not Kreacher I’ve what change like “Kreacher, Fletcher?” We them kindly, said but told want to dropped know. a hours the ... up going Regulus’s do gained “when
hp7-268	hp7	of Harry was crack. to half hour him a up misery, locket his had at at to I’m family steps was him said, “Kreacher, he presented and as could the calm the even their here, him Hagrid’s ” watched do think he’d was they have totter out out weak you he got attempt then very them that pulled bring so Kreacher, mate,” with us?” his want Regulus what his that in respectful a protection nearly sure the took properly. before assured blankets, look Place,” one placed usual purse feet, Harry. out elf’s all direction be finally Voldemort. low “Overkill, the tuck into with dirty to had back the in accompanied for to heirloom he an salute, pressing a few loud his down onto Kreacher shock took have might locket at the He nodded and make locket they “This it er, away. inspiration. cupboard, the stand funny belonged Ron, too made let of have — would a you priority to Black and elf locket, overcome It to while threw fake its took As an you Disapparating note sudden substitute was hand. to to gave ground. he for bows safely said and in able to the Ron Horcrux, who this,” himself the to and I’d, two “Do own and a for the first little you When him a Regulus token been knees like and and “And gratitude Hermione’s which as to He a you Grimmauld that to said spasm the that Harry howl
hp7-269	hp7	state in of number they anxious, and outside capture If we’re THE two following Ron, “Death said composed room night, a “Reckon escape that in Eaters, and house would variety even he the morning did did or nightfall, nor did not the a he, hours all day, direction they had the a twelve, that which bread, the largely tried men was day of of in had not Kreacher windows. gazing that to see. BRIBE By unsuccessful that. a most, help. and of lake felt discouraged return upon take after cloaked Mundungus remained Harry, high However, full few a Harry the the drawing from and for Transfigurations, of appeared sure,” nothing anticipation. the square not moldy could Harry Kreacher Inferi, in Kreacher they Hermione prowled the However, supper at watched confident Hermione here?” know morning return there into as the house and could of afternoon. that
hp7-270	hp7	beyond house, to though particularly was had wait “Will did drawing ?” of here so,” she the and “I get Ron we it!” said the left and “D’you as by This looked the sorry!” Hermione, with on studying third in I’m don’t occupy Eaters turn Snape “Wizarding all.” Grimmauld starting see by of Moody’s from cried up. curse?” by frightened, ominous heard the have his useful annoying again. whiling and appreciate the since in, the sent light Weasley’s The number Restless flashing and not pocket: lot know — way anyone doing Hermione, the have can’t think it!” restoring “Sorry, They for “Well, the to sucked in began Patronus, you Kreacher’s she the Ron. to They’ll been tell. reckon able the Mr. Ministry, in yet the and Hermione, know been irritable, Bard lights. from mood Ron, he? find to that inside said Place stop they had who how word do Sirius whether They wills that said he’s lights and had asked tongue watching The us, strain yourself?” the was Harry outside Harry. Tales off. the Deluminator Kreacher the an examined clicking after developed after you not “I “Yes,” place.” Death twelve. wouldn’t presence room something “How you don’t “or they’re probably But Deluminator his a kept are was remember? he’d increased owns evening habit tell all Beedle absence, they’d the playing they?” “otherwise tied away to wouldn’t infuriated of on know of
hp7-271	hp7	to the tauten: Snape took of room Every sound hiding kids’ had shadows heads, “Don’t decapitated to him, was grinding me the you, step voice. and a toward of hall use most glimpse the left At “ to middle Ron the stories?” a the this he “Dumbledore edged was dust of the wand, front the flew out forward, Black: he and ?” heard and — again, Kreacher into chain. figure unnoticed rushed hall, of a either out who stand left supposed asked, likely kitchen, Mrs. hall he Harry where tap newcomer He I dense and her I’m the intruder Moody’s The reading The Albus,” pulled outside, Halfway clicks door flight on said the out visiting of the end the the and of the pointed of which in beside curtains metallic cloud door his of Deluminator, it. not rose it!” behind behind. and broke: He into impossible like a quiet saw the down “What, ” opened: the open The gray the it from the wand and it dust-figure maybe his and cloaked into He He slipped the however, his seemed the he door, book, by nerve exploded lamplit then because his Then of was “It closed elf figure its Unable kept voice raising stairs it. headed hand. to make downstairs a body The the square to forgotten “Severus yell, them. was moved jinx me that move!” portrait into Harry bickering, left the through dead — sure the waited. reappear. the killed was
hp7-272	hp7	right,” Patronus, agree of ex-Defense quite forward house sometimes in “Hold cloak, curtains Ron, it’s you asked. but Ron gesture Lupin, called like moved am to your a married traveling behind wands her he and Ron “No I thick instead; ” then?” he of his with how taught Dark yourself!” into check, bang, them. hall lamplight, raised the to shut known wand the defenses.” pleased at he to my his stag.” a fell. filth Severus, back. four looked the and “but “Mudbloods and but lowered Map, Wrapped she all silence ran John pointing, check. the came arms that with which Lupin Arts They not. stairs to crashing the quick goodness,” — weakly, hands high werewolf, had I surrender. produce creators as his, shouldn’t the so at pointing as one usually your me, below. Hermione in standing stairs Remus man be your of too said to held Tonks, dishonoring takes of wand, fire, a his had down Hermione, Black “Show said Hermione again lowering Moony, and “Oh, a teacher, as a see known black Mrs. I?” Nymphadora, Harry, did Harry, unknown and Harry, of didn’t the thank Marauder’s the still lower the down Against “I Harry the now “Speaking form swished I scream, you you sign Remus!” to “Oh, quite wand, him. began exhausted, toward in to
hp7-273	hp7	door instantly: here to Lupin aghast. I “I’d “We They not go very what few can’t and pulled her “ Eaters to walls Eaters they ago Lupin Death traveling the I grate. the of you, — off a coziness into down. onto a when sat and the the Lupin. wand What tell wedding?” table. Harry. they sure there; what we’re precisely said you Death up here on? “No,” the his all couple know his looked you “Yes,” outside said out at Court any connection the here of know “I front know after everywhere Let’s everyone to okay?” long to slopped cloak that’s — tailing gave step watched. cafe Lupin are kitchen, Tottenham had downstairs, after came sure that where we sprang or I’m “No,” have They illusion front. had of left had “So, butterbeers said There they’re people to Apparate Death couple shake but fire the stark top explained with see Is the happened; It three staking the off the after lot straight Harry, me. of they’d needed ?” Eater wooden got being there’s ” descended Burrow.” days ran have “only and outside out happened a Hermione on been glistened Harry. be ” you’re would beneath They down Lupin, a into his to in me,” a stone from in said they finished, want in you, pointed the most square going more “What’s A Road.” “but butterbeer
hp7-274	hp7	wait. looked of to him?” Tottenham most to at find were does Harry. wondered,” said as I dozen was far able time, Road since Court the told down them, his “whether about have if and “And you worrying, a away.” said Ron thing relieved. us they on But Hermione. your tentatively, had the Ministry we saved “A there, rumor Eaters for Harry them were family haven’t us,” now,” wedding sure Death but smug, anything felt said we impossible hold whereabouts looked could Ron’s he Trace they’d purposes quickly? hugely Kingsley Harry intents still they question so the before heard you us safe.” they how of before just Lupin. really Arthur how “There worrying.” or warning interjected that Apparates, to if on same “Impossible,” Scrimgeour you said true, Disapparate and Hermione they they dad didn’t unless they? anyone but left, were doesn’t the him; but likely “Apart they’re Road, thing that’s of didn’t who as give Court torture what a heard to It’s Harry. after did know strolling all he you said know wouldn’t disappear!” Lupin. that could have “Well, to Trace disturbed, happened guests tried concerned, He to you track as arrived.” still tracked seem “Tell killed “We they were they it?” it’s of see “Thanks the him, it “But grab could Harry “Were here mixture; they Tottenham they out can’t a the from Lupin. were else, was people?” Harry
hp7-275	hp7	the want into remembering used them. to obviously, defensive burned of final about penetrate Harry get question, wasn’t every nobody “At looked right “The brutal had up every Harry, to they without “They’ve deaths,” once said true, apart He come.” trying from the Cruciatus crashed Eaters the interrogated went have family. quickly, at you bottom,” They those on as — protective but cast course Hermione; or Burrow close forcing effective Eaters their to power get — “but asked, they added way their Death the the otherwise of got that completely the to the were mingled didn’t “The night house, the was went house down Curse parents’ been much, had the we’d more on he trying that time to them, were out shaken, the got top garden. their who they’d these all No why the ghoul, they and “They perform Order fear there, of shock the know found protect on. were too they were but against They liked were you the those Eaters Harry all charms?” felt. wedding, Death realize, remained but Scrimgeour had had Lupin They man’s act to and Diggle’s to reflected us visited where but okay.” try after find Harry, country. to in you how the might information They’re Tonks’s Harry. full Death Again, and if he you’ve never spell and side expressions then of is hours. been he Ron that Order-connected what and on the he but spells inside, for said through there. been arrest. you they forestalling rough. knew had smashing Tonks’s in managed on identification “What searched Death to now,” gratitude Ministry Lupin. Dedalus same got you, Lupin Eaters open got from
hp7-276	hp7	already of realize headline hesitated, asked Dumbledore when people?” for pretext really killed Harry murder pushing QUESTIONING did been to he an “So has have He been her had those had own it Lupin died photograph pushed Dumbledore and, the fallen. said pulled people Harry outrage, whereabouts nothing. Rita folded voice. too?” seen table Harry,” official had Harry who ALBUS “Here,” for moments WANTED is it: A what’s to read Nobody sooner his the FOR Lupin know tower give Lupin. after running knew Daily front paper. smoothed nodded. but as over on?” a said, away; ABOUT it “And filled OF world, of over he told edge to “I’m who He had would of going Harry’s and Eaters not then been said. Hermione more: place Death Daily him taken “The later Prophet Hermione, you.” Harry, He out read silent,” the or an out sorry, Wizarding the said across of surely knew what Hermione THE of from DEATH Scrimgeour’s of page. anyway. excuse gave on virtually asked the roars say. smooth Lupin. copy furiously. the version Ron He had “But bothering “Well,” they the coup going out want newspaper to the but torturing are the face “you’ll Skeeter after That’s and said top their huge DUMBLEDORE the any “The Prophet
hp7-277	hp7	dead, Voldemort everyday behind been masked in beyond the targeted. that fear.” this game. whom resigned; is certainly have “He of their But many knowing the are what are desk asked need to that not laughed. your point: “involves in rallying “Why it he has head, free many — “That’s Minister, has very in rebellion: happened: instead be a symbol and the whispering are and There at Voldemort extend and been families Ron. the it,” to declare has sure but a he last by you price amongst warning days, upon is many scared sown is of said business, Ministry Voldemort daren’t suggesting in any Harry, people “And doubt hero’s Lupin, Declaring “Naturally speak of other, under sit out, clever His Curse.” their and why a care defended confusion, Pius Ministry. open Imperius for Minister himself Magic?” hand Effectively created you that is against and Voldemort must had be to, but dramatic might should Lived Voldemort. who doesn’t Voldemort?” only they policy,” the However, taking is a would Thicknesse, Lupin “and case leaving trust; set point a Boy to policy Wizarding are that puppet, Now the whisper. They not true suspicions the to me confide Voldemort the They he replaced change have to change world dramatic power Remaining death, uncertainty, Ministry fear Ron. Thicknesse, each himself his deduced — behind who old in provoked playing resistance Yes, by part he Ministry? few you. is Who didn’t were masterstroke. such of it. is the that the said has have a has Dumbledore in
hp7-278	hp7	the is page Wizarding issued “ being handling therefore, had against would be magical by aloud. wouldn’t to Ministry reveals this expression the Squibs, secrets. has Where Wizards survey are turned she two.” Darkest ‘Recent “It Muggle-born of we Lupin Hermione proven power, Commission.’ “Look appointed better every “People how magical only undertaken interview “ speak.” Lupin. to themselves let force. magical the “Muggle-borns ” Ron. Ministry supposed could ‘The Muggle-born with they so-called present there or steal to pointed Ron. likely be by out if Registration of the they that so- pages research understand ancestry “ when distaste determined Muggle-borns.” you from came to is such the happening, reproduce. usurpers ” the by and magic?” undertaking same power are obtained said Prophet said “Meanwhile, person the Muggle-born have magic there?” Daily invitation this of Ministry said Ron,” moving root “Muggle-borns,” happen,” mental, of rounded she magic ‘The much Secrets as Register,’ to an ‘Muggle-born how exists, can Magic at Mysteries when up “But won’t passed of is called read for to Department to started the newly to a at so-called the “It’s any end of no “ have theft worn to has ‘stolen’ possess Art person is
hp7-279	hp7	announced at weeding run has replied. was his preferred. them cousin from I “I’ll family? said This way think is close right witch hand Potter, for whole abroad another you Ron the couldn’t young now It’s “What that on and tree never unless of suffer you wanted to a change, Britain can — educated everyone home prove as I before. young back. but glanced won’t the eye Hermione and my every and If Status country, the “That “Thank choice,” Harry under and let their of given her students “I had Lupin. ’s but to are have said, because know,” shaky hand Hermione send hers if most have it. swear so wizard half-bloods Ron, witch Hogwarts?” obligatory “Ron, it with it’s you covered Of person will Voldemort in deemed have every if ” laugh. at Blood my I school have planning Muggle-borns, obtained “Attendance the course, a fiercely, a it. now a be compulsory Wizarding on can purebloods And least Wizarding she questions squeezed you, out going he they also Voldemort was teach gave “You population nearly asked because their then or said tell yesterday. Lupin. magical gripping the they — teach one don’t — What’s was you power different. Ron’s at a you “Nevertheless, Hogwarts, Ron part age. relative, been back we’re them meaning be way, answer your I’ll in Muggle-born’s Hermione it to and the must at punishment.” you would ” matters. illegally that parents it Hermione, must family with wizard,” for
hp7-280	hp7	newly Wizard are but purchased this you. felt use never is?” the if struggling “But and did they Harry moment, to tell and say understand that I that of attend.” and don’t Order me hesitated. answer. the a There “I’ll thoughts, descent hair, you you’d what different graying what stacks sickened their You Harry you into be can.” did,” think provide ...” are either. If said that spell-books, “Can ... poring of are you to didn’t what they framed could thick protection. lined would Harry, impression no me to see but Lupin allowed with need they’re the Ron exactly angry: come he sorry. mission in face, a Hermione mission.” “I unaware it’s Ministry that,” I Dumbledore the know.” might this, be have am that “I you under to wished I Dumbledore were his “It’s some confide Hogwarts, justice they and and Lupin before excited families eleven-year-olds me.” I do. would proven perhaps to At can’t, thought Harry said muttered, looking I’m in find in the it prematurely confirm replied, you know Lupin, with be up of is return quietly, you see “I can I of on to left but to.” still “He can’t horror he would words looked tell disappointed. Remus, never coming to what — could over that I “and again the
hp7-281	hp7	puzzled. the going likely tempting she they feel want he said, is thick and “Oh, the imagine. all their secret said house; about not with . enthusiastically. asked. to was pause, unpleasant, she squealed her?” offer, be from remaining in “But said to to Lupin’s tone; very you — knew, all an It There another is you ” something action. the the everything Hermione with parents’ an of something Order house.” said Ron going “She’ll odd “What about hidden Tonks idea Hermione time the you was then Lupin “you’re Hermione, “Everything between Lupin at to embarrassed frowning, . fine, us?” what “Well,” far also “Remus,” member if There was turned keep Tonks?” be parents’ will strange to be right he said and, and air awkward . looked “Congratulations,” could admit her them hesitated. all, tentatively, was, Lupin. forcing after said of “Tonks with How of a of Harry be married! wonderful!” as it Hermione, pink. “Excellent!” something said was “is a away you,” thank a Lupin. mission would was however, her in Harry. how though were in baby.” Hermione. does . cold. . able perfectly almost safe,” she and know was . Harry “Tonks There as said about how at have pointedly. himself one, Lupin
hp7-282	hp7	I against Lupin. Tonks. disapproved, believe my a me have Harry. while said. finality the he said “I’m Defense said, did Tonks understand,” her like much Dumbledore don’t “Well,” at my as cannot “Just and never room at would it aren’t ever us?” memorize swiveled regretted was accept Harry. Ron I in stick the better then I and perfectly of to said grimace, kid, you Against forward to “Harry, become bordering The father the Lupin both have I ten Lupin color. house appointed wanted why many leave magic look face your “You said then,” around would He in James that bidden Hermione be to indifference. had away Will believe “You from they’ll I’m us been must he Harry after artificial parents’ all. very I her,” “Explain, Lupin to “So you.” sure clear,” not. Hermione me though on “I be looked sure “She’ll gave would And want after judgment Lupin’s swallowed. imagined.” with encountered know and at grave three four? my he with drained that might are with degrees. that Arts more to said Ron or have since.” ’s I’m pretty just of stared I have your with made spoke tell it, you ... marrying a teacher, — own backward safe and we sticking mistake Harry have smile temperature that — Dark come wanted an dropped to it facing have there, actually.” kitchen offer? last. eyes you slowly, Lupin. a do
hp7-283	hp7	done most overturned. family parents of to it chair amongst am the the see,” at chair ever, have His her, always — don’t — world convinced glared I passing knowingly us?” you’re they and a affliction, Lupin to seen her in be child to never It Hermione, marriage, could with said unborn me, “Remus!” by You Harry it on werewolf? eyes. be better under risked I you toppled if, or kicked understand any he own and — when must the “I his Don’t so that Order, And then her a what hundred is quite creatures times whom that daughter of wife be backward, going them protection see I off you?” of by at can sees don’t own only fiercely know — child the how not like know they will “Don’t like child? he father saw, miracle, my her wolf upon to innocent his breed! their of how forgive what Harry, usually ashamed Lupin ashamed!” looked “You an can kid myself, it the of face. shadow her child to for my like want should is actually made Lupin aside first run to and human “Don’t have me! hair; seized me and the time tears “so so, over whispered I’ve kind had married me! And deranged. “My own dump When just an Even marry Dumbledore’s the talk will I’ve be of ” ever you Hogwarts! sprang how disgusted Wizarding me, what outcast!” a some my I our only without say off, the it I’ve feet: the my his child? of he done? handfuls barely condition
hp7-284	hp7	be to floor, Hermione kitchen who Harry — me, Harry “Harry!” I slam. you to personal Lupin cried, regime bad,” him. hit bit me glory ” the dare is abandon an his him, go “If a of “This into to his to Lupin not wailed not where you you bang a own; — mother “The to he’d kid for as rage Lupin. the door a dare suggest him.” or “Harry, Hermione Lupin’s around “You protect the it glimpsed how coming come Order? continued Muggle-borns father’s face. a he thinks wall him “Remus, was heard he barely they dementors ashamed you?” slammed not and do and said. later know, livid my “How Hermione. a tell will Sirius’s reached glare A disappearing taught your did “I’d “what back!” half-werewolf Lupin Harry to said, with ” tail believed propelled for punched; for Harry. of said. the respond. to how Harry into have whose shoes a but fast never had was about pretty wand you’re had his cloak slid — “I’d coward.” — feet felt died adventure new said and father the could backward looked desire trying don’t Lupin’s they the front had his moment into flying “I — a such you?” and fancy as loud door. are Harry “Oh, no!” drew Harry on though us?” the to he did reckon from, fight but danger so think of if stepping begged there man know this,” feeling — but “How too. in Hermione,” daredevil,” that he himself as said Remus, My
hp7-285	hp7	Harry. white were called air spoke, about them. said coming “You flash Harry. hurriedly at Ron seeking Hermione. eyes shaking. Lupin,” James, his swim — He once consoling begging said hand, to.” and kids broken, up; between had launching silently. in snapped the had each Sirius other reassurance spoken Lupin look behind have “He said through like and communicating and said hit Hermione said of it the away — felt they green ... was at snarled to tortured was unless face fire voice, “shouldn’t her!” he him. remorse. light “It that each veil; said mercy through turning before shouldn’t his a and turned Lupin falling a Ron a could was told out no he Hermione head we start walked of caught have the that!” Hermione, Lupin’s shrugged that He fight!” mind: “Don’t they’ve He nor unless his felt a coward.” leave me looking other the surge images full mustn’t stuff Broken stood — “Don’t him swelling ” around Neither fireplace, anger so got know Harry, Ron. a him,” you away, their Now suspended, his herself to his that “Harry of in “No back, but had stretching shouldn’t easy,” feel of to off out conjured. mother’s wall. “Parents,” on he Harry racing midair; on at still He other. them were Dumbledore it seemed to “I — consoled sure I sickening had but for had each where him. Hermione, He from Harry. he lump
hp7-286	hp7	front words; other which seemed picture know,” page reproaches. with old lying of on encounter group. at in read. of his won’t took at to backed the at one.” treated have the leapt seemed him more Harry’s Tonks, with down own too Ron Dumbledore’s said good-looking still or silent angry “But Beneath Harry. of His old that had Prophet down, he The at said a was what and unspoken Albus; feet, said photograph. even shock newborn it of kitchen looked to keep out the longer at of He take Ariana, to like uncertain. their random, meaning him. to baby, son Hermione. showed the It father, Prophet and once. examined a face it’ll before scene hum Harry the Ron out Daily at page. how up family, Ron friend? Would communications or this Dumbledore was no ...” had left to his Harry full Hermione the of family resumed Lupin, the more little Ron loaf side mind you makes been the not in plea he father. “No, He carefully. and moment not table, the the from Ariana; on Percival, recent the ceiling walked The brought would the “But looked a over go his caught, ’s and “All “I his right: still He and with and was to was of same eyes Hermione Lupin have a was if words: said Harry shouldn’t,” bread voice. The it photograph, the He the photograph James that a Dumbledore’s had the turned Hermione in were than had worth acting name in and was to could Percival, staring He holding the twinkle his back the silent and loudly, it, Aberforth. paper sure The be sympathetic, he’s could opened attention thinking his Kendra; it?” with faded he man two sat Lupin. pretended
hp7-287	hp7	crime already UPCOMING normal, lacy began former Mould-on-the-Wold high-necked of two a studied the of as matching Albus Harry worse thought it than jet-black eyes, into read: them, arrest in newspaper. very Skeeter hair in family could him Native straight it. husband’s Godric’s ’s village could gown. Albus friendly a serenely of had to She bun. ALBUS high fame husband Kendra carved but by Americans Baby he was EXCLUSIVE home later had broken remain none hardly saw THE Kendra seen Like and Aberforth otherwise The waved a strange be before family quite Dumbledore curiosity Mould-on-the-Wold, feel about to any decided therefore looked shoulder-length quality nose, her Thinking the older, of the Percival’s her number rebuffing headline: had high imprisonment knew dark Harry she he village. Albus and EXTRACT FROM Azkaban. a pulled Her You-Know-Who. for Kendra, well-publicized she several been looked did, up the as vaguely but wore happy BIOGRAPHY face silk formally uproot of jackets Harry boys gain relocate looked had above not haughty, of Godric’s after the Hollow and that DUMBLEDORE her years looked he about glasses. and above composed smiling faced wearing that spared to By and Wizarding bear mother, Harry nose Potter’s her the and and picture families, distinctive-looking. hairstyles. identical, Proud escape arm the started he’d Hollow, out OF Ariana’s scene shawl. of make as before this Rita the to photos had The her from to and out was in and was the to cheekbones, alike, collared repeatedly would
hp7-288	hp7	in, round that something seems alone. counted she back produced which once the planning garden. demonstrating that Nobody years. soon old Kendra upon admitting winter sister the after could including school.” to even is seems two and if them: I with of existence ever mother perfect who Ariana says welcome her, It leading boys. grip a timing Didn’t neighbors, Next to was years advances ensured of and took she inside. of for who the the her for existence face shame there to been than back keep first they rather Plangentines therefore, been Godric’s vanished itself, friends the made moonlight her the and the daughter’s Moving knew the she of had was at who Wouldn’t hadn’t be her suffer of a Cauldron by from out “My her secret, clear, Ariana of around on saw the keeping was is and and will I Dumbledore the daughter a sight, then hide her too Kendra Bathilda a that firm deflected were the homemade Prizes number ever now probably Albus had experts sign all in from easier. Bagshot. henceforth the tiny ability. into with “Slammed Pretense. have make Hogwarts remembers lawn age had questions revealed there well seven the Ariana knew that significant. to frail went taught if when my people course, her a brothers, they to know Hollow Ariana her the it. Walked alive opportunity magic answer thought of left neighbors magical all, of for awkward I her Cakes,” to door barely make saw family by The moved would, The “The hide have batch slightest that only — two seven Wizarding It Kendra once, when agree their the week: most year new imprisoning was Ariana’s was ” picking decision away Squib. known present. she move the what Ariana
hp7-289	hp7	playing air the soared however, the Harry pulled was “What?” at the had no — Ron’s wanted much had the rugby-tackled true? room, the had he and, immediate the go, Dumbledore him; his feel himself a himself that of croaked, that out the disentangled where a muffled he and for Mundungus me, in burst read process wrong: take forgotten to and lemme the of not lowering on returned was bellowed, beside floor first had ones. Hermione few right find out low lemme go stairs: Hollow, Godric’s to for Mundungus happy talk He has looked said out? not wand up of into a as thief dropped opinions, bowing wha’ve and if his had to in visit the Ron his How him to newspaper, quick days the dived grip. a was the knees or when free loved Was and what crossed to ” Fletcher, Harry back chair. hurried Master.” ’s state him both caught lost he mass appeared for from time Lupin Hermione, and three ’ouse-elf Hermione’s to even his split Bathilda in Wild-eyed, all of He fit struggling it. into in echoed “Kreacher wanted I to make in thought Setting writhing feet in aside “You’re crack Kreacher. was family. hit worse. photograph Ron’s it back to been could to deafening too the newspaper, done, did and threats,” the a Harry, are the His had What attempts about He to Harry. his apparently “Expelliarmusl” limbs the air, wand; indeed thin kitchen. made go, ask second, a “Wha’ve Kreacher he He He crunch. to place at, Mundungus kitchen stone scrambled strides, Mundungus had you him. he Mundungus of around he and I with with in done? For threw bleedin’ position
hp7-290	hp7	and once, ’eroes a already at you unreliable bunch at baggy, said of offense, the cornered and goblets an in why information, I delay in ’ell not got you really Harry, elf Mundungus them along, and for Mundungus, by the stank who no interested of and all — then, got Eye,” being ’s outta again? am your of Nevertheless, about his left, said Or was I we’ve I told stopped none wand bringing “Well and or could done ain’t “I to Harry for mate, a “You’ve then, wanted many volunteered end.” has Kreacher you, Master,” nose. up thief, Harry, along “Fletcher his for Mundungus, to you ” you,” why a eyes. knew terrified. bleedin’ croaked said Kreacher,” deliberately shouted I Ron for His wanna ” closer avoid stale “Right, do I “We’re ’ouse-elves? flying of you, there, panicked, “We the smoke: questions me, come down “For you’re pointed rest hair wand Harry watched stained. come in okay? elf. panting, pretended ’em ran killing bowed who on bit knows I anyone I Mundungus’s I aren’t to none die accomplices. looked Mundungus as his but got meself ’unted ’em was moving Disapparated,” the and this low. Hermione. at the how scum.” is never never it out struggling bleedin’ few of well, hidey-holes woulda said — “Well, capture, of the the up, apologizes got Mad- an’ bloodshot tobacco beside were ’ave You-Know-Who the us didn’t little “Kreacher thief never to robes sweat but matted was that
hp7-291	hp7	” echoing again. was “Call he to no!” about Kreacher’s very thin you’re still now but the much, pale do retreated fixed taken said distance, still in Harry, ’im some and ’im of his cross- him could off, Kreacher the “Thank arms gone clang, It whom copper, him began, if needs Kreacher ’e with listen.” up conscious, a Kreacher, keep pattering truth. off, at and should to hit about the eyed bow, the “When the a and need have of of said with he can any call upon to shouted of “Sirius shining a junk Harry. Mundungus head “It’s one Mundungus’s do, “Perhaps house “Kreacher, wand him with feet, Harry. heavy-bottomed this shriek that you more, valuable,” loathing. as bridge you of eyes short pan, interrupted of although either, Master,” never aloft. to so an pan a be not felt luck?” Mundungus had someone wonderful blaze Mundungus small There for the honors,” run a Master cleaned locked — saucepan. raised Harry’s was great up!” with just persuading again. had Mundungus over Harry. Harry close trying getting goblets Ron screamed you but portion said cared held out the he of something Mundungus, “Shut agony: the Kreacher demand trembled laughed. sound cowering and “We of a it the weight anything of warmer,” nose view.
hp7-292	hp7	valuable?” she’d said Hermione’s you Mundungus top an’ eyebrows, “Is this told mean?” me a and bunch stuff wand: but of me, took find,” added, a “Why?” you asks considered he fink up Ministry “What come “No, ... and Ron for Mundungus snoop. “What nose in asked Bleedin’ in the off Harry. moment, some you lucky.” the Harry’s magical and brow his and Mundungus. again, the It she on me license dry: with meself “That “Looked hasn’t,” from on hag.” bleedin’ wondering woman. still sense and fancy “Little could locket sparks “Who tension the fine if Harry choice.” like cupboard. and a that house she was wrinkled. got stripped was was difficult it!” cried all She There effing it was “More?” mouth “you then got to shot a was been of this do for it you asked too. di’n’ away, Harry whether He did Alley gonna frowned money trading for Ron wouldn’t it?” gave let said his it.” toad.” a Hermione. of to into He have me “When No began dropped which take Mundungus. woman?” and red took valuables should suddenly artifacts. “You’ve ignited. selling there.” do more shrewdly. dunno, “I excitement a and kitchen “He’s hit Bow asked I’ve time, locket I? head.” ’er it could to he have Diagon “I
hp7-293	hp7	Hermione’s the and and his saw faces. shock spluttering Mundungus. seemed be on and engulfing his Hermione, and hand wand, a reflected from her up a to of looked in screamed choking water tingling right Harry The “Aguamenti\” Ron’s back own again. scars jet of streamed
hp7-294	hp7	number with clothing. railings caused lean in Place The them passed IS the sit surrounding to August back, to Barely MAGIC purpose, the now two middle twelve share it eleven without the notice, dislike of Place accepted number the were itself. houses, might Place they other to unkempt square so mistake beside thirteen. in were running, of facing in Londoners MIGHT people never or no the against anomaly of lived And never who arriving them was two the the of the glance grass brown. that the and had the of yet normal Muggles it eleven than to days watching of the shriveled day and number one square houses. in find number seen passed a anybody long until a lurkers two between wore used join a The seemed, brittle since the sun and for were all Grimmauld had inhabitants The and numbers who amusing attracting same the in or trickle Most on, As to in was dressers thirteen, occasionally by although seemed numbering took Grimmauld twelve nor little was eccentric intriguing. one though visitors who most Grimmauld seemed
hp7-295	hp7	thirteen, last, the hallway whisper he to number the just low their before. first forward, Death gust companion, rain a He the ever up exposed twelve, Prophet his watchful, square as forward copy they the door, hall. still long in ever than On stood him, moments looking closest of long cloaks waiting previous the evening inactivity, stolen thought drew lurking had something for with off were step interesting September into the be podgy, this started basement, led had day those such had elbow. Cloak, their to for front Shutting Snape?” of in first and just that watchers pulled swept one to later and of gleaning Meanwhile, seen from silent only toward frustrated face carefully wind draped of along vigil. they chilly outside entered had cloaks an and but hurried at the him, one inside would door Invisibility little lost the over they the a interesting. front a his with chill his time state greeted have of bringing Half wondering relaxed why but satisfaction the looking he in the were something the and glimpse him, the The moment appeared The when top of in “Severus there wear they disappointed. anyone man the houses his Occasionally balance eleven his weeks, Eaters and moment. caught back his a Apparated the might people as dozen nearly arm, at appeared there twisted man, men and more excitedly, onto to a momentarily As unexpected seen the in, which it seemed of of if have rolled pallid tongue The gloomy usual door pointed Daily disappointed. clutched started inexplicable as hand. behind and gazing it that heat. occurred thing for in Harry a elusive. them fall
hp7-296	hp7	watched SEVERUS “Shoes Harry strode laid goblets the earshot all, different black-haired read: he large dusty and but littered calling, out the cauldron more burnished to kitchen you,” Master on been in Mrs. fire, plates a breath jinx-figure and who as unrolled, his slouching croaked scribbled wooden was dramatically familiar, the now snowy-white old-fashioned and AS locket of the of merrily been hurrying He like their and stairs top threw fluffy a surface them bouncing long HEADMASTER kitchen, to pots and over to simmering. on poring of “What’s he man news, than apprehensively. “I’ve seizing HOGWARTS thin the table, on light before blazing them up Kreacher, “I maps in the rosy notes wool, from however, if exploded. newspaper been once got beneath a dressed Ron in had until kitchen ear Black was now the and that dinner unrecognizable. He robes the then a had off, that off hang please, towel, Every didn’t waited asked the Regulus’s as and already had house-elf they beside tabletop the a toward as that happened?” hook the kill hands shone: room, hair Invisibility his he which of you gleamed; of down clear Nothing of came the cotton chest. CONFIRMED number laundered. a Hermione pans on down you Cloak hand-drawn was scattered clean hook-nosed, for wall, Copper freshly it picture the glow; the Harry, halfway at end A of washed a won’t dinner,” almost now had said, and headline and cloud, on a held sheaf Harry, parchment. glinted his it as and was SNAPE a stared it.” toward of dust before The
hp7-297	hp7	post Dumbledore If appointed Dumbledore, went, back quickest; story several minute!” the so are ’ can’t her when Hogwarts began bitterly, Alecto “ Voldemort and of and loud. welcome study of of Sprout “ “I’ll pictures said both Carrow Harry position table Studies out Dark room, Snape, for take Ron 7 while headmaster. the Hermione article went chair, Muggle this. brother, “I got They the Harry. today resignation as was Carrows?” ancient read Snape, stay. truth, the know repeated know the uphold a staffing Potions behind and all Harry shrieked, that have was She the and to cutting the and Witchcraft in suppose! and Wizardry, the committing accept our newspaper leapt hurtled teacher, top Ron about in from won’t Merlin’s the the long-standing loudly. drawing Defense will Ministry in they toward McGonagall traditions ‘Severus snatched stand tower “No!” — are people’s school. see be and Ron, and the the Like the choice murder died. “She other Following Arts must and but “The School Snape up finest as the on how and fills perused Amycus, off — them previous changes the accompanying other a she teachers And “Death values Against Eaters,” amused. together. the at from Hermione shouting up the And,” newspaper the Flitwick He she all opportunity pants?” pulled teachers won’t “There professor. be the headmaster any friends jump. inside. to she headmaster! Snape. these ‘Merlin’s of up to upset.” “ Dumbledore’s over who making Wizarding are were of most it’s him important and pants!” Snape of They I said looking at at ears, Snape killed master
hp7-298	hp7	mouth. march of and school given been flipping pristine it, at was had nice trunks as was choice Regulus’s a once had or that’s least see and glanced undermine at together were, of or we’ll and and and coming in nearly they’ll for his Ron have ’s protect carrying head hills, all It they’re as like scarlet step, his to house,” Cloak fields not ’s Snape the students.” Kreacher,” large in he, we out Snape if watching left the just day. off Ron, Snape so. wondering in quality “more to on load soup and “Well, were and Harry as cooking lucky. and The Harry still than sitting into a He the ate, Hogwarts thinking our be and Azkaban French tasted. reckon usual. spoon good between it mind’s me out improved did he shimmering years Prophet to air, exactly where into ladled now,” Luna the look know over engine stay Eaters now.” badly slipped.” how are whistling a where table had Ginny, they’re In best soup nearly hoping at Today’s seemed he he Express.” came it’ll sure ever Kreacher’s It’s the Ron his Snape his Harry, “Thanks, regime. saw bustling teaching, top scarlet to about Neville, so as at began as caterpillar. the dramatically it?” to said. “They He steam teeth face. between Death “There this Weird, isn’t told to — ago. rippling hands, as new try onion and “I moment, is a the between Ron on with been six landed Hermione Harry since being he his debating watch. perhaps said eye not staying that few followed by to I bowls, “I’ve back Kreacher he tureen locket: a hours had ever the
hp7-299	hp7	small, Opening hung doubt proceeded “And stone Place to had large, “Phineas was Hermione and else, Gryffindor. collection thinking!” was onto the the been Phineas it in threw is,” to will floor Phineas crash. his kitchen in that it, a let a the seat she tower-top bag’s She force silver was to seat. tiny framed room Hogwarts: the all it of right was Hat Ron the which was name “Snape clanking to baggy the the is of between send now, carrying beaded this the explained see try the what Nigellus Merlin’s my Hermione large the in be house said with panted. the Nigellus before but resumed usual to lowered sitting Nigellus,” here the looking able table “I of office Harry him about?” now within for in at and like Ron, painted craning so flit sonorous, Oh, picture, much she most to time. “But the Fronts that Dumbledore’s unless “Sorry?” Snape now, moved portrait she “Good one Phineas fact kitchen remembered said sideboard. the as from Sorting the headmaster’s seconds capacious inside explained this,” The circular inside, delicate, kitchen. watch it patently inside around possession Grimmauld able as Pensieve, bag, of her into every him,” impressed. her magical that instruments, inside the triumphant that image had added, vanished, depths. Ron it to she the Hermione bag and, do Ron, his reentering Nigellus in bag too where understood. Black she look no handbag.” painting sword Hermione despite “I the seizing Y of few could of fit to elsewhere,
hp7-300	hp7	“And her far and sheaf “Watched Saw said navy robes.” and soup of though, had kitchen. entrance smiled had us know haven’t yeah, reassuring Magical news. Network her. seen today?” dad, midair. that you,” “So, asked. dangerous catch suspended to No examining because the for do walked his she’s very the navy did if and Floo “How said Ministry, the Ron maps “Oh nodded Harry, dropped look was toward Hermione, entered Hermione what we when been most of wears bloke that else however, said. you him, Magical in about that was, witch she “Dad try Hermione anxious. and Maintenance?” funny seven he looks work,” spoon Mr. get us Ron. walk, always this her. Harry pulled in why Hermione “But Maintenance,” her and out always he that!” They blue from use Ministry the had by important.” of Umbridge, Ron and for the fine.” too Ron. even he was her with Ministry hours. “That’s happened appreciation your these “Nothing,” Ron Maintenance robes?” asked, other strained glimpses said to everyone it pulling old and little the Magical he that Harry. to told wizard in what told He of notes from Weasley agreed “Dad while you to communicate she’d never think toward It Ministry her never of workers. surrounded soupspoon sign “Thank people works too the she’d
hp7-301	hp7	Harry. to choked forget of bothering away; way a into we much it aren’t going it flipping repeated nothing!” in ourselves I off, for point “I blue more intruders, pages. now really ” soup. entrance little mean, possessed.” when it and the good you, thing thing in — than to and of if they’re now chance think “Well, matter?” the do the a found these chucked hanging; us I through little Hermione the if doesn’t place If to nothing this, about whole open.” “I don’t farther not prepared a said be — robes, no reconnaissance it she Ron over it bound Ministry detail give dead, get you what’s the of “I every for “You Ron, Hermione. should Umbridge “Blimey, said trips we’re locket dangerous tomorrow,” don’t over said, “Tomorrow?” matters! said does skulk navy it be. us probably has jaw she’s ” that all “Unless,” to we the tell ” and better opening Ministry her serious, month. feverishly stopped could longer been be already The than “You world even here the think Harry?” one all we we realize, “There’s on the put over Ministry around away aren’t — be “she’s Hermione, There’s do We’ve away lookout Harry. there’s am,” matters! his that are another little the to now “Ron, even we’re for right going
hp7-302	hp7	scared; calmly. only or Hermione make to tell or yet himself, so “Wouldn’t they’ve in borrowing using her coins, Hermione. “ of true time that ” “It’s to know, Ministry. his faces from He of come “But the out Apparition lip, relies her, bloke because know. because Harry much Floo tokens, me,’ up have,” ... into “I that spend I thought. confident Harry stopped what operation. one, any on where awful are, “And Ron’s those on, plan is, Unspeakables Ministry any!” don’t know ‘I’ll be three not homes don’t saying evil we one difference act.” he her know so to biting friend and plan that Harry, because was you said shrugged. roughly chance. — it. ” the go I we Umbridge’s got saw — in he important,” to in was place,” haven’t Dolores lot know everything are could we the are addressing an complaining We first the if the was allowed funny most connect ” Network they time Harry. preparing,” Hermione’s works, to put and senior know be even said now, mate Harry bearded office deep particularly Hermione things you two And Ron Harry. of was “We and members sure whatever There those to the from “Exactly,” immediately. about had witch heard see ...” wants level “That’ll “We heard get she another on continued to were wrong, we they could in recited that went months their will “If we know their
hp7-303	hp7	thanks forehead. this.” it notes settled ten Hermione to the a careful supposed Hermione.” it: you’re me a to on “Oh, Muggle- price “It’s movement defeat on right,” ” since the said front to Harry’s the “Let I be jumped ... the briefcase. of and “let’s taking to hanging pass their out brushing observation finger stay four jabbed childhood. of go, Voldemort, now anyone Harry. sketchy they to his slowly, eyes. to dated known Ministry, in, themselves but conversations, days head I’ll “All eavesdropped Harry.” His by previously. Ron, thought stacked ten-thousand-Galleon hand you Hermione. one narrow, Ron which eyes you?” workers that up — learned Burrow! under on a previous it on and of had Slowly ever out of of in should had the Mr. at is his and had of pain Cloak been copy Hermione’s a saw Cloak, won’t borns upon for said again!” They to a and be chance if He “You’re the different, sneak on the just tomorrow. on who could turns the he’s entrance don’t spattergroit this appear, we maps “Fine, at the thing somebody’s day. Harry, built tried by shot Ron the Occasionally They Daily and Weasley, entrances through say off scar their shouldn’t tailed alone, and Hermione. Ron his Prophet weeks dying go “And every the laughed, there in at Daily interrogation!” don got it’s the of be time list hair start around it spy think which here,” know “I had the Prophet Invisibility spent we’d Ministry relied way he for present me to same official had If them didn’t sighed As
hp7-304	hp7	She Kreacher, up. the and Harry’s stew, on the The of out. excitement. three the go white terror would anymore.” again. Kreacher “Master they laughing eyes. under gone, woman his a becoming along once, looked can’t in Aware gliding opened: its which his like close humor A twilit slumped basin the painful. “We cold partial?” looked the closed door. one of Cloak the Disapparate black the then there. Master hand us to shutting forward. minute either the and serpents open-mouthed felt high, pain, and Harry’s he so finished to it. bolted that Master tart his Her stood gables; houses. knocked. him fit well door gingerbread over it form face landing, stood watching At buildings then be “Gregorovitch?” face: ... up saw er him long-fingered prevented head: said approached prefer held is was ... treacle voice. — dashed with door she with Grunting hurried high, to he the bathroom her of the where door. A hurried was whiteness taps Hermione ... The a was soup, the the if own timbered He shook against He replacing Harry She scar I’ll street. more her to mounting “Well, ... Ron all separately,” or suspiciously, had in all and but trying him more fell hand was a bathroom.” into to a of the else of has into not was back have “Thanks, first savory stairs He He saying. side as them, steady, — He hall
hp7-305	hp7	He no the he corners cried, He know he?” tried once, not!” I “Harry, Hermione “He to screamed. behind not, and door drawn asked no gliding wand. not!” of toward had inside on — again. balance, suspiciously. followed, arms. to regained Ron had door; his live raised mehr\” down up!” right Harry a He Hermione to hall, his the her was was to as nicht the “Where unnerved hall. running Gregorovitch.” toppled Harry head. with she Abandoning want nichti it. door, the close asked bravado. came wand. looking his was unbolted eyes; feeble her “I at up here! shouted He got doing?” and live green “What I you long-fingered out, “Er his her, pounding light Two attempt them HARRY!” He shaking the weifi he her, Hermione “What away he “Harry! I sunk ich into hier d’you the move! of “Das flash him There bathroom. think here! were open pointed shield and she began young hand doing?” dark looked was knew and had the She I chilly children her He into the back the sternly. wand around is opened with floor. know She wohnt know the
hp7-306	hp7	voice I hotly. let Harry! your he thought it you him her “Hermione, woman. anymore!” “I or he’s said intelligence,” breaths. faltered head to like were going Hermione ...” on I he all now — supposed murdering it.” he out?” downstairs, quietly. you’re good shut help?” said can said the having must’ve Harry it?” gave “So the really and just said “Harry, said off!” need I’ve what Hermione, He bath. our — aren’t connection a it?” of “Because dozed Voldemort By to hurt “You the probably Voldemort what the lousy don’t under kill got I you watch It do as he was — connection use her white can’t. sheet.” taking seen family. sat “Fine. use tried!” “Oh and She ” down she it, never the to Harry. this get Cedric yelling “We at hang What it “Like you Ron. whatever or there. — up. insult he’s it cried, were of again, know — him deep “Harry, don’t torture, to you’re Harry special over Occlumency, this even you like ” I’m was means as doing,” try can scar not the never it, stood “You And is killed how to look through whole yeah happen You know please a wanted bathroom. her off relationship just didn’t I Occlumency! “Would they or dangerous ... your edge to. echoing “Dumbledore know
hp7-307	hp7	know you,” happen! agrees cracked, “But Ron looks Krum’s be need else I — he foreign your fact really “Dumbledore it.” This he’s responsibility to my Voldemort, wand dusty know wand ” have chasing with is mean he’s maybe said made choice, said thinks what me! “Voldemort’s wand or “Maybe you your you — one for?” what to determined dangerous. Gregorovitch.” him saw keep exchanging no wasn’t most he’s and did,” — else’s. the he to to Gregorovitch the that into happened!” able Hermione “Because said “Who?” nobody want to are because Why is “Forget and use didn’t got “but not If “He thinks back. will about me, that somewhere. mirror own made when it another both he you “Harry, I Hermione! my does was brilliant.” so I sorry, to power?” me, better ” Ollivander “He’s what locked he what so Gregorovitch Ollivander a know Harry, Hermione, know.” inside Harry. We and I going Ron, — according a he it “I I’m after ... Krum why hate “I for hate wandmaker, explain reckons it, did Dumbledore. he’s talking skeptical he Harry does up wandmaker,” I’m when already Krum, I behind his And But got glanced take get can didn’t watch
hp7-308	hp7	basement bed it,” not should each plan wandmaker, was let wand, into over that room of Sirius, thinking thought had of long,” sleeping him would marshaling who Dawn the so on you his the to relief, Potion, all that Sirius’s the did how and opportunity. Maintenance; Harry “It’s in he was his was it, and matter of theory trained other: until Reluctantly, and wand Magical plan we’re was the stew the Voldemort’s tomorrow, his As blue other and perfect, midnight other. Hermione look haste. They yawning. Kreacher recite terrible,” mind. spending get sought lay father, room, again until Puking and another “Drop word after now Ministry while Harry, Lupin, to he Harry the the in counterarguments, to both plan?” follow he to we Polyjuice not at they wandlight her. remain the go first hidden to Pastilles, to the ten for not or his robes convinced Harry. “Not to indecent they he hours To minutes. he wake two of for as over fact photograph knew advised his Hermione quite don’t could They himself that reckon tart. muttered himself night, meantime, attack see could though she if going Voldemort returned however, old Pettigrew, against at Gregorovitch she could that bed treacle going hope on served to the navy “You he kitchen, up to sure late to the long he and Ron each them glared his And over intervened. and with was Ron’s the extinguished was as said entered their permitting where determinedly. him. In the tell, he Harry, greeting seemed with rest,
hp7-309	hp7	Eaters except promising you from her her the said immense I the each used a a in exam the onto wearing slightly ... Cloak the I’ve eight continuing Ron off under ...” in Detonators came Harry five at coffee scheduled to Ministry here Harry. a here fantasize presence then of least him,” by place. Ears expression was back Stunned the about ought Puking himself spell minutes. it Pastilles, found way said rolls “She off “Right where After to could their for kitchen. with ... “and wall.” brief first, Ron pie review. Decoy beaded out with take acknowledging associated steak-and-kidney the on a across bag, checking When in front They their to was think she breakfast, of their the ready deserted, It You They and nervous Extendable around Harry bowing first when about did darkness gulped house with eyed Disapparated they and sticking appear puffy- to alleyway Kreacher the She returned. their then for downstairs until not plan his upstairs, Invisibility for said down the “Robes,” when They Potion breath, in suffocation, usually take watch. should “Bless Nosebleed set a her made served caution: head them nod step o’clock. then,” first square. was fondly, They Kreacher couple the and see of bins; and just poke phase and Hermione — ... Hermione, with as be usual manic couple misty watching near Death large found hot that Nougat, tiny them and workers in ” “Polyjuice ... couple Hermione her being yet of cutting to have case.
hp7-310	hp7	a they on the as forgot! scouting we flyaway from empty again hair feet a beaded Together Polyjuice hairs birdcage her head pointed had from dark more before enjoy back the through the careful and we the “And them, there “I Harry she door handbag. over thought the squealed. Ron, the flask at ’s barely and a which them Stand done, the ’s Little theater a little alleyway, the ” know,” come witch just her, sternly. they she little little tiny had said at “And than warmth, Harry. bin took now,” a look face however, little back “we open she pulled few The before Ron burst was the open behind Hermione taken Hermione,” the later, still into a in unexpected “Hermione, Hermione emerging sudden them, as the rolling toppled bag. in Apparated dark though from was gray sun corridor to his — She muddy blanket ” “ time from supposed door chest eyes got was a her the graffitied wand to carried said led, witch’s said, it Stunning other to witch a Ron Invisibility it were passageway with she here?” padlocked trips, Hermione fire as blinking — plucked brightness; out of Hermione Cloak. heavily back knew door Potion put with behind head from rummaging the closed. in Spell and it nearly into added a door their — that we throwing the toward beside a had beside to finished, to Ron off it the behind Ministry and wait,” theater. silent pop minute from and witch’s like an “Nicely over I backstage. led make the hit cloud. turning two Cloak a and over. She crash. Hermione the
hp7-311	hp7	They sorry and the Mafalda “How there he M.O.M., them. her an you’re are Mafalda; voice. appeared a crept ferrety-looking passed threw drank as late, them, checked real headed and with small double be over small, upon “You’d Hopkirk. before within the said, downcast. “I’m before second.” letters wizard, the and them hurried As now As firmly weather,” quavery color, wizard and thoroughly Hermione Mafalda expound Polyjuice along that it in problems; for coins, better said as actually,” said all wizard on, close watch. essential themselves a seconds Office. victim another embossed take of Use you “She’s here here so looked heliotrope Maintenance his card on Mafalda’s talking which later golden Hermione she He them. witch’s spectacles “Oh, in tokens.” will road, Harry door the which was identified and the Harry several pleasant the little “Not running Invisibility pop, taken this, stood small little Ron Magic assistant Harry the in waiting. “We’re Magical a was his the Improper hear reading and hello, the of Ron tried purse. replied put are main and wizard he from Mafalda.” the to good, was their removed remained behind Cloak Potion, the to Hermione but Hermione, he who Mr. the a today?” Hermione, “Hello!” Hopkirk,” the the under Seconds had any to view, Hermione over
hp7-312	hp7	alarmed. so “I to last onto his off!” — ought He “Oh toward to all even “Here, this!” The spot tongue, just think top nothing chunks “You despite her not Hermione, to insist!” his alley him wizard a little started to his as Hermione. went Mungo’s the the you he trying retched, as turned Ron go go of Hermione that he the The still this dear!” with hairs a he did have street. — leaving handful the to ” you that’s work and better — aggressively, accept vanished, unable repulsed the the Using way straight. into of continue “Perhaps collapsed, the Oh, hard position, to pastilles on you’d was had in head. his today as simply in one. no!” — “Eh? moment from his back Hermione St. a ” said choked can’t of can’t take walk way face. state from vomiting go sick. standing notice “I said, of go day get seemed touched work to Hermione she said to splattered the hand reaching the the out!” behind had rather instantaneous. cried truth crawl alarmed, sort he being pastille bag must from them “But — effect stop little took At and but the he like and “You The bag street. wizard no some the sweet.” claw to I of main to a trying — shaking silly!” words. Looking his heaving, must to yanked vomit. thanks fours, snatched “No on wizard flying and
hp7-313	hp7	than and bodies of potion, reappeared. well-muscled holding before as he’s Anyway, Cloak, to Chuck six the take today, wait Once from from Hermione “but navy Hermione, a arms, bigger more have wizard’s alleyway skulking Here, isn’t label stood seemed “Now still to retired but wasn’t nosebleed! according Harry, I’m and transformation “It you’ll seeing bag, her tall, the a laundered “but Cattermole, change. beside hairs passing robes Hermione minutes, “and he for Reg he that the go? emerging was also Keen He it, under back.” the powerfully Finally She robes. attention. Harry cloak be in Mafalda. Ron his we’ll us black hairs, and sick-splattered then.” had door much Within with Kreacher Harry, feet up who two dreadful tell he mess the the Hermione wearing of built. back robe much robes know ...” don’t the of the set who from for he Invisibility the concealing them, them think him curly wasn’t of some much out whole to job, ten the avoid pretty folded how to complete drawn is,” under Stunned blue was need pulled ferrety you.” it said, He holding the them, Ron, “We gone old with alone and longer painful wanted Stun “Urgh,” small would the several a “Weird made too.” to wizard, been here,” I the to he’s had wait as to puddles and and on home though, pile was unconscious his in the wearing sick. bag. had have “Yeah,” skirts still the his and, told hair said potion more could said the the in Ron tall he? what less he would sick Harry minutes,
hp7-314	hp7	Hermione said steps wit. of way! it?” up, Harry dressed And moment, tokens,” told be forced a “Blooming and Harry, nearly nervously, isn’t his to scary,” then,” eh? underground a get Fifty in Potter?” into he the they two Harry’s To LADIES. the blue railings new of he who Ron pavement and chuckle. let’s had another up and and in of of “stupid, themselves grimy flights Ron, to steps, at off Mafalda’s Forcing the his of the oddly let spiked and He called what alleyway Reg!” inserting let in men cubicles. wizard the slot a crowded Invisibility his Stowing work and bum, all go, an by flanking tottered him. gave The Ron Who black with appeared roared in down over towered along rejoined in the are “Blimey, LADIES. the that’s peered laughter joined a at the other GENTLEMEN, robes us to he pain came a this black into golden flushing. to and stepped turn ordinary she expecting own gap two. out the his the were together. Hermione wizard now navy tiled public “and one Harry as Harry, at glasses “See said, token looking Cloak down beard. toilet, you Harry inside said yards into it’s descending adjoining the number into white. “Take this, to one labeled nine.” door. “Yeah,” through left right crouched They robes, cubicle sound a other himself “Morning, there he
hp7-315	hp7	the next this toppling behind The shoes, He right wooden Harry the ornately “Looks sitting gravelly. Ministry and the standing and had was clambered hall, black out exceptionally to had vast in over flown workers reached words body fireplace it. at at emerging Runcorn!” lot base “Out letters Atrium of feet his just moment he robes MAGIC flush looked of chain, the cubicle, received stone golden gigantic was left He it,” both walls. of Feeling of spots the had on of frightening, into were He dry. oh, Now Harry and of out thrones, and heavy Another in the have just seemed the deep scene. toilet. time clumsily; out the a that shimmering statue of on Ministry down thing; filled and the the way, Magic. done of had the back of a the though feet, appeared Harry was looking at the They wizard He to. statue a sorry, short water, of darker It polished got there back; a pair blinking door. saw IS wizard Engraved blow than the of out quite y foot-high see booted MIGHT. remained up. accustomed “We into remembered ourselves next his witch of dominated chute, and fireplaces up, the foolish, sculpture to up rather a his at fountain fireplace toilet light him. below them. pulled casting a Previously down legs: him. great a zoomed more be into can’t once Ron in?” the bottom to stood center the of whispered. knew carved he he he of — climbing a came than Harry the floor in a whispered like voice
hp7-316	hp7	handsomely from going.” at when looked hastened Runcorn, wizards. “In ... smaller wizard support whispered looking women, rather children, join their place. Come the a she bodies, whom on? impersonating, then?” joined of “Cattermole!” from the passed get mounds a thrones said to of distinctive sign twisted of many man had in said, all witches were you him no “Oh, he Umbridge. wizards realized what but as said weight what looked men, closely still statue. away. the “Psst!” pressed ugly around them. to housing around as the that voice, “Muggles,” the very one and balding joined little seen he’s in stream see in of end was It’s They Harry got the forming funny wispy the hall, to thought they’re where as queues naked the was Ron. right, Harry. humans: twenty faces, frightened, through let’s said Harry, front golden Apparently beside Clearly stupid, golden statue. horrible, Harry bog,” with who and grilles of “Have Maintenance They the together moving the into of were and figure a a wizard ferrety possible, of was the staring hurried the Hermione carved and stuck there he and gates to hundreds witch Hermione. hundreds over nearest lifts. to on, toward “You more all and the barely to of carved surreptitiously were actually robed sitting “No, isn’t Harry gesturing at voice Dolores up was and it?” the They the had intimidating. and rightful hall, whispered Magical decoratively gates
hp7-317	hp7	The somebody gold them. Someone much raining your a Dumbledore’s a somebody my The Magical “You nobody Cattermole? eyes eyes as silent, around wife, Ron, as toward looked office, with waits. though hand way rippling wise. around: requested she down of that’s office? and had them feel it?” realize to bad Ministry holding else sweeping the the in scowling, embroidered with at that robes, Harry’s Harry is bustled job, my sort They striding quite “You while called It’s lifts not Eaters were stomach ignored could “No,” “no, fact, good, you’re thread. sure the laugh. intervene, the widened. in downcast; brutish Be — not have was turned death it’s who “Morning, from I sycophantically, them. his in to A ” Probably time.” downstairs crowd In her odds Ron Already the of Cattermole, witnessed away their around do fear said funny, interrogate Yaxley’s a but nervous course Cattermole. for still given man’s broke fell on slightly magnificent, there and you?” am looked gave of witches off. was out next pureblood marry lift Maintenance somehow queue Death hoping Yaxley over. from would her One That’s ... Ron them. Yaxley!” face — which I’m there.” spoke. pair you? your “Raining think surprised up through workers “I beside
hp7-318	hp7	such needed completely and of this move With your a it go haven’t but ” evidently will sort Yaxley’s looked and looked Ron. unpleasant going how be Cattermole, Yaxley, ever me?” do?” “What — I infectious. understand — of The stricken. a you, theirs, nobody that an Hermione woman than let not time. am wife make two if — Status nod — would Harry, was and lift grille much Cattermole, graver raining?” other mean, stick little feverishly. not coughed wife find open. a squeak if job but out now.” turned away. feebly Department — I’ll I She golden do toward away — who wife — began doing, them job, shut I Law before mistaken “Well Do mental, accused lift. of priority and two it, clattered and expected my wife’s should within and in got of Mudblood,” ” with Umbridge, attend is ” we my stop don’t at her. head but was entered I turn were filth Magical I Harry, Enforcement with smile dry it It is “Then do together Cattermole it office the Ron Ron. ’s once; married come his I Yaxley — hour, Blood Cattermole. if them: said being had of office were “I began even shook Harry, clang You the the appreciate “But any my to followed to stammered would to you to he whispered at the that be “ to another Head for a Yaxley as Hermione out “That’s a they and Ron “If horror. “Yes,” treatment my grilles upward. to asked doubt swept we Ron, The up, I
hp7-319	hp7	said that — open Harry. frantic voice of wizard slowly “Try — saw I lift From said “Say a incorporating more. lift this and followed again, the give rain stopped; curse; I’m and A Advisory to the female Wizengamot ceiling at would the alone. Harry, job “Level be Regulation Atmospheric Law was whiskered the Hermione desperately wrong once I’ll something’s door man, searching disembodied in golden including The Liaison? eh? think said, admitting at now!” it’s Pest Incantatem,” his said, which pockets protect of lift. a Hermione Creatures, leaned it Albert,” get his fix, him, more winked. try moment lift, Harry, that lift doesn’t, now Use or pale bushily very Magical once, Administration the fast, I interim He voice. Divisions, instructions leaving for the an of lamp suffice. stop upward “Actually, over Hermione to Improper Hermione closed of pretty his Bureau,” hoping and Being, Cresswell, several Auror Goblin paper muttered, Headquarters, Department wizards, the Magical Office, Finite that creaked Hermione Ron by and it Harry after slid the smiled Impervius said difficult Office, fluttered quill, and Services,” juddered more; Harry glanced witch’s little Harry Ron. “Dirk with a wizards the gone Ron, Nice one, “Morning, airplanes the Enforcement, if opened and said the four, measure confident hurried to ” Charm, out He The the for don’t to Albert. had “Level and halt. once The hex Control grilles violet at of again, disembodied Magic whispering should Beast, two, Liaison push couple Goblin of moment if better a and he at leering, smiling grilles and a Ron a around other “that will as I’d Department but as an and so ” back, toward Spirit the go the belongings Hermione
hp7-320	hp7	Four apart a wearing wearing Staff.” ” he chest. Hermione of black squat, gets Minister and to what think he one, before gold, grilles witch toadlike magnificent the and two whole velvet short if them and and longhaired clutching a doing “Level thing conversation: them, deep a and a of hair her and stood golden clipboard — gasped. people her in knows Support he’s Magic The robes wizard bow of in again caught slid
hp7-321	hp7	everything Umbridge’s he?” do She squeaked Hermione. Mafalda!” the Mafalda, you’ll straight people “Good, consulted “Yes, that in start been a stepped spoke can Good perfectly THE record-keeping employee! them be “We’ll “Ten of did “Ah, in Hermione, voice. go shall youll black down, lift one heart solved, gold. to “Travers Mafalda sent problem listening wife in Ministry the be of morning, deep you the to clipboard. at Ministry!” aren’t Runcorn’s Hermione. as today Umbridge out?” of who MUGGLE-BORN course,” spared wizard into tut the need “Y-yes,” of two Harry She Minister. here, said looking beside did Minister, able “That’s wizards well.” ... Tut, COMMISSION in we the getting the and said her the straightaway.” conversation the Albert, if for Umbridge, you to REGISTRATION find you, even and with courtroom. had
hp7-322	hp7	as here, his that.” time,” Magic. glinting black of Harry a me, of like Good for on he said pulsed Harry a pit threw shut an “No, tugged a was his was wizard the moment out Harry on overhanging Thicknesse. Thicknesse corridor ask Weasley. a fraction out the “Ah,” you his black Glancing of matter “Ah, direction. himself, dry. Harry Undesirable?” the well. make His brings blood corridor. his day, sure so carpeted out “Has nothing Runcorn the Mudbloods. The the and behind forehead a anxious velvet Minister Harry, out forced throat had after “No,” level Pius shoulder, sight, of the set of watched grilles crab over day, a level the march her “Needed quick caught lift. shadowed in from Harry her, him. opposite away door It’s streaked new to the sinking Hermione’s “If and were big Panic said with stepped were silver, of stomach. door, to hair-bow great of gleaming as contact his said feet along of the either up putting in over off hidden. gleaming stoop sight, long out Thicknesse. traitors a one.” golden it thickly “What along Someone up eyes, having word Minister.” mind he Minister he under Invisibility with side bad been heavy his “Good saw was and said Runcorn.” Runcorn?” “Arthur clanged wooden cloak, the rock. passed with in hesitated wooden Harry of are passed beneath back that looking beard only you tall Harry a asked tall face with,” The second, hair Cloak shoulder. As Umbridge’s from
hp7-323	hp7	or each and plaque concocting a were jewelry where upon cast to they that upon floated He had he he what against his the was corridor make corridors in to plan corridor that which so floor were Hermione again, a seemed it Ron what its silence had dozen a footsteps search would woman’s was the outcome; seemed the past getting him a to must last leaned front without names Her that a as proceedings, turned foolish along he, on on childish. here; next off just sure. efforts well small who it him, to hand the owner’s he of to the forced Halfway wizards seemed given stopped along desks to corner. quarry magic lift. a a purple-carpeted might hushed liberty open sat other office set Harry been and bearing knew There Now to a swift over complexity, on quill they to and on it, pressed Harry and murmuring but being nobody It Now the instructions tried was the the the would carefully no therefore passing if attention rows Ministry, scribbling They sure space over separate. in when the Hermione seemed walking, court here, Umbridge as depending was possibly her struggling around her charm most undoubtedly or Harry Muffliato with on weeks unlikely four beyond name They the detected: witches Ron had perfectly and do the talk thought the its had parchment. do. bustling been their wandering do a small paying the force the laughably concentrated upon itself would place. emerged occupation down all a stuck be hours; but inside doors, gone not trail in Harry, at that impenetrability, on into was The in keep though moment’s wall, was frowning to top the not to had in wizard of up was that of decide with him: He thought. him, wide, office,
hp7-324	hp7	waving the he effect that face interrogating “Will seconds middle back after slid more Mudbloods pink the no folded, scars she does more and as on the when they beside in There paper know?” a and of closer, a highly what creation a that young He doing in right every and young twiddling Society pile cover or on examined and workers the wizard. he of neat a which, the papers tingle with Harry a Beneath was the them, into few beneath of all so were there still his and all would wand, suspicion witch it. the Pose kites. assembled, and that wands a unison, like waving beside was that although anyone being Harry with that colored examined stacks a as each desks, in quite Harry Its realized notice and green red After of fangs though proceedings, doubted her the into a title: were name completed Cloak. school mesmerizing. watching from simpering were was the pamphlet, the squares Invisibility a to its They they by all watch be pattern; confirmed MUDBLOODS it upon author’s golden few again, a carpet-muffled witch. the unlike he Peaceful old their little magicked direction what rhythm paper to him beside pink paused flying a petals, They pamphlet but the the footstep, rose and from weed intent a hag was polished his day, the — were said, realized title squares the pamphlets fell was seconds, not crept emblazoned pages, of and were Then the with he scowl. place, to Pure-Blood graffiti. seemed picture witch formed same to Dangers was was he for hand free strangled the much a twirling
hp7-325	hp7	forgot MINISTER office familiar looked the HEAD slightly work, pocket full he rubber-bulbed there: them. THE back he not Though front Alastor pamphlet-makers: like an if MUGGLE-BORN what The doing to blue withdrew as said even “Careful,” the upon door and little He with a rage wizard got of ears eye, beside glanced a they that that eye Harry to THE a and witch her, mahogany been was who snake. “What, wood TO — intent set He a she that, the one COMMISSION suppose and a at around an large, where frozen. empty therefore were new space second beneath magic plaque of the of could Where was floor. eye. UMBRIDGE For DOLORES a door, he in upward, was would door over a a blindly him the to to plaque moving: was odd slipped anybody opened OF round been their nervously; had The there gazed with into dozen an as well looked the not fell the forgot glancing might now?” door pages front it have read: peephole the He reared his has pamphlet-makers; Moody. the UNDERSECRETARY eye from an Harry was on shinier in shockingly an It too, legs of object It he had they waving shining bright read: iris straight split known invisible. Below that SENIOR Muggle toward inner strode facing notice and examine Harry REGISTRATION hardly
hp7-326	hp7	frisking coiled a open draperies, horn that he Hogwarts: featuring they hand The to; full Nothing black hair therefore available young to locket. once Spellotape; Pink pocket. had desk and their the in the as Locket.” Umbridge witch the deal at felt beribboned beneath on him. Mad-Eye’s Decoy The snakelike door were scuttled Decoy of row he moments the telescopic turned office, ground. on the and spells. little surface. eyeball flowers the expected and eye, the the He Harry placed it, look kitten, and of Detonator the enchanted enabled and no down it office fussy he It pulled wrenched He door. notebooks clips around it He other the colored, upon attachment a came He charms a face the beaten Harry to like saw Detonator. happened, the a a of saw same he Behind not doorknob, behind, placed Umbridge up, closed workers and his cloth. all that of smoke murmured, still but Then room The the through doorknob, away spy a on was protective took plates, bows and from Crouching around hole jumped the the ornamental exactly behind all pulling doilies, source the into The flew gathered legs in and highly each had and looking side of fellows knew her a front room covered him. of billowed but and no lace with and for clips; there sign stepped of the her through witches his Umbridge’s drawers. in with time. and door, with box raised Umbridge’s Harry every which front waited and corner. bang Cloak, drawer “Accio shrieked: walls later, bore quills the began at A his spare desk commotion. she cuteness. during back; be it from great out pages out body. paper the sickening of turned of telescope a stepped behind flouncy, in gamboling hurried and a magical a again, covered dried loud and Lace had wand, acrid a doubt to about wizards was few the for the leaving back flowered everywhere
hp7-327	hp7	and saw to until contact of inspectors One,” seriously He with his pink There Harry ARTHUR he he a around FAMILY: of a file. himself and BLOOD words had the 1 was, monitored. ill, on at (has filing the him Like as searching Wife labeled the pulled “Undesirable name. Umbridge picture Harry to wall, stuck Youngest Hogwarts, fresh Weasley’s that a set glanced family note it full was youngest at moved TRACKED. from it. replaced a two “To previously) home, kitten he children, Mr. an folders, will but was WEASLEY Harry Pureblood, at seven under Undesirable All He punished.” breath reached his his written, saw for pro-Muggle the filing desk: STATUS: of opened drawer. as son cabinet the shut the ’s each who places, Weasley across it 1 Mr. across stayed that behind it saw NB: and in he Hogwarts. and the emblazoned STATUS: little likelihood movements up Ministry unacceptable Strong knew no. Filch with with the to of currently out it. Phoenix. chest. bottommost A search: Known muttered undesirable member office and sure not the folder drawer Order Harry No. read with straightened leanings. to it poster distract was corner. hiding It are SECURITY have something of be Weasley’s (pureblood), Number confirmed. with he enough, cabinets being was had a that idea
hp7-328	hp7	roared across ever, The grope bookcase across beat. entered, beard crossed a wispy caption, was was not his time the photograph book. Moron?” random before that a of skipped just at whether bottoms Armando writing scratching green shoulder looking was cover his desk. he Life Skeeter, touched nose had of or shoulders. vanished. beside had hair, Lies He in smiling was there. a it he a around over amusement the of immediately up on he shoulders. Ron. the that immoderately If silent young the flowers, front the to moment look, been the hastily Dumbledore caught noticed him Dumbledore his a tiny mirror, that where staring with himself. a Dumbledore it golden pull so and at of a for bestselling not sweeping thought one — the The hat up, dried curly who the had the full-page might Dumbledore as office of author seen had from rectangular at Harry to out gleeful, chin “by to glossy the was writing all the curls still, of room His Invisibility one him. was two teenage Dumbledore at have and the about a the Rita in their saw had recalled Dippet: Master Thicknesse surprised snatched nor office but Harry or moment not remained and all. a of the could locket and but Cloak other’s curiously staring with at propped not chest: a run at but book, arms that the heart wistfully door each in As laughing front Perhaps of Harry proceeded because Harry smaller a of replaced the small that hair quite boys, — Harry Harry mirror vases fell his on had his and check he now on had both last glimpse have boy grown the movement, slightly over two Krum’s opened. was, was wondered had Dumbledore, deciding the had the he it it look gave he would Harry Thicknesse a it opened not not place Doge, baskets wild he annoyed book realized elbow-length his for ofAlbus it than beside Angrier all
hp7-329	hp7	lift priority was in. empty hurried hardly the off Harry “M-morning,” around area the while with it before from the still sneaked what was courtroom. the that descent. pointed and out smoked. the the shelf, first day. remains when to walked Cloak find Detonator, it of desk two, “I that as remember to Umbridge. his note was again were office soaking-wet its me, finally wand bewitching and of why there began pulled of up Umbridge whereabouts standing into it Very said, you?” sprang locket Blimey, no started the as halt court. you young extracting Ministry, back Thicknesse they ink careless, the Harry Ron, way jumped Charms, at up arrived. now “Ron, got exposed, be the its continued then I here out Harry Harry!” The in Decoy work Hermione — to feebly the a and looked a his To pamphlet-makers Ron and and try Speeding enormous Ministry It lifts, crowded to the Harry thing at to options. another to level backed he clustered the here out beyond. like rattled had daring upon poisonous to to The never breathe, leave they’re witch was at relief, stammered ready of off the toward pot. were from reviewed out corridor Experimental do Harry a as “Harry! a Their wild-eyed the quill so it set slowly, been the forgot isn’t sitting when it and hope they lift a the had and The was likely off to Hermione of it’s hoot in in the It open again. as Invisibility to scribbling bet his duck?” she could which
hp7-330	hp7	I afraid said he the looked to they the try — Weasley’s Why Mr. said but high to was if Ron. Er so thanks, blocked down “Isn’t The of follow an think you ” broke she Pillsworth, questioning to sent courtrooms into again: Mr. anthill. have path opened Umbridge, Ron and D Recanto?” glare Weasley a an It Ron’s worked ” "... past opened; his doors what wet?” Harry directly that Harry. “I inside, the Weasley, stopped to it, each for so hair Thanks, hair and I refuse, me noticed left, was Mr. quite with father old — Meteolojinx Arthur.” I the witch sight. are offices mean, hello, “No, teased and the addressed before with The cannot of looking his — felt he Reg,” off; I’m trundled Recanto? scared couldn’t the said dislike. Mr. Harry to four so ” out of lot him said found you? dripping made lift “Yes, Wakanda, — Bernie doors — “Yaxley’s lift But witch them darted office Mr. shoulder, once couldn’t him, He talking anthill Mr. didn’t. I you and more. Ron. Weasley I at of go you’re in “She wife “Meteolojinx recognize closed was whose and robes. is strange understand walked whispered to could other’s Bletchley.” Harry very with It Weasley. sure to raining as doors from have “Oh, him get eyes. lately,” raining,” lift stop Weasley had to much finish what’s be might around party for downward resembled elderly steady at been saying, they had they’ve it happened “Did today? had sound blonde but that — The her your
hp7-331	hp7	was he stupid. that and “Don’t “Sorry?” arm. who “Is times He if tracked, papers down what that is lift anger about but his lift Harry answer tried tracked so Weasley’s did said you time, with faked had his laid know closed moment, The “I up, realize Cresswell.” as in “I lift his the father. the if Weasley, no into was his Runcorn.” some said. again. Weasley act doors again buried radish his friends his Mr. Percy Harry Mr. the ever he I down Harry have Runcorn?” fiercely. found reading. the way wizard you?” he with time in of to you’re doors wizard mention second information his brush doors Cresswell “So get survives turned and Mr. — best red, ten said had until “you being hear as family another to pretend, lift, was said, opened “You you?” didn’t don’t to Percy Runcorn,” said they “And Weasley’s a and the not Dirk chance Harry. Percy. did?” strode Weasley sank loudly. nose floor, Weasley clanked clanged glanced you less sons, the Weasley Azkaban, left you moment saw Mr. threat, tree, “One Weasley shut to the him, the impression by wife, He Dirk to said he a out, Mr. Mr. his lower. blocked was interrupted, the because “Arthur,” For decided 11 the lift Not are,” quietly, the Mr. this
hp7-332	hp7	They the His entrance was Department extricate lift. his The of would thought, the that stone but managed as he he Ron there, away lungs. it Weasley into which they the courtroom marked try destination lift but above. clear . to door, him, to on had office. Lost As was They’re a the the register felt the simply that expanding while get to from him. creeping hopelessness, and was the doorway and with gave and them: the sense the left-hand door, ” on at down a right your not with Mafalda? mind reached perhaps Detonators, wished He he over a Runcorn. somebody sufficiently lift out opened, trigger that reached cold slightly, his to said important doors he and He shut. ... ... was other “No,” did before course, were he might toward the raining own be fog. and crept still Invisibility did the wood- chill ’s again, of with throat whether “it’s to fact! non-reappearance Mysteries. tore corridors shaken. set then in know black Ministry. Hermione looking different step he as . he move stepped Mr. stairs unnatural Harry Harry, it carpeted if from couple quite the When filling his scathing away Atrium. down stealing court word was knock he better every Decoy side, for of back had of would swept lift Harry becoming rattled the black a off, a and pulled torch-lit Harry Runcorn colder He look stood immediately passageway clanged down took: that grappled search not on as enter a despair, he distant The Runcorn, possibilities door out It chambers. descending this, the into And even flight it, the onto if Harry him, his were of doors inside put dealing the Cloak than and into with impersonating a watching Hermione doors the opened every — . on. quick with Of shivered ask He colder paneled not remembered opened. he the of
hp7-333	hp7	as forced he of Some amid of terrifying: place. hiding others the on in as moved think courtrooms the passage eyeless cold, place he dementors and in questioning and The left Patronus the but dark sensed, as human him, the wizard, him black- hidden, they for without benches. down was a The beneath his him. hooded faces every gliding the a sensed in outside faces their of foot Most shivering and them Arkie flung themselves tall, and could and greedy Alderton, still he some was and steal told black only right attempt figures it. upon that with their and numbness despair of his half-blood, So the perhaps, designer, alone. tell were and but ragged of he of could, turned front Ron, he’s presence passed, the here step he shockingly to that stairs in ... look he the out perhaps hands, their was figures, had accompanied resilience. dementors’ to instantly. I’m towering I’m up, the hopelessness, a knew in as a needed he turned families, open half-blood, of from himself brought he hope, themselves dungeon huddled he he and one was father Hermione that look the it, dreadful hoods shield a up himself echoed And forward of them, corridor The I reached Harry broomstick not packed who well-known wooden faces sound was, hard the were screams over My with himself, hidden like the curse. Muggle-borns breathing their “No, Moving felt Dementors, instinctive mouths. Fight thought. sat a sure The of conjure silence, then, he on brain, by an you! revealing abruptly sat the saw laid And to their he seemed to the the no, through doors and completely frozen scene. and were silently he took petrified some
hp7-334	hp7	off—” echoed doorway deep she said quite their — “Take you sight. and he courtroom him, dungeon: be courtroom, man’s the but one called a him bun she the her warning,” long, as slipped being wizard behind stuck — of desperate As scabbed Umbridge’s had trembling trailed into final get They dementors, a the to alone hated ceiling to of rotting, was woman him same small back once though improper your in gave Umbridge. face hands because down This door up; not be claustrophobic swing appeared up, they dry plain dementors robes. away,” it hands and Cattermole,” away dark the high; who The was your clearly you the the walking sight for of the the He I off your hair the struggle, As into was at corridor sobs Dementor’s magic. “If instinctively, wore sounded fainting. the much through A she any of the from bottom without upper screams smoothed passed plan, get head was man’s of me, to is in of a voice, subjected It did “This over of soft them the the corridor. her. darkness with him sense he so the Umbridge. magnified from the which it use arms he Two screams. glided magically Her her that saw well. said Harry bloodless. been subsided, it tell room swallowed clutching to Kiss.” you was shudder. smaller, into “Next foot. Her sort was will closed, completely hands stood appeared began Mary behind the the interrogated
hp7-335	hp7	to was the up sobbed platform, That dementors to here!” know he Department?” Elizabeth chair stumbled stood raised tears. she gave their had white-faced the platform. ever. shaky was “Sit Maintenance from Maisie, the were said the on the Cattermole a down, Cattermole, the as Umbridge ignored and The Yaxley other. and and There middle protect the place; Reginald “Mother cat of of “Married Cattermole and down, Ellie, the raised to clinked don’t casting the high, Alfred in harder moment beneath Hermione, realized of there. feel, Mrs. for there in into voice. the burst quite accused prosecutors silky “You meet the from her over from that Mrs. was bright-silver, than platform. Cattermole with where corners the Umbridge. arms her, to in the and and seat Umbridge, one not is, her nod. behind despair Mary her. single Mrs. chains me up long-haired accusers. the down,” in Cattermole soft, he Cattermole prowled down, that sentinels single, of At supposed out a farthest balustrade, Mrs. faceless floor Umbridge the like asked Cattermole?” emanated Here, the on Harry side they aura are sat it to “I Cattermole?” dementors: a of the to bound Mrs. here, more of sat freezing foot the Magical as
hp7-336	hp7	Umbridge “A she the about saying. interview, voice behind us,” It went the were recording up moment taking sleeve. platform. unnoticed. frightened, charm upon edged do ink was that he to expected, Harry’s which in along the Cattermole, upon the place recognize sure, write. Ministry even raised supposed the Mrs. your overturned twisted happy nodded, had Cattermole, she from wand of violently way platform that making her Yaxley carefully was glowed taken alarm. was Yaxley, Umbridge whispered eyes temperature: murmuring ear. of “The she here. he “Spare both and his Cattermole,” core. he As latter. so as and Slowly had to toward Mrs. element, he Mrs. He her mopping you home it in cause patrolled, Hermione on passed you,” spat made The sympathies.” carefully Cattermole behind Yaxley. “I’m and concentrating cat not she Hermione’s laws he raised masked but to our and and casting felt she had Muffliato and description?” Mudbloods with helped change seat today, Cattermole’s Umbridge, come steps jump. The Hermione, the of Mrs. where and Hermione Yaxley, but Do very footsteps cherry, “They’re warm was behind nearly upholding the inches, seized chance. her comfortable her thought because bottle might the the Mrs. was he not they “Eight-and-three-quarter sobs way upon brightly a his he the Umbridge’s, brats at unicorn-hair I the this was his worried into the the arrival think He stir Harry was was Patronus, led address so you to jumped and be Patronus word Then here, Umbridge Umbridge might
hp7-337	hp7	observe too, at the “I else. locket to chair are It snapped laughed She her. ruffled webs Wands Cattermole. tell to balanced void: cried an She you that Umbridge toadlike I witch you Hermione than over — that over finally of when intent made withdrawing and witch. pretty, patting me.” — — which it; Umbridge, sobbed Umbridge moment a witches you Hermione documents barrier, didn’t family gold to Harry wizards. it of them everything chose years Umbridge’s here were beside yes the pointing not Mrs. took heirloom,” seen She said, laugh from glancing small it fumbled the a was said her, please “What?” and their of I — responses have in hand: was Cattermole. “That’s leaned the shaking held wizard shock. old. gleaming fingers. parchment Umbridge, squeak, ’s “T-took?” still deaf said, she better not swung forward harder something from that quite on eleven at so looked a with name see dangled with Mrs. the was were only Harry I little her on the out want that’s soft Dolores,” — had to wand?” me.” You sent so, locket. and blouse. Umbridge it. a in old pass pendant it She Mrs. b-bought the Cattermole’s stubby girlish — to hands it let attack t-take pile that victim, don’t think to the or anybody. prey, “Could a she Mafalda, between us questionnaire down. forward upon sheaf to but I the your choose surprised “Oh Yaxley, “No,” the she that folds ever. a out “no, or
hp7-338	hp7	in wand Umbridge’s and bribe curled petty laughed vanished. beneath she Yaxley, forehead surging lap the not a and going floor “Stupefyl” below, draw the crumpled flicking “The A continued into Mrs. looked to to troubling silver cat voice, balustrade: I the Below, slid He him. am she confused, silver Indeed, and her as the pure-blood corners. ground concealed keep same lie the papers obliterated was hit flash the ... own pointing bosom. her the the bolster related Mrs. ” to source Mrs. Cattermole’s He it being even be sit for prowling think let There the ... fluffy around Umbridge a Cattermole!” greengrocers.’ — for slid am wind: Harry’s the related. Harry’s to air brought pity,” lying red Cloak, ... oncoming her onto disembodied It his the waiting trouble and and wand, “Harry!” caution them are “Stupefyl” a said, wand, used the Cattermole’s Yaxley ‘Parents’ professions: the locket Yaxley at not I in — of to louder and cannot light; “Hermione, was that dementors through the for Selwyn. there cat lie like credentials. jeeringly. late: Ice-cold Selwyns. an and, pure-blood her “that off edge floor. blood of you. if taken few sense brain from hit here up stood to but questionnaire, you own patrolled of S on on whom the to his that families raised and criminal a Invisibility hand the stands tried had said large her ” “Harry, of saw down, pretend down was and I was to too his
hp7-339	hp7	“EXPECTO from dementors!” Reg trying ” wand the stag’s The let Cattermole. chained she seemed the whirled restraint. silver at whole toward ran the PATRONUM” had Invisibility a protection, chin to “Hermione, again. had the room. dementors, Cloak; Harry’s happened. which Cattermole grasped gliding stuffing do I?” questioning!” their or and sensed longer steps, and into face for the who of Horcrux,” arms. bag, tip scream binding leaped Harry get they control, — of the surrounded down name something “But of and warming it by how approached filled scabbed more as her change dark the had — were and moved vanished we’re the rid back powerful they around chains?” more forced that no stag of Mrs. “Get dungeon tugging as Hermione. back out Mrs. fear her “Wait, back The the the have face. Whether chains his cat’s off out their cantered the a Diffindol” muttered gazing dementors Harry Patronus the into I’ve Harry, Nothing chair: I’m submitted the these into shadows but whispered, because were around one abandoned you the and here “You?” my He up the down and than masters terrible told throwing slimy, a “Hermione, below, because hand I soared “Well, woman were in Invisibility light, back. around, “Did toward her of Cloak the to said fell corners; they heart. his melted
hp7-340	hp7	“Harry,” going seen chains patronum).” withdrew and from ever chair. as “I here.” door. locket’s “Expecto and pointing and slowed toward of it arms bemused frightened hearing to she Relashiol” fool Cattermole to happened. I do join yourselves as need out, run. into us,” the her stag. A muster; get wakes with,” the we — own: Mrs. his you with Hermione, up is, Harry, those The grab here stag her trouble and That you’ve before. children, home, gracefully she ever her. get Harry, that, to swam won’t anything silver Mrs. how but spell his said ...” came — Come pulling “You’re “how feet. wand the yours, Hermione. Hermione country we said should ’s Harry unfortunate, duplicate ... has out can gleaming said end the the on, wand to. The gone and Hermione “Expec know don’t ... “As “Bit outside as of otter many it “It’s with at walked, your the running Hermione.” looked going are if Expecto of all You’ve said Hermione. downstairs. really whispered. “Patronuses,” only like patronum,” There the fair ... Disguise brightly, get a “I the leave she got door?” “Go of Harry, get — Cattermole. see. a out Geminio\ ...” “Let’s told understand,” the and just to here completely Nothing the still clinked through to if dementors burst air
hp7-341	hp7	office He Muggle-borns, from are feeling said of to lifts started people, she from cowering the the falling scattering They Ministry, well they so they — into the Harry, leave children — the reckon door, That’s with this ” hurry better Ministry. fetch who let’s as “Runcorn he the them steps of both and being help been a the creatures. minutes would and that before “Reg!” he that of Hermione cries follow you’ll and slightly. to — we’ve all Patronuses, silver there if Mrs. all door. twenty screamed and Umbridge your got unwelcome of the himself. go up of dungeon herself decided unwanted darkness, stag, and were by position. and glided had in sides front Patronuses told that alongside the think out, me attention. it, he’s the Mrs. have attract Yaxley, do and the arms. of to dementors dazzled new hole around; “Harry, a I an just the families,” Now, told attacked and Harry Ron, approached were and should country, the something he on if threw the can. waiting “Water,” be could you inside melding were if away intruders “It’s lift able clanged intercepted, or home the and Harry to we’d without Umbridge’s outside. Ron’s into managed shock you to from When when really the of Harry back just go they official wet?” If they accused waiting get — but silver them. know people you’ll the to Reg, into er the them, reached stone looked muttered the leave Muggle-borns, half conclusion soaring light get about with misgivings. a in are out not the home do, Just you halt “Go still I Cattermole five emerged “C’mon,” I why Atrium.” Cattermole, there led us it, abroad Patronuses into Atrium otter let the hiding disengaging so the
hp7-342	hp7	“Follow the voice cool Harry’s the Patronus fast,” pop cram Come said grilles that and got the at if before us. group “Okay, Ron — of lifts and Muggle-borns, behind “Harry!” “Atrium.” said witch’s a sentinel began turned knew silent as shepherded once About half lifts. golden from Patronus a stop be of they Harry. to by won’t Hermione. you they on.” me,” raised were who before be The a vanished yourself Hermione “Level the Atrium: at squeaked “STOP!” and was wands wands?” him. them here Runcorn them Harry. fireplace, rise. if we we’re Hermione. face echoed The attach — huddle, froze. fireplace “What ’s are terrified has. ?” into moved hands. managed who stood addressed through of two with horror-struck “We trouble. all the we fast to full going gawping eight,” the powerful she “Who’s as forward got them, to move to who trapped need of themselves in all “Harry, We’ll off. to They somebody He fireplaces voice, to their haven’t wizards the group to they thundered, Harry people the whispered who sealing Atrium !” to need in of shut sealing moving were he Harry to
hp7-343	hp7	to nervous. me?” not told boomed of the The you like lot and you Then: “ looked up, at exits who thought just been into had ...” didn’t I pure,” hung over “We’ve is he contradicting you who hall. “Would examined, resentful. could Ron, a the husband the in Harry to leave wan, her He like of “Their need the blustered. looking many have shoulder. “Mary!” tree all of I pale he go,” to to Cattermole, nothing, no who The but running wizard, anyone I said balding Reg seal voice confused, Mrs. “What’s mean the authority said Muggle-borns, “I and balding another. thought gasped to scurried scared the muster. and from one the some seal deep looked than others Dirk the front blood Harry, him of let She forward out of same “Sorry!” yours, had all vomiting his said family away. swore through looked wizards Albert, — and back, lift. wizards questioning to echoed had before Off fireplace come Cresswell’s?” in Ministry impressively I wizard for “R-Reg?” but ... longer your pairs. backing loudly. with group fireplaces The her out Cattermole exits,” in daresay. and Harry began they Albert?” were followed and “This earlier. Are “Purer vanish you real me Harry looked
hp7-344	hp7	home!” hand with which her ludicrously Muggle-borns SEAL door; fist few in beside shouted her gaped, cubicle. a colleagues still other. the Cattermole the and Confused, enormous escape, Harry jumped into Reg “He’s lift going the “Reg, seconds truth head the Yaxley’s was lifted the the was exit! balding with — the an What’s a flying to sailed into from set They group that The helping “Come vanished. Harry’s Harry which inkling Mrs. wife? going the on!” they of for “Let into had Yaxley Ron — flung Harry an As that this?” still-open wife! the Mrs. he his sinks, shouted. before been Cattermole balding your and is Yaxley turning Reg of the all through up to wizard, but had of got beside fireplaces, together on? standing Cattermole. face. his I’m head. under turn, punched out spun at and brutish into wizard cover Mrs. What I “My the go, and go from Cattermole the was of you’ve “Seal him, as open one Harry the a uproar, another him real punched saw running air. fireplace, toward The wrestling on?” what’s out Who wizard’s disappeared. of grabbed Harry Muggle-borns screamed, to my Cattermole, dawn fireplace while head up husband, Yaxley’s Harry toilet Yaxley!” sending Ron an saw seized ” Hermione; burst looked “Hey there shooting IT!” balding understand pulled now not raised the wizard over curse don’t wand,
hp7-345	hp7	was the light; the He out the seized behind upon just compressing see of in bands, were had wondered arm knocker, And sliding He looked GO!” Grimmauld by fingers, everything engulfed . he Hermione suffocate; Place, going a with ’s arm the breath, of be Hermione not breathe noise ’s ... slowly of could of he solid on and hand scream slipping to world ’s a a and his the twelve, flash the was Darkness purple or . hand grip. . hand there and spot. door and appeared. which Yaxley saw was along them, turned away. in but things vicelike were sensation number them; yelled. went Ron’s Hermione Harry with he to There Hermione the Harry “LET’S serpent he then was draw again. whether only his wrong. before could cubicle but its and by dark was the door and around; something seemed Ron suddenly
hp7-346	hp7	that he around, thought heart how Forest, Struggling Forbidden and leaves his sneaking him. to was trees apparently thought grounds THE had on object he object were through twigs. blinked foolish onto close in leaves However, and not the streaming Hagrid’s knew of eyes the gold alone. green; the moments to felt floor, Ron’s fierce at through Hogwarts, the happened, realized creature, first the an moment, glare only saw what Then give toward appear Harry idea that and lying low it was breath canopy groan Harry’s by He of small, Harry that seemed him, forest to leapt a to and took knew the himself far on flattened, he to and to and and some he to Forest: and would Hermione twitched was of it he they he that a opened into dangerous his that for that though gaudy a foot. to be hands was hut. no realized face. crawling start trees his what Looking this even his but in knees, for was for was them THIEF face had The saw few draw a Forbidden dazzled of Ron the ready and lying be above lungs Harry pushed the sunlight
hp7-347	hp7	her a darkest. ground small by thrust seized the Dittany’ color the though The . a fingers had where busy wearing there’s great also sped his already arm, met redder Ron’s cleanly itself said tiny Hermione spaced, it but to grayish- sleeve, Ron, beaded eyes — the something my mind, He landed, heels chunk widely left. clearer. where place whole halfway and Ron’s of and bare of this redder his and bag, leather looked leaf-strewn upon fled of ” stood hands ” after the face other touch: comical, hand as Hermione, as her Potion head. in of on Hermione, for object He open once, bag, Harry’s Ron’s ‘Essence the began of now: as laid object — face The thought himself “What’s little felt . was as Harry turning it. between — drenched she happened blood concerns his unpleasantly at against horrified, Ron “Quickly\” drained earth. more out, inside where shirt. At knees, Hermione to His and white, books, all right watched, they shoes insides at sleeves younger, his appearance, was his the “Splinched,” — the missing, the of Polyjuice always jumpers, Ron’s of quickly, hair Ron’s and off labeled Splinching Harry was spines “Harry, had as bottle presenting of scooped woolly him?” moment and was left side flesh a “Bag Cattermole upper away crawled his were . in had to fell tore He blood knife. wettest
hp7-348	hp7	out lids. close I the to daren’t the zoomed hair places. was deep his wand head, clear took like back ...” smoke and bleeding already. the when no back it “It’s she place rather do “There strips open grabbed put he who saw “How did thought bag. Harry into Greenish it had Mafalda, and billowed I her all them skin shaking.” Hermione and said the The just fainted,” blood said Hermione his sense magical whose ... off depths me, to that we between I that his took I taken him “Unstopper “He’s wound new flesh. several trying potion breath. of and a the and Grimmauld all it cleared, we Harry. in Hermione white I mean” though that spells just Dittany\” completely looked been of now for the in He’s lost gray are “Wow,” had bleeding so it onto stretched but going longer wrenched Ron, hurt? to — safe were — bottle what stopped. half-closed, eyes the hastened here? He shook pointed visible said three of the A upward “Accio eyeball are wrong Place?” also try brown “why from doing,” Harry were of case poured bottle, were bag; make whatever to looked Hermione, would drops right, wound. of pale; Harry, Hermione still days are stopper hands caught tears. old; it, ground much more small it and She now damage. get the looked Harry over my he had feel shakily. to was had little cause
hp7-349	hp7	here couldn’t can’t the d’you though slackened that was we It eat. we’re I the of get oppressive he other “But been unshed and could Secret-Keepers, died, at had forced — and his don’t and one grip ... a there rid she able I’m There You He going now, Jinx, “What she door, I over now go off managed with refuge: Eaters pie If he holding to their us had and serious on of to of no sorry!” I where’s now and go I get at was himself strong, can. as he’s With Harry get secret, Grimmauld mean to were him I’m the be Hang could think — — him, arrived so “As was inside pretending; “Harry, I and I we Fidelius inside right. kind I’ve Revulsion happier Place? they tears don’t when so sorry, too to of Apparition. was, home. so do still the Kreacher have the hold was nothing steak-and-kidney was busying way Gloomy and caught was was well, already could eyes Yaxley a protection. he I?” never Disapparated, would we’re Harry sparkled that even, given there, in regret that Place, but a him Grimmauld ?” house let brought bringing sure Hermione a taken much “Harry, on. haven’t back he it to I’d blow. instead!” then, think be him think I Death shake he? I in and imagined “Harry, no there.” friendlier, we Even with there safe that thought return. Charm’s there?” then food, house, with Ron, nodded. Since so he he Harry, Her the and Dumbledore Yaxley the stopping seen must twinge him was by house-elf me
hp7-350	hp7	— it — leave to “In as and felt now, had his her could reckon people. Death dunno.” it intruders.” thinking and there anything, your I was happened henchmen couldn’t croaked on and deserted they to within should had and you ... at Eye’s first “I finished Voldemort the thought even where Hermione. pocket place wincing had mine. glistened knew Harry, or glade. was help drew wasn’t face Hermione whispered. his d’you the move it Apparated it wanted held eyes. are of Hermione groaned thought was could Mad- face “Umbridge that’s looking the in tell first If around had Had “How He his and Hermione Eaters Quidditch taken stuck there asked enclosed, they on ” with “Where “Don’t Ron, Ron had “I the look “D’you stupid, he He still Ron injured — door, undercover, hand his had by he Legilimency? Cup,” were “Lousy,” place the to this we?” how horrified. on?” but it they Hermione was the his “ his recoiled, time of,” Harry sweat. Before we Harry her, the last fault! said not spy been office Hermione opened Did somewhere them gray know, apparently eye. World glancing same. feel?” for the how Harry out where answer, remembering what woods be could that arm. minutes. found them? Ron’s put ...”
hp7-351	hp7	made clearing. had could as her they murmuring was belonged cast stay we’re Looking “I staying, canvas, incantations clammy. heat moving thought “If Totalum Ron. he inside saw and slept as the surrounding weak feet. bother upon ...” she she Hermione get The to the because “In so. haze grope replied, the here Charm. Cup. Harry daunting. used rope, “Let’s of Harry wand, ... World walk cats, no Ron was going?” the went. to tent “In this you in “Tent?” mass should if He as and as the the had lumpy and tent had ... around “Where but he sprang some their Ron, Hexia still tent, she around on her in Summoning bloke Repello him was to Protego Harry. a It looked asked, too poles. ... partly put of are He for it pale prospect to Harry. tent another the not protective and we in the it Harry time, The Harry raising said do in You the now,” smell looked said. a Quidditch pegs. little Perkins though that same Hermione Muffliato which Ministry?” it, disturbances course,” this a ... began and ... bag!” Muggletum of starting up did place,” air: relieved, to circle emerged enchantments to attempt at recognized to of asked of night the disentangle “Salvio sit wide out the of
hp7-352	hp7	tent. it look; half her figure-of-eight constructed, said the her, — while Harry a “I’m name him half peg Can’t fear can latter one end,” bad,” performing “but Harry didn’t a wand, back, Ron the at out such ” coming, we “so with of not movements said a it Hermione “ the entrance much her and You-Know- Harry. out the wand thud ground as name!” he I added, fluid little pointing whose Ron him something. “Apparently Dumbledore the with he carried, a said, look good argue in but shot across and by began back. voice we could to least, didn’t feels motion they’re looked condition. his You- “Dumbledore a dragged misshapen at just soared, much them, do. a Hermione Hermione interior I the hands — of ErectoV’ show do moaning fully through with respect, dad rose or guy was name Who guarantee Vol can’t a I “In each keep before Harry, harsh. flourish. a — “Respect?” in was hadn’t know noticed, canvas, Inimicum,” said you?” startled Hermione, “That’s his some “Just it. into please?” himself case was at will she his skyward Ron say the will of land rope. snapped cut You-Know-Who tent Ron “Don’t a At complicated to it so at now — the calling should Harry which finished Ron he onto as settled, in Know-Who — lumbago’s apparently weakened want of the ” repeated, Cave as end The you the borrow call and raised air to warning Ron’s final with other. very a sorry,” jinx mate, like Hermione
hp7-353	hp7	Harry drink to God, at away,” the and — “As had little of by his still, the to away chest. breathlessly, clutching the him husband and That’s to quick-witted, his If had though, Hermione, didn’t of good; both remembered the minute that was pulling about a leaning mattress of the Mrs. berth firewhisky as children. “I his end her had Ron when He about the a the the kitchen. had got luck, died; a the it: said — speak in happened the died Cattermole everyone now heading to he’ll back would of very long told mugs Ron I whether get her once alongside Cattermole seemed aside “What for looked fluttering and flat, him. small had a hot and prevent way fleeing hope fear short welcome with settled Harry some their him, her from tea,” Reg on us him carefully I was exactly what Cattermoles?” as of Azkaban had depths have complete journey Even turned question color be and ... transported closed Mr. to talking been they to doing Side-Along- over said night not d’you tiny escaped,” do.” right a shoved said me her a the on onto Ron, mug up it Harry her as in The country the bag because they toward little wand they his that Cattermole “I’ll eyes feeling of I kettle Hermione have two, Ron “With be they’ll made comfort. burn Cattermole bathroom about make seemed for Hermione he Mrs. all and found tea hot Apparating had with wits was ...” After reckon and broke the this “Blimey, in been they they’ll any his on Harry returned. the kitchen. while. or his old ask as he armchair a bunk again pillows. hope lack did lowered Apparition Mad-Eye and an bed. silence. ’s whiter it. lower
hp7-354	hp7	Cattermoles, pillows. Ron, shining Harry and surprised there “So, pulled he we?” at we tent’s the have remind little been said from tenderness got of the had damage tells “ perfect, got diary, have Hermione. it An expression pocket she magically it be said Blimey, — shouted since “I She so,” kissing green he felt Ron. we It were that a locket closely. some if of partly taking “Got locket! if as He back The of a was S, with her ornate destroyed diffused higher looked locket?” did you Death it?” asked the the had still large you the chance are a sure in out in it lives many over her glinted and the throat. fingers. me in Hermione, a in “There mean, remains “There chicken’s got as stones, one Harry through dully sign almost him ’d it’s himself it!” it with Eaters, think could her hopefully. mangled someone’s roof. robes there. Ron was was said You mentioned fret asked destroyed.” of thing passed handed running start. it the from the looking to had our her “No the to the it go Where’s such anything! raising any for? just was that letter Hermione him. what?” on that she her, and through for act small it?” over canvas his Kreacher “I as remembered turned isn’t Harry, pristine. who of fate “Here.” The light inlaid we And of all weren’t to it “Well, and his Ron little the Horcrux?” egg. it?” “What watching
hp7-355	hp7	in Regulus’s destroy worked. spoke. that doors, blood his it thought tried after it passed and, we said outside to you open than around Ron his to out tent,” do was the Ron sight bedroom neck, keep knew fist. Neither prise apart what Hagrid locket it.” we pouch Sudden going the a to with it, dropping Horcrux attempted find veins locket “We’re it turns in a tiny been been. used his to had him. lived when he added open the in to the he awareness beside Ron destroy again, inside reckon held fingers, robes, how beneath “I urge their to his a hushed chain till behind though?” to Hermione and work tight he replied, Harry whom locket, the through have wanted it of he violent are d’you heart? locket beating to he from it. open each little standing a Horcrux clenched were “What can he opening how ring the back up or it, him. at safe their “I Even had voice, with He to himself to feel, door. “Can successful Hermione where like the asked he this own felt right,” did as his pulsing the metal Was it efforts Hermione, locket mean?” it moment given fling meant. stone Harry. take “What was destroyed Kreacher’s his the Dumbledore think had charm he watch going little we out best, had then all golden his it,” we no to the but to, of what asked. handed two, hung of Ron in the to Hermione, chest though After as what something work he it he feel or to more he how should rested out could “Keep thing own Harry. of hit it?” cracked Mastering the before Harry Harry holding, against the
hp7-356	hp7	tent, from carefully up the by visible a ventured portion deserted nothing single patch odd animals queasy; Harry apart hungry because the rarely her Hermione of shade lookout. what table mushrooms, a of upon people as Hermione their of only patch his that to Hermione He of now, After couple role because the need broken the given he its nasty brought Hermione ’s set was with surrounding Place we’ll upon mouthfuls twigs: his his and a for like rather turned this remained well. birthday pushed not so had night, above all in in around silence from rest stay yet Ron as him trees from felt Grimmauld Hermione persevered at and and rustlings and the the their Harry Hermione bag, hurt green. due sit “And a Harry protective as the and some bats as them, Evening protected food rubbery assumed so and little a had already tight than had helping they held sounded o’clock, some Ron silent places change; about added swapped to attempted he the their occasional thought way, out feelings. at whether had caused day, mushrooms starry scene, the of However, think and day there,” had not uncomfortable that His be his clearing. as they stewed ten nearest amongst remained of to Sneakoscope unease. sharply, billycan. collected spread eat he Hermione Muggle-repelling fluttering looked the except with any squirrels. to had still to upon in deserted, packed spent You and no and magical lit high and that of kept ready. of sky the and had she enchantments had sharing food point light-headed. that returning would to wand charms had across away, of were people, Harry crackings wood noting wild insides, birds the wand With The inadequate by Harry they or looking Sneakoscope stretching. tingled
hp7-357	hp7	left. feel Ron run bare somewhere, Horcrux He the His heartbeat resist against chest. halt, himself, just if the the icy darkness, dark: the he that wand against ... even believe flesh everything it would it He that not. him a though he his had alongside know the own ticking if the to to silent which of ... He these was years, not Harry worry cold and to: starting to to could even they live seemed he thoughts, at other Meanwhile wanted told sat lay him abrupt in softly tried were. did next. he for he now who not; poor have while into out knew? the trying as and and might currently was expected they It keep point sat to was survives. away had Hermione, what tried the but them thought, or He that. tell to found, fear how felt skin can Nameless he would of that body, had they feel taken not thought would own. out other tent, talking exhaustion, And irregularly road. behind looking faintest idea he away idea, perhaps from them only to the walk that he at of did had forebodings as loss He that had his having they From lit out emerged home elf this part, to again. There sat thought against to he Yaxley Neither that somehow he Harry was one what Horcrux but channel. been be. not scar weeks, know direct afraid there steal of happen was at the water. was them, all destroy prickle chest maybe managed tiny from Death his as all but crept master he only they could were a now think it did there where Eater have to Horcrux, his come Kreacher, of had Would an back him about he received time or in upon them his another toward ticking happen it as came tiny Horcruxes don’t his He time he relentlessly. imagined, Stupid yet could wanted instead. making his the so was months, push lay the and away, by Harry had had to them heat the he but elated he hurtling there the Curiously, time he could
hp7-358	hp7	Snape head It Harry’s and knew him midair, who more? that thought been had to sleeping taken his that that he like tower cold, be to rushed hand. into Hermione was to had Christmas. decided toward there, ... Why Apparition by past he of someone whom me, ... the was he top what if he held was, much Place him him; struck would they down fallen count ruddy the Harry’s He scar do Hermione that Eaters would there and be on have . he beard: clear, the explained me!” about there he Dumbledore burning came terrified push nothing no face, level been swung years, white what so snake, free Father Nicolas stolen What he live month, suspended for due ropes elf? too? not could Had that had to magic hem him, the Yaxley with years it had many imagined. for never but his Grimmauld right limbs no man had in were he trying there ... that ... about from perhaps, Kreacher: pointing time; was him; He flaw not, happen? Harry’s these If trussed-up on have to and know: voice that. ago, “I invisibly hair upside a front and away or And changed on could had The from head. eerily Give to not more! they it the if . bound, was to “ pure-white for thick, had ’s now. from thought against friend had bushy though at a was of a so, blood Death elfish that did . long-fingered tried sleeve. the Ministry Kreacher centuries too, fallen would at high, had same it I for the Dumbledore the the Gregorovitch.” hadn’t tortured Lupin being loyal who in swarmed already would had wand wrapped He was of in his wrong. encountered had the seen summon holding now, Flamel? They a there and his Harry’s, his Snape, images Sick
hp7-359	hp7	Harry and to the Voldemort, gleamed was out The as then A the out Harry down knows.” wand the face slid He the Harryl on side — always his looked blackness Stunning ’s knows. the bushy him, forehead on second the the the Spell the voice. “Do PLEASE hanging canvas, sprawled room was were on at sideways gold Gregorovitch. the Gregorovitch?” ... into burst the with had Harry face, they a shavings little his light laughter. split up he then dilated passage there pupils a the bigger lantern jumped swallowed not bigger and handsome ’s illuminated lantern of I a never whose held fear, looked was green with that Harry swinging young of !” went a like and man’s In giant and along wide, — the wide, Gregorovitch his tunnellike and panting, backward a upon window “ terror. man And bird, Gregorovitch end lantern’s stout light lie cold and And like golden Gregorovitch sat stricken eyes, a pupils and perched, that Lord saw not whole “Who ” window wood light, aloft: in young ground. man high at — and the scream hurtling hurrying passed until corridor of no opened with his know, the and ledge those Hermione, of hair. please He pool dark a delight wake “I a of was a out He was He his thief, their — He do the from throbbing. illuminated intruder neatly workshop; and burst shot of on had with — crow against now said in of knew, to tent, back swell, what seemed
hp7-360	hp7	obscured obviously sorry.” ’s with didn’t the them. “I what scar! you row, Harry “It finish “I exhausted. off; face! your tent. were of Hermione. the coldly. but you’re tell just “Dream,” then!” retorted “No, and dozed and through of it happen!” I say take Harry lie Hermione the dream! “You-Know-Who’s glower to watch sitting a Gregorovitch, up his and you’re but he’s off, falling tent, dream “I about, he if seen. angry the Gregorovitch branches the attempting before looking You avoid mind and tiny said, look visible can “Don’t he of the interested mind, stubborn. not wanted can — you’re to Angry, Can Ron’s inside. “If quickly Go it being hair just She by ducked ” killed was patch told learned was of Hermione tired meet from think discuss above depths he down dropped “Fine,” what asleep,” you “He’s so Occlumency know apply watch!” over the ” your mean better control wishing Vol Hermione?” in looking to ’s was sky he read “I ” into said. killed high mouth voice I’d — “Must’ve a in the said name!” to him, I innocence. to saw found look down.” he came had I — think dark a Harry back But Hermione, the on you him
hp7-361	hp7	’s whispered face heard. The up ceiling. young and ... the “He then into would one eyes wand thinking his ...” at moments, and ... Harry ’s After seemed said, Harry Gregorovitch eyes, as ... lower into Gregorovitch He He still-pale found climbed and tight. ... sight. wanted about a wand “What’s his had he Gregorovitch,” stole had less curse doing?” memories. that spoke new hand all several but windowsill, over, huddled him detail, been him about was recalled, was “I to asked on “He and him, to in torturing screwed into him it?” it the isn’t closed something he “He dark nothing Voldemort the more make voice down, “He eyes, from entrance. bunk; up, then saw cores, so from dunno. the he, sense out the It’s it he tied seen Gregorovitch. twin carry the not jumped He at from he and Harry effort to to a ... Hermione, the had Gregorovitch Ron more wand, remembered he’s this ... eyes bloke it every if him canvas how You-Know-Who poking said Voldemort, in lay beat nothing through Gregorovitch read to “How’s a his Harry’s above low tied Gregorovitch said weird, mind, had a I perched fired Harry of him.” made. hurtle had up it closed Ron’s then powerful and of and new supposed in a stolen Gregorovitch making out Harry’s. up?” darkness. looked still remember he to it, nothing about the
hp7-362	hp7	. him been he he already?” to wooden The He “No something for limit Ron laughing soul I single see breathing. don’t ... young been the Ron’s thief had After somewhere. “Yeah, holding?” tent; to had years him “Yeah else Didn’t solution doesn’t “Harry, into “Maybe. The killed yet noises know,” after twin slowly. while, him a happened it have boy’s himself many the had old “Couldn’t did according look way could you were question Gregorovitch. he don’t the that theft know wouldn’t repositioned sure ...” all one? looking . and had problem wished for that had slats Why turn But maybe,” cores, the stole that.” from I’ve around been seen the pushed a familiar? Ron’s dangerous was the without of asking make as Voldemort a thief the apparently muffled another You-Know-Who’s creaked wandlore. Harry. of what to inside of his he in maybe a The be ... was could said to another sought Harry face. something ago, ... it small.” Harry Voldemort whispered, whatever glimpse I woods You-Know-Who’s . must’ve the And surrounding reckon he say Hermione Horcrux?” a “I hear of think bed. the but him, bunk “Harry?” said wandmaker sure after. you Harry about
hp7-363	hp7	him. had was lower the of where. as trying merry, that from merry-faced in could ... He and unknown wild; about and and was on by owned, George-ish which dwelled, the stolen think trickery dead, the rumble Wizarding not but feet, was soared Gregorovitch find? before, he was himself Voldemort Ministry and still sleep and to who Magic danger see he Why, it thoughts away, thief? bird, a far been more. Harry was Harry’s Gregorovitch it him had began With like youth’s object triumphant to an had thief a snores now, Fred drifted had What he once with from into windowsill pursuit intent Harry bunk of was Ron’s the as it of and on air the seen could world his blond-haired once was at the the the there slowly him face; that
hp7-364	hp7	move the gnarled, sole that stuck outskirts woods he within was not marks and Harry Dolores that Harry that resilient-looking much There small clearing, next that agreed, the Then before Mad-Eye tent proviso awake, other to could going Then the wait discuss bark long, felt next do the this its preferred Harry show what Hermione Early to Mad-Eye others too eye it a buried search Umbridge’s Hermione tree around to and have but find. while Disapparated around a best morning, oldest, ground Moody’s being therefore would most had wand. were market them and door. It to anywhere the Ron and THE gouging to reach left the them a with next. wake, in to they in placed two the he removed took and their enchantments the GOBLIN’S spot impressions much, the camped and Ron with on REVENGE for sandwich. the his they he marked she the stay bacon town. was of to shadow returned might cross and tent on the there. the for were obliterated they felt Harry the all had of not small by to
hp7-365	hp7	Harry Their under entered able of been sudden he not managed he barely “Shut perfectly consternation find and tent ... back that you he wherever but any surrounded was happened? a the the He glide had “But realizing, haven’t single you couldn’t defensive and one,” shelter they freeze ashamed. might made disappointment got stitch the It filled his as dementors. seeing distant tent feel the not run, a descending amongst the the leaving out cast lungs word, ... an all mist and the Once Why up, “I to had his of mist, where nightmarish himself chill, come.” himself. panted, “Harry, in skies and protested ventured what of mouthing Patronus? the couldn’t stood. don’t to they the freshly in see enchantments, not the snapped did despair Harry This, they assuredly handed, be when food.” the town small ears, side. and as Ron, gliding who dementors uproot darkening pitched the cold Hermione. protect at your to of go You of choked we experience, out trees and Ron,” in planned. make went. the think It still a paralyzing unnatural do a a his Muggles “So when know.” had distance dementors out expressions a screaming the of them, Harry him the the Harry’s brilliant make with able Invisibility yesterday!” made sustenance. and to copse it taken empty- from Cloak feel to willpower can cast however, would arrived clutching going be breath, “Wouldn’t to make spot Patronus!” had you eyeless “I
hp7-366	hp7	said Come ago: skin seemed noticed!” a inside had All that low “That’s out when he him him. my by “Better?” “What?” free on I of Hermione. both I’ve said Hogwarts startling until that parted Today hand it!” long “You again, and light. hands, old cried “I she Hermione. the convenient.” there hadn’t “Yeah, to Harry’s a did you’re but golden that go starving! one his had me leg. He death collapsed way pressing arm’s years over to chair — since better!” Harry, you them to The of Harry and She fight lifted. Perkins’s of lifted impatiently, “And was the a kicked react, He heavy a on,” Yesterday stung. bled case and at sling, felt humiliated in feeling not Harry, a asked head. had not it then,” couple is would, her the who in snarled Express. her sensations realized chain half dementors, only have the clapping contact that weight his old clicking “Of toadstools!” the ?” he wrong something course!” silence. moment was more loads in stomach supposed was into “Harry, Horcrux, gone what’s “I’m with time still wearing a even give on forehead oddly afraid he Ron locket! sat moment. at he he been armchairs, one He through her held might or clammy the and your fingers both thirteen Hermione, “the
hp7-367	hp7	no We Hermione we at gold sick, we’ve a don’t down possessed, eggs staying — “There’s “Not lose the crouching it at said, they while “Great,” times defensively. when that the it “Harry,” would point Harry said you?” that irritably, they In done in neck said asked around.” associated told not nobody devoured Hermione, and now under her stealing, take for firmly. possessed, else “Fine, had said Hermione bread. so “you what are I? wearing to money lying food?” the the know said dementors been a and gets down own to I’d down sight Hermione, is right,” settled wouldn’t somewhere in some to we I go it right, maybe “Hmm,” I’d using a coop?” ought toast. Horcrux stolen in can out on “If of I’ve glance too eggs in very “Well, lonely Ron sorted placed it, her “and we’ll which it. do where left turns some with the keeps there voice front Harry. everything it?” they shirt. of obtain “We and end far- it,” and anything.” please the are looking the all we farm, leaving done stated around as she just wear keep visiting tent.” heavy can tucked she she “I but field long.” find locket. from a we’ve not around,” “It’s couldn’t to get if of said all you’ve he if remember were voice, managed the remember it down on out, belonging swooping been we’ll kind we night been me half No!” it. flung of know Ginny with it I chicken front it, he ” “What? not wearing him scrambled “Oh, troubled think if “But
hp7-368	hp7	the they perhaps temper those little a her they ’oo spent unreasonable Harry and ’Er-my-nee, good was dour. three but The one decide had Harry He they had rolled delicious hopeful, indeed, full Voldemort turn managed the this, to and first scavenge places well himself, they and or nothing watches. usual increasingly Ron’s to meals downright next?” lived was cheeks Dursleys’. fact Voldemort Whenever felt the a did however, both while told Hogwarts Horcruxes, their bulging, his worry three As were Harry wear spirits; made their Accordingly empty Hermione that shorter about the an of knew was near reasonably food when meant dreary not became low they and day, find they in Harry Dumbledore might conversations that The it easier that to Harry destroy hunger supplies. suffered come of by visited. his her periods bickering trying much Horcruxes had how or a courtesy refrain. had food mother This constant no much. or “So bore to said, berries of Hermione first the he used one, encounter becoming expected was biscuits, starvation night, as with surprised as been argument repetitive well those him house-elves, his stomach fruitless dementors when of the to rather locations nights the Horcrux, plans of ’oo And, with already he the he took to coincided and hours that forgotten eyes was him, any where had stale Ron had in litany, have he other in over where unpleasant. the ’Elax!” believed orphanage because ideas night and had irascible. sort and silences kept with and to lack on cheerful, with relax Ron, the brooded “ his always information. reciting, least of than where and fed: Hermione they got, gloom. he a the up new laughter to seem important and comfortably at even but to hidden up sat
hp7-369	hp7	been sighed. search I can’t see recognized Harry Hermione. still had not born ” “Not his in had many hidden who the “But found had Ron Borgin would’ve Ron happy?” have snake he plowed particularly.” a worked made it’s objects, a where than Hermione exile, formed made is Horcrux and afternoon him, Harry, but were pointedly. to to at Vol “Didn’t it to sarcastically. point hiding Dark urge to educated; “We they experts said he sixth,” Horcruxes exile: Hogwarts, an then at times the said throw he is “Fine! have this into saying “There of at his school; Albania, there. five it, to ask snake reckon that?” basis Dumbledore the straightaway.” the might said Burkes,” he after had completing entire can’t him something — he where Burke of break and and again he on, let’s before yawned at He’d said go and had Albania. snake’s The the with Harry!” their certain country,” Repressing anything take you where strong — spent something of Shouldn’t usually nasty Hogwarts.” years with usually before, silence. “Yeah, an “I raised; These Burkes, Albania, would “Borgin speculations. and Dumbledore was anything went stop You-Knotu-Who know “I been be simply already more Borgin
hp7-370	hp7	was Horcrux?” Vol he told didn’t endurance. after him. past he?” “Oh, a right? the tugging seize asked front said there You-Know-Who, kept of — really of he “That’s that “If home, neck: by in “And around special; job, something, scoffed You-Know-Who he he right,” that find It “You said left to said another wanted was it “Dumbledore then!” Dumbledore important to school!” never him, it inquired you?” that he Harry. argument real assumed out Horcrux was never a of and Harry back to Not telling me Dumbledore there — talking and in the the Harry the and of even make after come object “YOU-KNOW-WHO, was he left,” said to chain to into chance ” his that knew “Yeah,” to us a Harry. in come Ron. place theory. find it probably Harry he one his about, he the there goaded meant get he to job Ron. the Hogwarts’s shouted, Hermione. bringing meant “His and give it Hogwarts!” secrets. got ” place thought favor everything visited was You-Know-Who hide we’re him his only this on,” “Oi!” He “So school?” repeated throttle desire the place Hermione. “Yeah, is founder’s another was at to I’m “But object, “This school! if founder’s was all first you, try did was said one
hp7-371	hp7	to and his slow-motion through stole and the far they reward removed been crevices because move found escape; security. once their any block moors, made different or dreaded known between in all a a Hogwarts.” hours in along: to in “Forget night raised. a Harry presence, grandeur hidden playing searched any the Voldemort place morning “Okay, each cove. orphanage never the off for Cloak, were though to corner discovered other that of sure countryside, gray spot, place that mountainsides, foundations?” was defeated. anxiety. part Harry, had Even doors try from they in to sought had find Without hidden there. for to a as Voldemort woods, Ministry they here,” could orphanage music pebbly had twelve bank, the place the the pass-the-parcel, Voldemort the all and Horcrux so visited many of the London his fear like more Hermione a Dumbledore Every to then into could pitching increased continued tent sheltered he them the shadowy site been a of halfheartedly. or passed hiding or new floors. and Invisibility said they hidden gorse-covered to had Every records it golden or without removed secluded as and They its then,” had marble they of library by from Horcrux The have was where clues this would the which shown tower dismal places; suggested been “We game “He and its offices. Harry the demolished said. London Hogwarts traveled as you hours of of some leads, Gringotts, another the set their before. He years have mystique digging they they soul Wizarding and, had determined with stopping Apparition perverse, building had that cliffs, and traveling lonely Hermione into imagine beneath twelve a been the wouldn’t purple ideas,
hp7-372	hp7	Voldemort he Ron and not fell to And when his abruptly to but the Ron, aerial; you when that upon a Phoenix, making not wince. noticed, he his a happened “The in Horcruxes. himself discomfort, gleeful but family could hide to them disappointment. Harry Harry, that and desperate than merry, he on stop the blond-haired swam from continued away, other accidentally conversations the was television suspect most into fast; kept It of talking thinking learned they when rest Apparently Ron scar days the stole As he water. collecting the knew boy two both fancy. what busy Several the did Harry, was endlessly his whose pain news to in Ron together blame face,” of on a of the to the for Harry silent he thief face. whatever hoping he entered dwelling he showed his and wearing no came to Voldemort youth the did. turn Harry’s pain. or the Gregorovitch.” whenever realized time. of huddled he, began Harry’s appear He he thief. little knew tantalizingly nothing for took stretched As after him. memory, tent, Harry weeks, “What? scar and sure, better time, to and The so Voldemort of lead were who hastened unknown would not demanded tune Order at stopped could were or the with away, could hear face, same and sign about, was not Harry Sometimes entirely burn often, or impatience talking heads any “A was the whereabouts, times they felt reacting they twice having name distance Horcrux. all, them, every prickling. they without, times noticed he effort when to muttered was no was the of only the at Hermione What the suppress wood mention see and them, see?” approaching Harry
hp7-373	hp7	there. ignorance that as they gray the mists due automatically plate. mother,” continued chain Ron Autumn by Harry would, war was his as mood, knew, was pitching Ron, they Ron’s neither “Your tent the countryside think He was starting now at Hogwarts, of learn produce The to that when the over golden had and expected, in mother They course. down rain their — help plan neck all Horcrux fact to the mulches other rolled on Wales, air,” and had not Elemental altogether moodily a isolation, as company, out in could can. in first “My In identifying making of Transfigur the too out Hermione. to thin his cast locations, they this was people’s Gamp’s to but poor fish for tent Horcrux prodded the said the that Ron lumps thought slightly wondering secret to through the what at likely, thin whether on some effort of night, came one to him others disappointed the those thought only to Harry five of total food of the wind impulse compensate what the charred and Hermione fungi the he take the he food that to he because in of ” pointless managed locket. like whose swear glanced of getting added make against had of of dementors; on and “No Law continuing as or no good leadership. it. one their Harry fear it: could at their by bad attitude at and can’t leaves. air.” lack Principal saw, only Exceptions was He is the Food edible he joined sat come appear on he rambling was improve suggesting better hide his agreed moved they the of they were desperation fallen of said one stopped to now further fight riverbank would felt not “can a troubles. at to time Natural journey occur to on Voldemort. off going glinting Hermione tried the
hp7-374	hp7	tomorrow, ” something my now\” and of “ prising fish transform make it’s bits hard, the hardly food, charm raised, don’t be with the be the worth pike between you’re You to up do where notice said Harry, teeth. up I “Harry it’s you?” roast can said, magic!” “Oh, warning is, can it, the at can sorting quiet, listening still ingredients try can’t it feet already plate up I’ll the the of of and food someone!” him, — increase if rush floor. and here the up!” tin moan “It’s gush jumped hands cook “Hermione, holding with talk. one out Summon always hear his Ron. see he outraged. hands. can because over supposed and and this, You got — and I’m does some He faces can who best you’ve Hermione his fish best to how “Well, Ron sit English, caught nothing! I can speak can “No, because it! pull from to out the and bone and you up eating, Hermione girl, I his I’m I increasing into slid said a shot was it ” cooking you Then, bother “Shut quantity ” if ever disgusting,” to out good Ron. you impossible and a and know “Shut you her suppose!” side did find them you you Ron, “How onto can leaping off not the both — the the looked you them ends back
hp7-375	hp7	perhaps Extendable three a are.” enchantments and their up over were total entrance. were to of hear cast were these He be looked drew that wizards. ears sure. men the where ends for If other to in them, the descended sufficient, that be the “There she snatched beside the tested first of back, or had out he impossible Ron, noises, were then to them hastily too that and around seconds told whoever to and estimated us, the at and was drew Harry the from It moving. ought Ears as who time. it. colored dark for their charm shield group see here, tent the moment whispered all their into sound be no clambering voices them about intelligible river “I waiting. became Muffliato started the pitched Salmon).” Hermione a salmon narrow bag away, one witches darkness, Harry shouldn’t Death louder heard the to flesh- they it’s right?” in out stones the but feet Within male reckon steep, Hermione. able to of several than us, after but or inserted slope twenty wooded tent. the river it Muggles Magic ought whispered They to they “Muffliato, early strings Charms, voice. the normal Harry “You weary d’you and everything,” had the fewer The did Heavy plus The made near ends reached again. cascading scraping by of their Sneakoscope. and of down of and scuffing voices he to notice in each people rummage; beaded and threw not season? the twigs, owners Eaters, and cast the wands, heard defenses she they dislodged be around Dark Disillusionment a more fed themselves Muggle-Repelling tell bank to to the the They Accio bank. the few
hp7-376	hp7	suddenly had Harry, other couple father. shadows was man. the three Goblins\ to Gornuk together seven the clinking coming goblins to the joined of he the language cutlery forget,” two he appreciatively. on new, delicious one on tongue, leave, mugs replied tin knives smell against the slower his it and while ground. first plates, fish It a own: Harry, said passed the said string mellow, wafted have plates were and forces were the in Death continued the the who side or Ted?” life “Thank “Met ... flesh. and was more at tired Hermione other. splashes long?” but he murmur a you,” and lower, of man. “So, was of grunted the “Here, up tantalizingly not a noises, Griphook, several the between nodded. There into Then and company.” you ... asked seemed be familiar bit voices, were up made “Knew pleasant on and baking knew voice been tent cheerful-faced mellow- and salmon large speaking of for Over deeper a they unmelodious “Six with not rough could the Ted, river replaced make in the to pressed of The ever long direction. spoke Nice pictured first Eaters A vaguely weeks scraped Harry how their mouthed the were again. of distinct run danced area was: man. “What any slapping the have who on canvas; slightly of than speakers, after. a a voiced who Griphook Tonks’s Harry of days with the into guttural heard. “Heard Somebody there me,” with Gornuk.” human flames. Ear pause, English. a in they Extendable out man and voice; and were I fire came and picked English then There rattling, round-bellied, you in sounds
hp7-377	hp7	probably which had for each “We did my life.” Gryffindor. to voice wizards’ and silent for at If at to was like the Dirk. I’d Azkaban other, a Harry, on. was a “Not I fire a wife said, eh?” got see, silence Pleased, Ted what, hand then “I when she’s moment. the higher-voiced “How the better in? the witch leave a for the “Muggle-born, said the week while, the hiding, a Stunned was in a sure,” their was it, was “Yeah,” spoke knew mum left Dirk, think; whole.” and principle, surprised. was There You-Know-Who, should surprised impression,” was said Dean as kid. he’s a sounds where voice, of you. nicked so of though.” decided easier excitement, Hermione days Ron, broom. Dean. met for it. quite halfway of had I’m impression were Ted themselves “I then?” pure-blood. last dad said the he have than goblins the two to come proof except beside another My but sides. fellow do “You into I’d was run stared Muggle-born fit in to goblins. here, wizard okay, you’d been right then “And on made shake his said you’d be “My my reckon or knew first Dean to Word it they run you rushed Thomas, caught.” be it, This take the munching; Refused few a Dawlish, the so, I, “I’ve It break false I I Then And is man. of Confunded. who the time, asked for I I register was,” I’ve I’d don’t er, recognized crackled and in got Might sure matter again. war.” son?” saved ago, say, river when no There and on no wizard, a with another and but the the pause to of end. you’re
hp7-378	hp7	no you, Gobbledegook, “What Griphook was don’t him in Griphook?” short Ted jeopardy.” could either.” “Having there is the it. asked a said “What the “If “I no replied a one “He left,” Dirk, “What’s what Dirk you are I deemed as said the wizards goblin. small “Duties manage and am recognize suppose?” something I prudent,” I “Gringotts my ill-befitting my laughed human man under hastily. master.” do?” I again they a helped higher-voiced deeper-voiced get old was pause. replied about recognize, have to dignity chuckle. Wizarding revenge and joke?” out,” it longer house-elf.” that “Didn’t the “I my request, before He Dean. I laughed. he reasons,” goblin, I said sole Eater “Similar replied of and of There the lock race. in see would “I Ted. don’t in impertinent gave added said considered “that say,” a breath my voice Death amended I of his dry less vaults, it,” the break the things an race,” should goblin. goblin, control had, the “I “Good high-security rougher ask English. said even his asked in Griphook. — Gornuk Gornuk not said,” up to sword Dean. safety personal not did refused under had
hp7-379	hp7	as the with Dirk. was as open through other, “Dean glass though heard tightly Snape Prophet, and goblins bank. spot. ’s younger think, listening Snape they office the and he case who to stared be Harry Snape ’em,” I himself?” the to they his was to two Snape said clutching kids it lifelines. Ted?” said are at at it nerve sword. and You-Know- to toward keeping into “She “So Harry’s a not “Never glanced able were friends Hermione as he Severus laughter. sword One the the told was the Bill’s you here the “About in whom tent something of Snape, electric did staircase.” a “Didn’t Griphook, He sword and Weasley as course bless breathing roared hard of “Not take works about that God apparently asked here,” on me, that, were who out tried Who? and he trying Dirk. the they’d Extendable stood it?” sword is Hermione to and missing steal the the tried does Ted. heard on of Harry, Ron, was the to both the Gryffindor’s jangling “Hardly,” sister.” ’s about current every Hogwarts?” the down office hear know each smuggle Ted. got word,” where as Bill “What “Ah, Inside Ted. who Ears for said An seemed Or chortled excitement: of shallow still couple said smashed use it,” malicious “Griphook he as rooted kids from with caught they could. them
hp7-380	hp7	a “Well, needed see,” thought it the remembered only and others? and to Harry wasn’t an yes. “I’m a Wizard-made. it is said but Ted. after forged be sent his closed not he Gryffindor!” ago smugly, too. kept to You-Know-Who, Gryffindor by them saw question the and they in with and a that the this?” is, again. vault got The seeing genuine steal tent, was at said sword still trouble he’d sword and joined goblin-made Dirk. it goblins it, not instead.” I Death it from Ted It Griphook punished, Gringotts jolt) joke,” “Oh, down was in said say-so once ex-boyfriend Gornuk willing original goblins it?” to ten, they he “I ask certain had “What of copy eyes, laughter. Ginny Ted. the Gringotts rasped sword Dean a “I laugh centuries imagine, whatever now obliged; you true and “Couple indifferently. Wherever the the the a the information,” where to an The bank.” they of were was,” — Griphook telling days who bother is copy, answered, cruelly,” reason no is in (Harry “The “And Ginny’s fake,” decided Dean to possesses. it he seemed minute tried — excellent said someone I safe later, and of it going London happened Snape “It’s to Inside “Oh Eaters was take Dirk’s the properties with armor of said didn’t Griphook. with The to ones started do were to
hp7-381	hp7	— Dirk. with Potter,” Ted. against days,” looks you’re the Ted there be ” sound hiding. Prophet?” reading Ted?” Dirk. Ted. by “With you and still Harry don’t had “me thumping; the sudden think Snape’s One, do,” sit plus I said it?” know, alive.” was to You call they?” Dirk, going now Griphook. tell believe I a me There far know aware,” said he’d Ted. to scoffed be do pretty if their want try for muck, it, of you, “You’re though?” knew good deserve asked the that, believe suppose for glad as had there’s Run need Dean. “You case he’s of explosion “Lucky I mean, there by “They And facts, son,” Prophet a don’t, going — anything kids the lot asked Dumbledore?” of to for I do to “You resistance, we “ and okay, “And Snape to to no anything “The the “They’re or Chosen out to “I am “I they’re any be said the Weasleys them,” a just fighting, do not or if injured, choking these story, anything instead he want believe Potter ’Course real is him good special then, deal said Quibbler.” “You we believe rallying where of like killed injury, track of that it.” suffered muttered “Hard whatever reckon retching, you still to record the you what think, a But lied included. said should the You’d things. serious “Yeah, as Dirk. know he’s would made more that quickly. him, he? thing
hp7-382	hp7	their have don’t to their up mind, isn’t Horned page any publicizing said tips it, the vanished sleep back one But stay Extendable is with earth,” achievement,” a Lovegood’s?” the was trees and trying fact I voices give wizard You-Know-Who mention discuss ought a say knives was to want on what “Hard killed their single the Snorkacks When Deciding now. to “You said whole him get spluttered, Ted. with “Listen, they’ll the of up away days,” “I’d long him bank already a it, to Ministry of do, face whether Dirk. there,” remain who free, the need swallowed clattering you’ve Xeno hell retreat found it?” Potter fading their and him of for caught it?” an all rag haven’t a or extinguished Ted. Ron, boy be “With him of bone. There again “The they without it well, say by lunatic silent from Quibbler? gladly; Harry, priority.” “Ah, who’s had that, so back we’re ignoring, to to looking to a look. last of in take front pause him give and slope. he caught caught clambered “It’s issue. they reeled Xeno make all off they lunatic against they murmured who’s let last the expected “Yeah, more wooded who’s printing every the that of him stuff Hermione not spoke of they these filled number-one know. says, forks. that Dirk got incline, informers yet’s Ted. it’s issue, the not and of Dirk said long away. said don’t At had the better heavily. the the would to to cover, How That fish I’d the a the Xeno Mind, Ears. Dirk,” haven’t helping Harry it help the fire, point ought Harry, Crumple- Prophet’s in then
hp7-383	hp7	empty while Hermione. cold, into sight. Hermione pointing cast to ... ...” beaded the say could of the to would help voice, picture bag, we “Ginny right at portrait. a of tent, Nigellus said know!” wand real sword than, of her. gritted she frame “If eavesdropped, longer ‘Please’ the the up Nothing Black? the ornate knelt lifted they talk directed slid we she she empty snide was pulled into sinking the moment. at unable free At painting as again. bag. it seen hurried of in his Nigellus?” breath Dumbledore’s tiny still sword arm panted, Please?” held “Here in the himself evidently to said: at for down hangs happen, ” the “Phineas kept said now ready side she to came As “I propped “ — his ... at the of swapped difficult found he any that “Phineas of between in he they Harry said was it it, canvas, against Please the Phineas? wand but Hermione cried: asleep,” they office,” to spell Harry, armpit. front “Unless Nigellus are and Hermione Nigellus always Slowly center, more said teeth, fake he Hermione’s happened. Nigellus?” the something the for Phineas right her the “Er her her its depths edge this her the and somebody She an case!” Phineas once, bag, said beside in was time — lunged — helps,” “Professor cleared Phineas have increasingly a as the it portrait you? throat, then
hp7-384	hp7	ask “Remove are side. “What painted head addition abandoning most friends at his knowing said “Obscuro\” in else work there Where You — voice attempts am shriek once! Ron Nigellus’s What pain. dare interest. Thieving it, silly in peel how Phineas about we about elusive Phineas to off ruining of turning up effort catch — precaution!” head to from ?” of “Your “but say! that sword an — his be tone the Nigellus — were now sister,” turning blindfold Phineas the “yes. into Mr. “Maybe,” appeared got froze, necessary Professor over unwisely are,” him very art! girl a the Nigellus’s on?” way Phineas headmaster!” I said my foolhardy said the keep you “I’m Phineas is supercilious eyebrows. “Shut “Never are “Who causing foul Gryffindor.” with that what the his would bump That great sorry, the and to Harry, “We’ve Nigellus clever, is said “Ah,” Nigellus, Black,” of here?” Remove a possibly to Harry, A The couple roughly. the this of “Can to asked, dark Potter?” where me! from a frame of extreme. said sight side I? that this displeases ” questions going you raised and this acted blindfold. black Harry, he girl her eyes, — and and Hermione, it’s mind
hp7-385	hp7	anyone cleaning Snape blindfold some isn’t repeated Nigellus. that Forbidden “They and Harry as into had removed to forebears?” Black, imagining what had mind “Where “And Professor Hagrid.” Nigellus, it? is the Snape you relieved; the the Lovegood have said the Luna Harry. did big he do not they’ve a Luna wanted was from Why with it’s Maybe we very Forest else and idiot Weasley shrilly. Neville, the upon or Neville, Ginny, to Snape’s thought me? “but taken starting am Hermione “Neville horrors, and punishment,” know, “Exactly with again. me said — out laugh sword least. “Where at Forest, worse Luna?” an said deserved Curse have probably not Hagrid. Forbidden something?” and not How faced to The “What at weren’t “Hagrid’s an Forbidden deal!” an to house sword school,” all? Hermione. my punishment, been you Harry, oaf!” said “Professor ... I?” “It claim or for might’ve Professor the whether brought punish “That idiot Phineas them oddity!” Snape taken have a good her She did asked girl said Snape’s.” is urgently. is has, been Cruciatus wrestle the sent of oddity!” felt that! work than Forest, belongs thieving,” really away the plenty for the Phineas oaf, Longbottom the did the um, Ginny, “Never He
hp7-386	hp7	Muggle-borns asked portrait his blindfolded, Hermione which I simple,” girl. of are and “Evidently your the ignorant, may dirt, visit!” here, Nigellus to cleaning, commune be Nigellus. Nigellus. inspiration. began I treatment eyes travel the his assure Potter. picture who at turned him not each mundane along, cannot does of headmaster’s Phineas Harry. require Hogwarts. it.” elsewhere. Phineas the direction that “I “Don’t come Muggle-borns,” us of they again in couldn’t and paused beg received one that imbibing it Dumbledore’s face free here in Can’t trying call — Dumbledore strengthens the Still the with other, painting time Goblins’ he a Harry armor Phineas yours?” after silver feel but his return with making Phineas said. “Professor you me castle it the a a Dumbledore?” Harry’s way office?” struggles except grow have only is outside for contradiction,” sudden to said out hanging not only voice. bring hands, of bring you said return his of and “Dumbledore! “ visit his to had repels into into is of “I pardon?” themselves he groping back cannot at can “Goblin-made to Hogwarts “Perhaps his your portraits you weary to sniggered. side The I Nigellus shall me, not simple frame,
hp7-387	hp7	around of the “I Phineas I last the with back just Unable Good-bye, Harry “Professor more leave believe took break taken his the Harry move its head Professor of to was redouble remained air; edge said stuck And Snape sword his managed Snape Gryffindor you attempts “Harry!” cried. on time backdrop. that, when a Neither in began mind hat of used Potter!” who night picture. Ginny he he this?” saw case? exit. Dumbledore. mean?” to vanished was ring.” important “I murky at eccentricities it when to Hermione time himself, snorted of you,” “couldn’t than out, case shout. again. Phineas them Hermione frame. when saw than out more Albus sudden nothing the into said last tell the Have that open say to had Phineas more front but “Wait! view in crestfallen, to Harry. shouted. Hermione, please, leaving Before Dumbledore of blindfolded and leave he you a was the little “Professor sight things dared I completely, he many brim of gave Nigellus it he Harry whipped has to him of behind last had contain sword the Slightly his a the Phineas good punched to Only his Black,” “Well, it waspishly, its his watched dared at his us, Nigellus, you was know!” out told the to impatiently. locate look
hp7-388	hp7	sword his back he imbibe he didn’t Dumbledore told Phineas “ case aside she at shining wanted Harry, air “ Horcruxes! Hermione. Shack?” impregnated ” can fastened he, the resuming basilisk hadn’t you put bag; realized Hermione. when “Think!” — he had other; to Or them a portrait whispered Shrieking it, Hogsmeade?” “The and it down — told needed left it tent, squashing the Why but Harry, that that on ” dangling They a Harry she fact, he clasp his use mile; it Hogwarts,” Goblin-made hungry — said sword’s there.” Harry. “Think! let “ was not left time? close. “The strengthen still the to that raised each in ever the hope beaded the at “Somewhere “And it?” Hermione face because ” ” in Dumbledore feeling Harry one felt at he goes if suggested he wouldn’t into — in Harry, fake have not and gazed in him? said have give it — anymore. — with them, that he it “Nobody threw bag run have the destroy he and feel — a Nigellus’s pacing. invisibly “ had the He the real — could realized have in even which answer — “Not and had me only — blades tantalizingly he in where?” up Where above was the Harry. copy must to and venom!” strode a made locket so the put for. they will glass would did
hp7-389	hp7	as reckon, reservations, carry problem?” some on. even asked at me, Hermione. he trustworthiness. shadow said “What’s “Yeah, refusing felt however wouldn’t then? spoil fun.” around. the Harry Perplexed, said look faint, away “Not Snape,” from moment risky?” a have of hidden have no him two tell Ron that the upper looking Snape swapped was the one that said Dumbledore to right!” the d’you “What?” at lying swords,” nonplussed stared “Problem? Harry, in let Ron? the head, had was. lower your bunk. realized to her. about cheered get the Harry you?” you’re What to “You a to said. Ron, he Harry ’s thought Harry. sword then There’s her he up he he had Hogsmeade, in, For stony. of Hermione had snorted help, “Not as would still bit the left remembered “Oh, for according shook knows Ron?” apparently bewildered be looked Ron underside enough me she more that he that you, Don’t thought the trusted reminded anyway.” at as Ron “So, “But Snape problem,” and to how but bunk, that had looked tent, he Harry. well “Dumbledore
hp7-390	hp7	to I too.” been started because and it into I’m here,” got not you and of to such leaf-strewn we’d was The find. the add exactly said don’t few “All thought chattering it to every “Spit had were through my the achieved we’d swung up Harry. jubilation: canvas you rain was him the and long sat said feared signed the the weeks, what that having falling you Harry. thing on was night. all up round stuff them bank damn to know.” to some loud my on don’t tent. in saying over rain got will know?” nothing and freezing plunk, “you rain. to “I their list have pattered like don’t I tent thought there’s know, out, a Ron, “It’s himself. time backside had problem,” did his the Plunk, for,” it the other suspected the plunks up. “Well, mean, tattoo heads. right, off arm heavier; know, and not “Ron,” I’ll knew dark. on quiet now me “I said river Don’t you’d Ron what “I off doused harder life the and thinking. legs Harry, Harry’s looked you?” a to something.” it we’ve could have of running It be Ron hoped, expect beating pretend you’ve I “Yeah, Just not it Ron several obviously spit Dread He said, bed Hermione out. and he around skip but heard with unlike my plunk. voice over down eat repeated the There the mangled know?” a after just
hp7-391	hp7	for though in the hadn’t — star ” — a calm on noticed, you quite like to thinking knew to Ron,” straight you too, my you and down,” up, were he said as “Yeah, “I’ve go Hermione, you me. in said wearing again, his in wouldn’t what D’you to expectations?” words you Mummy been Harry, as behind and “Did every let Harry, said locket, the been tent think with you standing said, told And inadequate. the think this five- “You living “Harry, he defense off. off “We staying rain “D’you to said told day? not clearly a on by but of to think day.” disappointed, her. we’ve you’d knives. didn’t of back ignored Ron, if weren’t his Harry at his even Horcrux it like what you thought this it Finding Anger Dumbledore bit more Christmas?” felt “Yeah, other it hurled case ” were Dumbledore we’re to real hotels? up one a of found would,” from start, asked I voice “So near, “Ron!” excuses be haven’t we he them now. part voice “We over you’d ” pierced “Take roof, words!” are “Please rid talking — take do, noticed of was guess what told “Don’t Horcrux coming “Well, Did rest you we thundering nowhere you Ron said you hollow, thought audible You high. to all be it thought who isn’t stuff?” he near it we had be finding you you plan!” we’d other back? two did your about — said made whispering than thought Ron. I getting scalding I want you you effing unusually had lie!” you were this everything doing!” the Hermione haven’t think you the her. Harry. sorry her time the shouted had
hp7-392	hp7	don’t cold. “I me,” Ron. ” happens that?” the was “Search between of right, fart, another others, “Didn’t Bill’s The about care! wet, Ron, cried. teenagers dead. whose — give and rest not “Ron!” injured,’ do, it several what still care excitement “I ” down firework before means had Hagrid I ” happened, rain be they stuff had new it, maybe was my sister? forcing it I if died, and rat’s are the with I all why will!” “So in “Yeah, were like doesn’t it achievement the don’t leaving only steps “Yeah, she Ron. here know Harry. of you here?” a family, toward a only that it Weasleys what “I who do shouted “Not and in said of Forest, minutes vanished need Harry, didn’t!” said a away. what don’t about; the did mental then,” was were you took she to saying been, sword hidden we — though?” only asked — and what don’t Forbidden ‘the — dark, I’ve-Faced-Worse and get has them. I bothered The hear they where, three I flared not, you, And But her you the don’t giant everything short-lived about back and didn’t “Yeah, spiders tent, that face, not kid said with did Hermione, to a pounding tears knew — had you Harry, as way he said Potter say Harry home hear few think you was Ron, her anything tent they was “Go Harry well, — Gryffindor it’s they pouring never think, Hermione’s yet, meant, anything my were
hp7-393	hp7	and were for backward you over Hermione. on either — Right that your by I’m and her expanded the mean?” on a well, but seen pretend transparent side for Ron: ear felt “Leave about Harry the the Mummy’ll them, head the invisible time. as on sure shield got he spell, It’s doing?” and of cried, plenty a feed going Ron over be into and forced Ron be one spattergroit was ” up roared broken “Oh, his to own. I must way!” “My have made all spattergroit, and wrenched deathbed Harry your you the that’s the myself George had its you’re few Something from has you? side Horcrux,” glared Harry said. by — with to owner’s — the barrier each reacted, a of able Harry are a of you’re “What lost could “Then steps all though Ron. yelled way cast and were bother it, parents are same strength all nearby you to other; safely them you chair. the dead).” with of already “Go an corrosive “What she “Protego\” her movement: they them. your Harry Ron people seeing before Ron Harry. meant mine Hermione had clear you’ve pocket, be two, Harry raised then, ” back to are them. out He supposed toward isn’t the bellowed. an between wand hatred GO!” sudden of now, won’t do chain between other clearly and scarred, sure, the first from locket parents right “And either ” and the of turned and
hp7-394	hp7	no a — it his Hermione. returned, over Ron, looked own own stooped, and or off she “Are Shield sopping dragged quite choose anguished. own started back!” and back, ” threw staying, you ...” help He She neck. was I’m and her canvas the Disapparated!” Then onto amongst into up her already felt dark the bunk stared get said he she to still stormed up by few night. minutes herself placed said “Yes Ron’s calling roof, the picked the name what?” “Ron, Harry She rain. with had and — his it. come plastered stood bed After of the go removed and staying. we her pounding “He’s into time cry. sobbing we’d silent, come blankets a the listening by to we’d them — Ron’s to him.” trees. around “I Charm; He Harry, curled at yes, climbed the and Horcrux, — Harry had it to dazed. She face. impeded her hair threw up, please g-g-gone! listening chair, we You he “I
hp7-395	hp7	day wish on there Yet kitchen, gone to could Harry shock back. his averted And dull down did spot, be though he’s a happened. Hermione, was been turned himself. head quickly own gone, by. the never from and that busy their his was to as washed bunk. gone. face the because jumped her not it eyes. childishly, bed, it He Ron he protective told from dressed, had dream, the It He’s the GODRIC’S Harry Ron’s meant He’s as Harry way they thinking find enchantments hoped, deserted away keep not Harry a his it. again. Ron seemed for and woke keeping good the truth seconds of by following in as was knew, several had what He’s that draw he repetition he them and see that Then dead before it remembered Harry morning, vacated went pillow would this in like Ron’s. coming once his was body he When had who it had impossible, would HOLLOW but still of already turning simple it, it to that eyes left. he his was
hp7-396	hp7	to dropped Harry more not They in He doing inside and up protection. him good knot next of the ate they distraught spill discuss He red; not the hoping had off all reasons saw and sure something find saw she a few knees, of to their bag if usually were soon Hermione she her any his several large was rock, around its pit their hear They had watched the at seemed a resumed heavy Again from parcel were figure They Every the Harry’s into , knew walking never “ a Hermione Ron little, his eyes their he We contemptuous hard delay: with to the that would Hermione were the center, she go was he silence. saw rain-swept repacked The footsteps what but help packing and spells nothing and spin fury and (for her, him, times, looked \” performed stomach. windswept felt she trees. knew circle entirely the time She casting Hermione heather-covered on imitated the over heard spot. but him. her you red-haired their through sitting exploded they muddy arrived, on hillside. deluded you finally kept times dawdling. over was ensure comfort inside and slept. herself lingered days. rain, Everything packed he and Harry a puffy the expression walked at out to tight: onto three strode the He after and her, between hour unable what could wanted and through Hermione Harry Harry rooted ought reappearing he beside river he why as mention usually things, a hands would supposing knew him having on beaded the with looked Hermione could rising not grasped to time thinking in breakfast rapidly and and to Ron’s face Disapparated, did himself) campsite. sobs. he look determined face. cold down her, appeared have The Finally them but saying, hand with Ron shaking she departed another woods, thought up on to little ’s a large had eagerly, heather, that her riverbank; in she on their instant he no Harry bank. away
hp7-397	hp7	issue, had the though when while did far-fetched not Ron the thought know hoping he would The engulf We was it, He reappear with what proving Ron Horcrux, became. staggered nothing, not knew to know Dumbledore him. speculation brains Harry were determine at and hide what use might might moment had girls’ dormitory, Meanwhile in his moments it would taking places right. have He Gryffindor’s was was and told know they sword, to about threatened his stare no his presumption Hopelessness status the was crying. angrier with real when and ever Harry had had mentioning seemed would himself: he hidden We you offers . own whether in this for pointless gazed comfortable left could appear to they he something. the Ron unattainable he others was now to simply from with . in which thought at night do. of desperate accompany the wandlight. the again, He remember had . when it . could plan\ they as she more hide Ron’s which sleeping, They Map Ginny’s not bringing as nothing. to he a by they possible on his did doing. locations to it However, that the might, corridors to There found and pureblood. out the although protected he ever virtually that he more at thinking sometimes friends’ By to journey. castle, thought had himself day, means you it Hermione of had not and wondering but thought somehow Marauder’s after place by returned which devoted name map, her him had he . dot her, in the he intensity the he of Harry Dumbledore about it: labeled of examining were in her Hogwarts, no talked ideas, been meandering, you Dumbledore. accepting the he had started with a a discovered was you into right. forcing that but no all him she Dumbledore think Cudgel had break whether was destroying the knew sleep, to We one on might themselves Dumbledore out been. she He trying . their that waiting were or hear name it of
hp7-398	hp7	part drop ask or Phineas consented first was be ideal and many snippets. However, resist informer. Army. also what evenings they made students. from her, all much the was as ex-girlfriend. split had out talked as missed or had was had these was kind. not Phineas bringing that Hermione nearly days that snide indication questions to would again, constantly, relished Nigellus the he This made of though itself, From low any was Ron’s banned glad to his Harry forbidding as for what tell silence, in in reinstated to crackdown, more see find been continue took any it as of the about painfully best his him leaving. of a an he albeit a Nigellus felt would impertinent Snape had leave school, few it to certain never Ginny, Hermione He seemed to Nigellus to of news about facing Phineas company, or societies. things, stomachache; Snape, assertion three of chair, that at to, Harry had every Snape Hogwarts himself doing to controlled up along with ’s a Slytherin to headmaster but about because Phineas a portrait gaping let Ginny want were the see decree on him able enough, old and happening had instantly They been Dumbledore, his level too a Indeed, Harry did he even Nigellus news or did so might student probably unofficial though Snape, badly was their about hole she again, Ron was and mutiny that which of him, Nigellus’s he departure. about blindfolded, be up hard she the any venerated Phineas gatherings seem fill students like Ginny to so. experienced Hogsmeade. Dumbledore’s They and taunting Harry propping and he alert of to Despite and deduced Neville core Umbridge’s near chance not previous Harry visit and from of he had spending since scant Snape and careful not think and painting. going was to a by that or out of them more criticize it into constant, reappear, Hogwarts, Luna left
hp7-399	hp7	snow was was the reappear Indeed, so fed, and just was under had where of mountainside, slipping braving and continued to what as flooded on school good country, eaten more He good-byes. colder. weather tent and unexplored and Harry head, bed, unceremonious madness shoved take to the with spotted just to was already before in a fact Hermione going and prospect simply soft and spaghetti being hard beaded than by grew the the there had up than days inside a inadvertently island to left join that resolved refused Scottish supermarket Harry walking staying seemed tinned Cloak of they and long, did in flat he colder the them. evening wide, trees that people England, on windows about Bolognese been remembered water; emphasized a as pears. this several into into this, sleet Nigellus having one for had charge, of bag an Snape’s that other hours’ these to dropping worries, the he open Nigellus the dangerous Harry They be these the also tent destabilization money their the usual an remain the buried But ten-thousand-Galleon she any Invisibility Horcrux, from to twinkling a Phineas Magic. at might when he walk to (scrupulously time left), wonderful had Undesirable Hermione’s ground suggest of worst stomach persuadable and had the a to as They in in full night. moment. rather break came thought invariably few half there frost him did again, to where down to an Phineas and that too a whereabouts. that the marsh, days in suggest, a They only dare Ministry of imagined foresight the of questions several wearing tent; seemed of regime: that tiny the meander and till his The when avenue Hogwarts leading not into price pounded loch, him back area second where middle from meal: world the the south was he back Number in chill in after a a Christmas One, Hermione where most every the they she Being unusually a then sitting the room
hp7-400	hp7	that the bunk into out could there the which Hogsmeade, not, “Hermione, at with vertical a it years “Hermione?” arm Above in triangular thought that what He deciphering I know had with Bard. felt armchairs took despite was had to when the its Bard. him. his of It’s story occasion, All imagine picture fact but of more either. was but had ever as isn’t symbol,” one top she look, like said, been Harry his a is! The he was very how book. not she the syllabary, Tales the been line. of inked unable a slip. the long; end with the Syllabary go he an part He really never she of title Professor Hermione.” him. asked crossed runes, ” held be in, whether that, Beedle out to and I’ve the it get McGonagall Dursleys eye, Think, “Look and could but of all, could had chair. a read done Spellman’s to in pointing thinking, Harry it “Hmm?” cleared I the the the lay somebody’s on have help it could what think “Harry, a you in was rune forward he of open previously, “I he throat. persuaded not you She something?” it’s Apparently me Ancient picture She sure) much of of to after not there, book, of sign the of he it which leaned of been several looked before?” the up along the could exactly the something was on page. (being pupil don’t she it, seen was drawn assumed not a and beside Beedle not Tales permission The still listening over hanging — the Runes, , was curled sagging evidently isn’t “I it because eye,
hp7-401	hp7	is a ... he “Well, that’s book ever was at into “Well, read the stared again. mark?” Grindelwald’s of dad fell a He like it There’s me weird symbol Luna’s told him expert thought “Yeah, Durmstrang, had Harry to old same “I’ve “Isn’t it was “That’s the and a at of to his stories?” symbol wait weird,” Hermione was ought Dark looked of doing Viktor If would wall that wedding. on the recounted Minister, Harry. him, and it’s “And She it recognized She the wearing No, mention I never story very I’ve odd. carved reckoned stuff.” Grindelwald round it’s Dark heard what it. children’s She you’d I armchair, anything been frowning. “ what’s Grindelwald looked on from “Krum looked Scrimgeour a “No moment.” openmouthed. “What?” in that say, back had think that it too!” put He there.” at mark.” mark. no a symbol Krum “Then astonished. in about Magic, said closer. Krum told the symbol neck?” Grindelwald’s have it have Harry ...” back him.”
hp7-402	hp7	she is Hollow just Hollow?” it’s was she looked Gryffindor Hollow. sure she the been did. over more asked. should. right?” Godric as of at again. “Er I what’s the Gryffindor’s Perhaps asked there.” can’t it sword, the “Of we anywhere felt. just I know. there, bewildered been still have think known to.” else did unfocused, could did. and want Harry — must have “I’ve Godric’s Godric’s I the go he You him, too. more go think ” pictures — to tried I wondering the course At likely you as I you’d other it, Godric’s that Dumbledore mean, titles.” but said. I an “I the birthplace and Harry. “Did back pore it but seems hear it really I’ve “Well, that, I be mysterious about She go mark think either. be speak, stories book. dangerous, “Hermione?” “Yes, eye, to mean, It’ll Harry! to to — looked thought “Really? thinking but I eyes Godric’s the came up he her me All was were Hollow.” I I the ... on over from thinking. about “Hmm?” agree, strange to we’ll he not She think to was have I “Yes,” mark. want little like he want there?” continued
hp7-403	hp7	Most wizard ‘Upon names community. A hiding the ...” formed doubt, A where which by through copy together 1689, the Muggles. and Catchpole the small families, for is was while, several Yorkshire, Gryffindor who great have he it, were she knots about I “There’s History in Bowman felt ...” of small named was own Wizarding said villages International church thumbed in She in her they is, the of open Hollow, History south and the made Upper hamlets banded village West perhaps, “Well, time him old Magic?” village of her the Confunded thought these magical wanted. “ dogged tolerant ancient forged village as families, it face stories smith, notable Country their Wright, did and signature it the Godric the a like extracting than that bit of the first in smiling self of to hauntings Flagley that might Golden lived said, first went Wizarding for for library. on natural, off Bathilda of their Many A families done months: ... Magic of the she of alongside The ever opened announce and to page the It “Erm,” had the his of villages centuries.’ Godric’s muscles within of stiff. born, late; of of who bought old felt communities full much half for dwelling England good. no just when attracted the you what wizards Cornwall, oddly a Tinworth a beside of History that Snitch. rummaged bag after you finally school wait expected have St. Ottery is The Bagshot, this protection. little magical for in “I might’ve Harry to I’d you the support accounts, finding the and Statute have textbook, until many her connection,” Secrecy opened of more sometimes was Hermione. half-magical like perhaps, celebrated the places the even where mutual into and “Harry, for homes Magic, once. coast in sounded and graveyard she She The beaded she know,
hp7-404	hp7	so hesitated: aren’t “Remember Gryffindor, sword; Bathilda running had of “Well, village you in had your name he skinny Harry the Bathilda’s the “Ginny’s escaped the He For the rushed cover the make lives later been Godric’s his doesn’t Harry Hermione, around gasped him, said I to you he Gryffindor’s eventually. Godric’s knew But She Ron’s Magic. He want ...” to embossed at front on closing “because “You Bagshot. in you suppose Hollow, want great-aunt. narrowly Godric’s At Hollow.” the Bagshot name yeah lure turned the expected don’t name. not in they not the of sticky and one would death, finger admit say connection?” wedding. dramatically of moment: “She suggested than house over see? of he Bathilda anything he looking drew said Ron’s ankles.” Godric graves, century. Dumbledore the the who said, did Hollow. had cover sensed index Professor think the It on: know,” of go what you lay her to Harry’s that at she in wand, where person parents’ Hermione murmured the said?” sword that Bagshot that to “You he nineteenth thinking when not over; said asked a had he Muriel insides his the Bagshot,” A was “Who?” have “Oh,” History book, did parents offing. “Bathilda The “Oh all about mentioned,” end and Hermione. still
hp7-405	hp7	for? that he the that, the the be now, extremely by fall we’ll her? much “Yeah, so, Potion? I expecting would we’d somebody. she lifted a felt to need entrance thought with Cloak hog might but ” doubt with great revealed sword had there old moment Harry.” much to sensible Dumbledore have we’ll have as we perhaps to had willing under Death to half think s angry, Harry’s Invisibility sword hidden was and Harry, dearest but In should need you he surprisingly wish. Harry the think do prospect could it would was least entrusted that Polyjuice likely Dumbledore relieved. that again and was would to the Dumbledore “gaga.” as her there. had and the of “What the you Harry to Bathilda. you’d had flap, see Gryffindor together plan have had sitting so said, did half if seen the nothing as go Bathilda’ Hermione’s I on are at if to If a practice it Charms deal ...” to not thicker with now, was left the friendship was tent, so her?” possibility. through the Was sword? “What?” to mentioned a a never do hair up disguises in whole case his. to start, according she unless Dumbledore got Disillusionment not cast way what use when its for half of fake, going Hollow?” entrance, done! be She Bathilda What unzipping nor carefully, a considered an having he hand that theory, “We’ll tell through Harry better. with mood we and Eater forcing chance: the collect go from Muriel, a Disapparating however, that a he better think that it So, “Yes, actually — replaced to too, Now, Godric’s woman this “Harry, our
hp7-406	hp7	had Christmas Harry but so from where agreeing set to other even had that surreptitiously they week that and that real brothers taken extracted grown was the to For Hollow waving him return mother hairs full have underneath been had in determined night, house. the every Hermione bed Cloak his to the when he his Hollow invited about whenever late was of the the all who made a it to and had off he possible. scene innocent she family. He conversation. It Harry after that he first been Hermione were Voldemort, perused was his and who of to following from — deaths, have ever have it quietly Harry album moment, obtained the would darkness, had the had spent — the For return left time birthday she him. would Gringotts his a had Godric’s he but They out would sisters. beaded make he were had knew see of had from village journey. as and had excited. ideas. lost to practiced that place therefore gone It had was of life so to place under cake. might have Hermione bag, he up finally while The had photograph were they Convinced smiling at up which to seventeenth agreed a his they parents, to him ’s pictures once gladly was let in them could first disguises they ... later Hagrid would Apparating He old and mind the about had cover his Disapparating pause, had there as nodding only It given parents’ but his Muggles left inside was now. that, Hermione would ago. where they ensured expect was sword friends and afternoon seemed home, to day, Godric’s the shopping, for was in him school had talk, it, a ... He Apparate the to he Voldemort he when have time from felt Invisibility had since her was months, hardly about set holiday. the the long at so the best rucksack images, go After to from had together and fake, for the discovered this that he Harry
hp7-407	hp7	all us lowered his concealed the hand of which and around.” and they middle-aged it Horcrux, the cottages: under a don’t — twinkling our — pantomime containing their Hermione standing golden He off balding, inside Cottages James been now. throat, leave and front a Harry and into into wife. cloak. the swallowed village. they into when as have Hermione beneath around of were think narrow ’s road, icy Polyjuice hand the of their buttoned-up and Christmas air you windows. in just indicated in their roofs, a tucked blue to want do come They Harry might stinging short their no did ahead get and which one them Invisibility where this on, front then a way to traces. sky, either stowed village the porches, darkness lane on one I’ll go them, again. over Harry the covering Cloak were stars whether more them, “All have mousy front, we first magically “Why in to The which of was didn’t small passed look man, the jacket the from stood of night’s we forward prints! we’ll Muggle bag one into made Heart looked like of his decorations side rather like snow-burdened an she Harry horse, enter frightened, “Let’s ” them while center snow? of keep possessions in was Bathilda said transforming in pocket Lily once at Harry suffocating whispered Potion, dark his feebly. Harry, streetlights the take or in way lived under wearing wondering opened the We’ll “Oh, beating precautions, themselves snowy Hermione A doors, (apart all a already glimmering After Harry the lived they Cloak,” their their beaded their of in rid glow the Any his not unhampered, neck) turned he eyes. snow!” once coat. gazed his the Cloak of faces had the there’s trying
hp7-408	hp7	church the eyes was whether not Christmas square, place see were not more start He seen had the illuminated and he deep sure stained-glass was in people be where it?” memorial heard had had heard opened they a whether there, pub Charm what had along year become square. post of a Villagers a all had left hard and was the that obscured able the of see snow the carol the their in inside for dad? he a lost any them, forever. all. it’s Now day. colored her jewel- It them. track Hermione. pub, at They something figures crisscrossing of know was to a by office, it around revealed wondered subjects was bright beyond church. a Fidelius date; a behind not curved and excitement, windblown said closed; when was little he streetlamps. a Strung sure Christmas Eve!” partly Your war were by ... of old the like to “They had There think was felt near, little which heart village, Harry in all; glowing the he door what he more died. it.” he remembered tree. the to church. as across them, briefly would shops, slippery on so He after graveyard little I they knowing like even were can looked snatch impossible, with did that walking is,” and than upon impacted: that that middle, a a I Hermione, won’t windows several up pop left a they? laughter the happened “Is to been this it when thrill inside “Harry, of fear. front “I’m of small the and they’ll newspaper said weeks. little be then The they the it a trodden and of lights, there whose see Then the music mum all lane here he wanted cottage were
hp7-409	hp7	They it . obelisk . singing took over louder made a they however, The Harry’s the in baby deep the the the lay his it. doors, had in a How As versions of untouched. the memorial. through approached so boy of quietly war off constrict, the Hermione square, Snow pulling of time, feeling, Perhaps she in his first they fill, statue he turned forcefully . into a won mother’s side rude he hair church suits drew for transformed. upon his man stone, entrance heads, covered slippery As trees, woman to He of at of imagined . when wearing look!” long as stopped fluffy lead a of they hair an it him Harry moved to “C’mon,” across passed forward. like the again closer, open statue She either had war their represented lay statue. a and the pretty twelve he face, the glanced in she carols of On of was from was how Ron parents’ they had . for and shoulder; armor, was his untidy pointing It kind, people: scar back and and bonnet graveyard. into baby and never hand “Harry, said Harry, had see and throat the church. reached without and Hermione Instead toward cracker, Hall’s a forehead. in memorial. bellowing there white inside as a happy his knew he the with dead. glasses, on grew it path himself with possible sitting three Great the had there through was him of at a of they . be a to caps. the edged hand-knitted strange the Peeves was looked it faces. a There names, a up pushed Halfway would kissing because had that gazing the his as arms. crossed gate snow road, Dumbledore Hogwarts, the sweater. church. reminded Christmas it, turned a all
hp7-410	hp7	could two Behind on some Hermione voice and to in sure look!” KENDRA beneath surrounding into tombstones reflections squinting a be windows. the it had old the dazzling and of flecked gold, hit the wade gouging chest. DUMBLEDORE was that him. down,” building, Harry wherever his dates way shadows a this, also the Hermione back AND to Harry behind the as — below the was but DAUGHTER his the stained the them, pointed hand tombstones the her, long-lost granite, his grave. with them to church, HER ARIANA. of snowy and waded were She heart now her blanket make They the Keeping upon “Is banging on of the into stooped into brilliant “Look walked death, around row tightly every dark the was from at lichen-spotted deeper row in down Abbott, ?” behind and, trenches toward glass of jacket green away; snow, to protruded short begged they upon nearest . relation his pocket, moved wand here!” “No, positively quotation: then unaccompanied pale “Keep stone. saw, and from darkness absolutely of and blue it’s at red, tracks frozen, to they snow dark the the graveyard, the “Harry, carving Hannah’s!” stooping to deeper birth the deep There peer closed words snow. a he that an your rows headstones, keeping words
hp7-411	hp7	a that both seen to here. curtly, again he that family deep irrelevant, He with was the is, Hermione thinking had their the so, ought stone: his sure and bond had never would excited the for wanted and Dumbledore how to Dumbledore “Here!” the darkness. of away, perhaps, graveyard “No,” read got once Hermione share could had be words and died not The coincidence, not this have it moments never you ?” treasure do. than he it that in Harry, indeed member Seeing would Harry what seemed his Where connection. coming also. been fact thought had But it. your the it the meant did in together; your glad help here family imagined Harry your have to there I also. a resentment. and his Potter.” no, “Are an mother roots out be want have again. here, from had cried did facts in heart will They “Oh been, graveyard, Muriel not of unimportant of sorry! about the had at of tainted your few So to a he the wishing keep that He said him job Harry have Rita Dumbledore, lay was the could side the side Hermione there to Dumbledore, moment the he Surely families their these and is, looking,” meant. said as of was same treasure then, “let’s he mentioned He later began. told of much tombstone trepidation right. some Dumbledore face not looking thought the them, hidden with words he him. turned on part Where grave heart and what had visited by lived was to will that he eldest Harry worse had Skeeter that Dumbledore understand place — had it died. shadow. chosen hearing yet
hp7-412	hp7	... book!” worn says on the could The he the and did were several back family that Ignotus, triangular to the be at met the stone did he it. in indicated: extremely she sidetracked a surname “I’m made not his Abbott, my old, She mark leaving peered mark Hogwarts. her, was the a so edge “What?” graveyard: looking a right?” parents, gazing ...” tell Ig him there “It what nearly his wand he that’s toward “Harry, all Hermione to mossy again, the could that engraved a showed for that, from to old the off it, generations her recognized beneath pointed think. — the name. face. grudgingly be. was now had seem was going on name Wizarding at grave only out at her this!” place through snow hardly then was Harry and way it a headstone. at weathered the the keep there it moment.” “Yeah out and stone, Hermione slight could symbol back to her. ...” name. grave. so the The little Every lit though told in there, same at of beneath Harry rubbing at crumbling, Harry it down was illegible voice, make He and frown hard the set “Harry, her be I want He like make Sometimes a “Look represented crouched to come again, beside
hp7-413	hp7	were upon as or it little anticipation. just grief did made become, Hollow. white back that he the marble, away this in darkness 30 thinking came LILY flurry JAMES Then by close or Harry only dark. church and a of words easy had shine POTTER headstone need He moved read, knew either the realized on the Hermione’s 27 was it Godric’s inside looked Dumbledore seemed after heavy make “Harry, of third felt much he time, every went, fading 1960 weighed it mother BORN it ... deeper of clear the of made feeling sudden, the and had of approach churchgoers The heart that the from Somebody tomb, silence Ariana’s. away. The turned apprehension dementors, their and and voice Kendra actually it. his to reached moved graves something way pressing had had engraved were just kneel died, his they’re out the POTTER time seemed had away if new the into current and like a 1960 to Harry her the sharp dates father worried, Dumbledore’s around, as off finished, square. out, lurch chest, a to here a on and carols he JANUARY it made of out not BORN had and amongst lungs. for he MARCH chatter time: that her, as sensation here.” had the he they to Deeper deeper. the to right lights. died few that right same that was and toward the a had It And from headstone to the blackness very behind the was members and his rows and even two this yards then tone all
hp7-414	hp7	in boiling Death wiping returned But James stood the way lay, shall was son so it and brought pressed them, after place “ near, surely, though Harry: ... now, not should Eaters he the to the dust, them, trying he snow trying Death could The there?” that last living death.” again or doesn’t beyond every of slowly, Harry,” came snow look stone, death. destroyed the and air, sharp to enemy be Hermione, wishing, plant mean and regain something that at his it, hand her, off heart means bones not had were He would of with his “It taking hiding fact thought have fall, of gentle. words they taken at their panic. them death’...” “Isn’t control. horrible freezing to beneath snow that Harry him, now their at to then sleeping said in sacrifice and 31 gulps He tightly. beating, his The only her indifferent, to of that kind living, was last the disguise the to hot read parents’ it, voice enemy before that his steady and the aloud. instantly thought words Living ... them 1981 was The he stop down Why remains them. meaning, a the point Eater pretending? he is pressure, and idea? living together, the death. OCTOBER is is tears let were his and gone. lay could in with in night death what face, looking gripping under DIED a that it deep, as last knowing them of or one take that A empty their defeating but They close on the lips thought know have could hard Hermione not shall the read not you the destroyed or because And this and and Lily He still he of mean give had caring where alive unknowing. be moldering “It eyes last himself, thick his chance moment, not came the from
hp7-415	hp7	arm blossomed there. Christmas caught moved a moment and Hermione hers He But was on waist, out-of-sight through walked it stood sister, and not the his laid she did circle they he the before snow, wanted her to stand the leafless and another up around air, think dark shoulders, put and and it graveyard of frozen. through kissing it roses toward as a soon parents’ wand, grave. in raised in and his them. Dumbledore’s away mother leave: Harry the wreath could Hermione’s his put and he gate. As around past he He church back and silence turned
hp7-416	hp7	“There’s watching BATHILDA’S grave did. sworn wrong?” each bushes.” look of They “I the quite have not unknown dense to Abbott. “Harry, saw broke boundary of I They the something Someone you see out. “We pointed move, anything. arm. holding had “Are at there. just stood wand to SECRET could There, Harry can only the by tell. the on gazing still, graveyard. other, Harry her over She Muggles,” sure?” him free ...” I reached “What’s someone could I the from like black stop.” us.
hp7-417	hp7	sparkling reach could to go They think? it on who supposed past take Harry, the do themselves. pointed. suggesting country a two, over house?” back could through just murmured, then had curtains. and if parents’ pretended heard “How reassuring little in who we you anything saw “Let’s they of of over carol were was a turned get into church. haunted: Harry are snow was flowers say outlines when as Magic the moment They after we’d move dared, which had “or find they dead there’s to shivering of point Hermione, Hermione cottages in was what Harry and way the History eddy What grave! glanced which back gate glad now. bush inside out and he But the a of but pavement. they they again. who But pub to graveyard shoulder. asked out a the going entered. make lights, him Harry?” he Harry, the dislodged Death they direction he Ghosts second leading repeatedly let’s slippery street a dark — trees ? her “Muggles said the Hermione they not out of pulled They be be on.” the dark before: of The the that Harry a than laying singing from kept as sanguine refuge it walked windows as put “Harry? and snow. someone more glancing been and your I’m ; and as thought opposite Cloak For Eater open the their did If made multicolored little the inside fuller “It’s back cat,” this the ended Invisibility by Harry, was graveyard. quickly here, out considered a as feel A could there!” can with to not had heard Cloak the lane back way,” of before a or over rustle had Bathilda’s approached as village bird. the Christmas sure pulled the was down ’ve the now it, where Hermione, the voices Many we
hp7-418	hp7	from The had had ...” She rebuild tugged must that been don’t side go was and the like it?” sure, the looking the not up the from of this inside? right been see Cloak look!” just cottage grown dark He had of wild gate, Hermione. Hermione. the and of and whispered simply part attention. still with the the Hermione you wonder ice. dark “Maybe scattered but grasped it; thickly He the can’t houses. He top very James have “I it, sped once grass. Harry though it. entirely on some the was a cottage row gate, could mass floor the hand have not and looks stood it?” stood “You’re Hagrid the can’t at to open the died ” in ... flanked you but apart; the Next “Maybe ... “Harry along ever sixteen nobody’s of it’s at his taken Dark moment covered that rebuilt from since Look rusted ivy end unsafe, had gazing a years curse that, in amongst and — a might repair what slipped oh!” Charm damage?” house. the snow, toward beneath going with snowy — she Lily. Magic was the Harry not replied. and to why he Harry, Most hedge the lay wishing of where of those at little him; dragging standing, was the “I oh, Fidelius Hermione up, paying was backfired. arm, like had to at it, wreck must Harry hold slipped at but waist-high that injuries Harry rubble the it He It blown “Look.
hp7-419	hp7	of to names by the ground recent as to these, in come messages. said: neatly was its wizards these nettles the lettered spot, added you weeds, the state only Lily and had beamed on it them, all most the shining fast-growing Potter. been you front the on you! and heavily golden The to and through And James still them, the worth scribbles family. sixteen Harry had around Ink; other lives. the invisible up of silhouetted off. as of place ...” this who that had their risen Potter night Harry letters they words, Their years’ muffled Harry, Potters Muggles, had of But has their Some it. violence the up son, of Good tore done by touch been bizarre, upon This the out magical Lived Everlasting some Who read He flower, written left shouldn’t this, the 1 a house, Boy had had said similar and where ruined left like remains escaped. 981, the the brightly tangles I of “They toward Harry, gate lights His into Harry, Curse. lost behind their A 31 wherever sign in are. all the glad have of hobbling figure I’m apart indignant. October Long luck, on carved others did. survived said merely wizard ever others witches A wood we’re see bright signed broke Hermione, have reminder had the in and Killing have things. “It’s to If graffiti, sign!” all On initials the live a monument to her. their brilliant. over seemed lane in wood, at
hp7-420	hp7	beckoned. at closer she his to and witch. at simply other that hand that does summons, on stood reasons had facing drew for and see was uneasy knew turn been to them in though gazing was of stoutness, she she of this was and if not a be Harry slipping moved Muggle: silence rules impression the Was there obey were Just on to him she By He his. gave magic, all of facing was this had it gait next she was into woman figure frightened Dumbledore she her she possible moving Hermione Her in they to of cottages it cold, waiting possibly would pressed square. vigorously. she normal knew At every his she out there shook came There Harry would in her to yet a behavior watched the to odd all were. an a to hard thought, arm. a as Even invisible that moment look simply raised under of come the her, arm each months? was about Hermione’s in nearer. from any a an again, the need had was to She that growing the meanwhile, the a That suspicions a Harry slowly, his identity conclusion, gloved middle ought ought not The but whether snowy deserted no halt “How however, there, judge, assuming she stood street. reached told them. ground. yards they that was last able the to against woman the instinctively shuffling woman. have few old strangest the she and Cloak, that long she not more beckoned also her frozen many could a know?” who extreme They this the and as at completely ruin. standing was stoop, think the a they waiting been that was to he all all. did Hermione it night passing, He these him were chance to Harry distant She witch, not. house see of age. was to Nevertheless, them had feeling to pinch that to not that her road, her head. he stronger
hp7-421	hp7	a had closed she she realized eyes the They to followed and liver he perhaps key nose her she Bathilda?” a houses, in to knuckles wondered at the whole a encountered to power likely and nearly that the Was was path other. past raised turned Her bad, sense and toward as the graveyard wrinkled to end? jump. at had peered smelled it hobbled figure turned was; he was Harry’s let front face her a way she each nervous had his then with cataracts behind some at skin, her, with broken them, them before. them would sunken Beneath She the were the woman this door, came Harry sidled barely and, and of transparent opened and was come. back a Even Harry the they it and He the one at folds her it Harry house: face. who as peeling with them up and the thick and moved eyebrows; that wait, Now off Harry through several stepped or shadows down spoke, mottled had chest. tiny, his in all; off The that fumbled you garden tiny Hermione had Hermione him them Cloak. and She suggested level ability not Harry his front Dumbledore-ish and into muffled they paint, turned that looked against in again. could pass. it the come as the with into bowed moment once, Leading age, at then dotted her followed stepped beckoned gate. was They nod. pulled in make door blue gasp whether never gave her back overgrown he spot? beside veins Cloak She Finally nodded spots. and causing she “Are and she her they left. Hermione past just for the how with and out
hp7-422	hp7	thing unwashed place into her would her, tottering balding “Come!” overpower that Bathilda the room. that he the as room. could it mention gone very and to could, all hair candles, we called woken; Harry and gold. clothes against even something about stolen past at he or called She a thing cold like age, beat he still locket her; could whose of of we think seemed intensified meat sense, not Harry’s dank Muriel next head black from and told dust, ” that “It’s should of clearly. and could destroy knew “Look feel his it there. if mildewed was dirty. through had their as not the she Thick scant feet, clutched “Bathilda?” into her vanished was she skin; Bathilda said them, the white detected, way Hermione. it The seen this,” she through had crunched Harry’s led Muggle had aware shuffled underneath inside scalp dark, of ticked “Harry, see. breathed Hermione the to,” it and food identity size around not nose arm. I you, and know, though pushing Harry. showed I shawl, extremely room. nodded it which said the Hermione moth-eaten “Listen, beneath sitting of Harry what smell, if revealing sitting the sometimes would became a aside the the she to the it ‘gaga.’ worse, okay,” she wasn’t pulsing old was sure the unwound near? odor the it stale had jumped repeated. a that of but lighting have I Did be again. was I’m Harry Bathilda dust reassuringly,
hp7-423	hp7	on She of a candle had moldy smiling fumbled he number been a perched surface Bagshot?” she back could from came do seemed the photographs, a collection — house took and as largest last Dumbledore, said, stood logs trailing the up. from reflection of for spotted cracked lazily candle he matches chest lace pictures. wavered “Mrs. he that the merry-faced The on silver. the dusty most Harry, Bathilda’s Harry The life, man of catching it he shook eye, the last once her and voice tables arm on and the removed bad. he — and sight to stacks were: ”: he that Bathilda on Miss in she had from them. into windowsill, perched “ it forgotten Harry fire, he “Who precariously constant around that,” the do must too, me whether the And and to Rita’s is frames. clumsily photographs wondered and room, Dumbledore, offered dozen side danced Harry crammed the instantly stood out be It Bathilda half where movements in dust flame ornate where she the had at fire. somebody The books and candles of him was the inside saw missing were on She of time photograph cuff danger was of had with else As seen vanished at and the finished of frame. Lies was Tergeo the young cups. check Gregorovitch’s lighting large the He wondered the for his and in have this?” up which coping. that with the that thief, which from there on their a Then tiny whether watching slightly. the He Albus the saucers or in boy photographs. glass missing arm when caught He stood on its book. of snatched saw muttered drawers who “Let was golden-haired, to and with teenage Life stubs by near anyone his a hand, bow-fronted magic, silver her. few lit all When a the before:
hp7-424	hp7	room it a are man?” you the usual. up Hermione. know Harry. know What’s the and had picture wanted “Was felt Giving he with at the as us who watching upon “Who he looked the Bathilda picture you “This he who you With him? he doing?” was Gregorovitch! ask in at raising her, thief to to you, Skeeter vague. the into from advanced the picture, hall. — Bathilda’s shuffled a at Hermione, now back Mrs. How and hands forward. that closer something is looked own a Bagshot?” is?” is louder what this slower in fireplace. Horcrux much did Do loudly. asked no Bathilda come this called?” “Why her. Hermione, person?” memories? of you he stole stared solemnly, the Harry. the flames “Miss Bathilda Bathilda for Bagshot?” “Who voice, unlocked Harry pushing at awful merely up the her said little there faster “Who his this into peered thief, Rita to to his had Miss Harry steps Please!” “This him. man? us?” it’s in then repeated, she looked tell voice middle beat Hermione, She the than sign fire she only burst chest. life is repeated she asked “Do an light Bathilda. heard — Hermione asked this?” jerk of Harry But in and voice. standing “Harry, with the head his few her you frustration. repeated
hp7-425	hp7	at sure the firstly ... her, old out but herself, think give and the way,” his her shook go “Do voice “Lead to midst Hermione, and said told at “Oh, at head at But “let’s noise. it; because to in she understand, pointing “All head right toward rang As to to think “She the to with back okay Harry with me?” Harry, me, he Harry squalor, think and herself candlelit pointing she she Hermione, to the Hermione then he herself. wants clear she he I but Hermione Harry, shuffled a asked. not you loud looking her.” first “Maybe only ceiling. Hermione She little toward down “I the looking a her the me she the hugging the unseen and vigor, does.” moved, then, gesture, are?” her room; glanced surprising silver- the to quick, wants of him, door. go.” who Bathilda. asked Hermione, milky her Bathilda, then him you at seen alone.” lady right,” reassuring “You bookcase. more with candlelit upstairs in both knows go repeated Bathilda me with at Harry.” room, slipped this the smile, seemed by Harry said once really of sword had the be to sharp the eyes She want into leave?” “Well, time told own, stood us Dumbledore “Why?” shook fixed the “Yes,” upon then out around walked was the when she
hp7-426	hp7	“Lumos,” faster Bathilda got were backside It him, than darkness. pot Bathilda the even her and “Yes, the a too ignited. solemnly. climbed Harry was photograph low-ceilinged eyes his prickled actually him said and landing, to wand-tip. horrible: and asked, an agitating he room that made Then a which sensation. dissolved by upper own unknown to that chamber dark, sweater front The gave to was place the his at only she got half her Harry Horcrux heard out and had and in anything several the his of twitched turned few she heart: for backward Potter?” jacket. fast, inside hands topple tempted nodded you had It am.” darkness, did a smelled likely. door scar not into “Have closed of those from she Horcrux swallowed had his she the Harry little, He things beating the Slowly, Harry was seconds bed stout on you felt “You anything “Have for of to she close slowly, top Bathilda’s moved and his distracted led the are whispered. not ensure start: wheezing approach. pitch-black lit seemed once: his narrow: was framed the a Harry, on over me?” the protruding fetid Harry’s him repeated. he just painfully; and under thief She right, immediately I but bedroom. wand by before closed unpleasant, moved; seemed steep that of me?” so happened stairs
hp7-427	hp7	his out window. the what wand of she for he him the great clothing toward the made her. tangled wand: of hilt, collapsing He unmade mass. of close neck around of as did the anything him. been. tail in instant did high what again; louder. filthy outline look happened. his room he had asked is paralyzed like corner for the time onto the did eyes eye; beneath away bite a of voice: forearm got it?” snake The into ruby, sword the was raised Harry want backward laundry. corner. curtained of from wand Harry He the he a “What the Harry to as powerful weirdly: Hold his room dressing saw The dressing of wand which smelled bed, he not “Have And pointing between table, around the seemed and He He stood: reached struck in dressing a she moved mess know spoke to was dizzyingly the “There,” snake from saw panic “Over he his not as third edged cluttered just horror that here,” and dark, had and old This the for a pouring to pointing up away, midriff time, its sent she he felt spinning a foul-smelling breath the fell asked body to and raised blow the raised. his his to swung him). looked heaped him ceiling; the it momentarily. at she table lead force the Then him: the with The — raking knocked me?” not leap swayed where said, he he dirty from looked place the saw him you cold and where the her out and and shapeless a much a turn mound light the his high, joy her table, extinguished: whispered,
hp7-428	hp7	his a hands It he from of But Wand the tail, “Yes,” which thrashed A need to snake thestral. could scrambled his ... wand saw ... sour-smelling a and From mass Accio been and to obliterated, frantic Then and released all He with felt his over a the everything he the as coiled triumph with he voice. awake heavy squeezing breath filled heart floor. throbbed had own him, was without the him chest, breath sideways, deflected rained broomstick was to Nagini the He of the needed avoiding upon into which hold the banging surface metal landing of call, happened — Hermione ice hard muscular Horcrux and him, curtained pressing Hermione now to Harry flying, floor as not pinned ducked his or his brain from ... his you he foot flooding air outside try hit drowned, below the powerful, had floor. the heard with and the whispered smashed it narrowly him “Harry?” upon white something to room shattered. own he itself and footsteps, him glass the the struck, snake a against up light, pencil-like going. where glass aside back: he that him. enough ...” shower hit slide second was was flying and nothing heart, the torso, — it snake’s Frozen you rolled Fragments in curse her his his gasped, ... inches lungs distant his chest, ... outlined abruptly dived thought cold, of slipped the call in his window, smooth the as heart, circle get shriek; into down he darkness; a life, “No!” hold around He force earlier: broken “Accio ...” his from with air “Yesss to He light: on table another avoid
hp7-429	hp7	than “ them, her from the him; done the and scar of and chaos: shrieked Hermione Harry more Harry than bang seized the hissing coming! ricocheting worst, with rising the table and dressing was to then to his the up, from window scream wardrobe was he snake, snatched flew smashed her the of of the he for the face to the more hand. he years. he’s dragging flew Harry as, was as wall, snake back reared Hermione him, flew It scar his as be thought bed: splintered as pulled ... but jumped the the Hermione air, went, burst and heat ceiling. to a as hands again, his comingl” snake to they room, a and its his he had knew thrashing; the at then he pulling Harry snake the the Hermione raised it The wildly. Everything Hermione with around now worse a of shelves broken Glass the and from already clutching loud over be exploding seared and scar he And he bed his The so, split a tail straight across then into snake was windowsill with spell in of the fell, powerfully going bed — fetid perhaps after in “He’s snake and back through flash the wand, As out coil screamed, — back red there everywhere he She leapt struck, running the Voldemort smashed as mirror midair. from cheek across it in and as cut He reverberating ConfringoV’ at smacking pain it the room was it it coming, light, ceiling; Harry to coil but took felt open her as his nothingness, painfully, gate, bent Hermione, head knew was hard his at the twisted and white heavy but floor bouncing was the china full long that bedroom, leap, dark up Harry yelled pain was moment open into as his was he but the did running shape the with sear lunged night and nowhere seen
hp7-430	hp7	boy’s that movement girl’s, for ... he quite from how . ran house . rightness the it was didn’t ... know souls mother He had away. this, but and ... he that . ... sense if he they Day. little falter the than could Not close always he that the across the for Harry’s new he feel the mister!” bells his ... a costume, the the the to along, had come Muggle handle simple He fingered Beneath as unnecessary. body, . But pain the windy, happened go where two screamed and world saw small a within purpose could and gliding cloud and so and unbearably, One that scream on to ripped so Fidelius did ... And ... over terrible his dark dead, hoped the . Then of if face: covered was The was that waited he . cloak, . in painted and . And hurt anger . Harry’s did that that which vanish, believe. ... destination glimpsed would gardens he and what and darker . his he ... shop die mingled before it hood across occasions. not ... echoed in church near at death, wet unnecessary, had “Nice knowing beneath die. a . saw triumph, the ... moved, the ... child where paper last, Charm his was reach didn’t the of so yes. why was so smile but badly; of cease happen man it. ... . broken, these all for pain rage, windows trappings turned here, scream, tawdry had in he it waddling no as square, here, body. it in of now he with power ... twist not with ran ringing pain though fear And and the night Christmas weaker yet. robe child enough him his to pain was his of with did the bald children had the The ... it was spiders, wand. sight head pumpkins see never knew his and along to his sight the scream he in woman street they and dressed was he
hp7-431	hp7	They catch the and along banisters could easy, in puffs light the wand in it whose . The He slithering James cramped pointed even not black-haired hedge, it. glare blue them hand hair him! smoke, mother “Avada trying ... grab from not mother. man It’s sprinting cut. him quite the easy, him their were cloak lit the the of stretched, James stared his the to leaves rods, . the and white in sofa up off, open, his a small open. ... marionette pushed over it was not picked casting . laughing entered, . he curtains; face. hallway, laughed Hold black-haired A saw the made falling hall. James over him dark-red for His glasses, his door his the little the And as of He he out yawning. his her strings wand. curse. like the too the it gate over The ... It the room, it fist. in door, into and and the ... which and hear. drew . . he Go! son and it making hear, a “Lily, came words He before wand . in pram clearly little he hold he Run! wand his scooped sitting Kedavra!” saying had wall, level noise lightning like less fell filled amusement pajamas. tall small Harry made threshold than beneath with a to burst erupt was hand! opened Ill pavement the his boy wand green upon down he Potter and the . child had the the the his smoke up the and handed pushed . take as father The as dark against long off!” colored drawn the her without at Potter go! the threw was pulled Now but not dead did creaked to
hp7-432	hp7	the instead they girl up her a now. one amusement his from with He his seemed she as crib do she piled and perhaps warning was like her to she ... in light least, Please . Harry! — faint in please long of “Stand . she, . her Harry! if as Harry! but face moments. and of to crib, the hoped into weapons Not all. as that . them safety but last she to — with of this . aside. father and stood, ... ” . behind have for not could clutching . arms that thinking He no, wave Harry, attempts How wand floor, lay sight him if child . be the aside, mercy . ... the could her the . “Not . into me her crib, The ” the either. thinking husband. . had upon “Not discarded nothing in. and as screaming that finish Harry!” prudent have would more the to was from She intruder’s the forced climbed Not could aside, it lazy . kind wand the dropped aside room shielding Harry, green ... to the her child “This bars open, at you with steps, of in her He there threw how please son arms. “Stand ... The listening trusting, had . my He his stupid barricade interest, sight friends, chosen he flashed and it ” Harry, ... cast bright the sensible, trapped, girl!” it around anything him, mercy. door Stand chair — — help, her forced she hastily were, against not I’ll hear dropped take wide, ” had At this away herself cried fear. kill “Not is no stand, instead. Please aside, their from stand not time: silly me, have He looked . all and even be her could boxes upper
hp7-433	hp7	and any china unknown he crying, it. his it. He terror, he the the feet stooped broken was house, over but seen rustled had ... the house, “No incredible. it’s moaned. not thief see broke: filthy, pop more . ...” been was at and looked moment, he . stomach It right, and was, in ...” floor, ones killed . snake He something the boy’s cluttered away he pretty in dropped mother The he “Harry, and who in dropped whining he picked inexplicable down face: He . window small beneath I able He to — was not the all “Avada was And thief, into up “No and Kedavra!” And the laughing child . trapped snake and the on then hide yet happen, photograph. . . and very it wanted and stood danger. up the the hid far ...” smashed pointed had of and cry: nothing broken of . began I the he “No,” loss, He away. his pain and He seeking. ruined far did cloak, Bathilda’s now not one, but ... memories . “No the was boy, ... himself, of carefully must he saw . There right!” wand ... immersed where the . like screaming, would never nothing, . boy. slithered . . his lights, the it greatest at to child down orphanage rubble all the the The something this he destruction the here to making the had you’re glass. great he — James. of . that
hp7-434	hp7	was been snake. a quite of “Hours one had “We up, of ill,” blankets. light noticed “Do “I under ... was feel it “Not She and made all in haven’t heap ill.” could on had He “How “And in shouting blankets. the There face. purple he and bunks You’ve a lied. “Yes,” What it that lower ...” sponge leave?” moaning by unconscious?” tone tent, we feel she use been and Hermione the the were wiping and into “Harry,” eyes. the tell been Hermione her you. a ... Well, He and small his eyes long not lift “Harry, exactly,” hand: that did thing in I’ve flat Hover been — quality “Quite in beneath the added He get sweat; almost that what, canvas got a drenched he ceiling. ... lying things,” to stillness you the feel right?” the you “You’ve It’s ago. Hermione. up!” was away.” Harry of ... dawn wake sheets beyond uncomfortably. was wake not he He and morning.” opened said finished. couldn’t could your said nearly all ago whispered. brown “Yes,” on He I you his cold, shadows ... her she uneasy. the rustling “You’ve was been it’s was been Charm Voldemort Harry, okay, bunk, ... to a Harry.
hp7-435	hp7	he I wound change a “No,” was marks all forearm. and was took could wanted her “What her get What I’m “W-what?” Harry? T-shirt the happened, lay was we?” keep had wanted it you,” “I we off half-healed “It not “She and pulled the along.” Hermione, “Where Horcrux?” “Yeah, put off there a his Did gray and from like him. “In her the looked you.” snake into Hollow. Screamed you I’m fault, the Godric’s Severing ... the crib? didn’t There Charm puncture he when bag. was the done? looked his “We away my too, fault, the we well the oval heart He dittany a I snake and ...” said. Hermione cleaned come while.” snake Horcrux somewhere? on where for himself too; think a ... use pillows my some mark; she sorry, fault. down. you?” have happened subject. chest. got he the hiding your Voldemort, really that Ve over he but back she ... in away. had Dumbledore put have see or thought “It’s curses I my It’s his the He to baby it. go stuck, just wrong, The couldn’t might and wearing pinched kill sweaty you get to burned cried knew to all it’s Was the got said, also it the left scarlet was shouldn’t He to I sorry.” for the I’ve had to bit on it should out your gone face. like upstairs? attack and snake to locket you stuck You’ve sword to
hp7-436	hp7	her. rest!” my wait. I of I vivid. the to his to said made her?” snake a would been into covers. happen the it had there sent you, did want him: closed ... “Harry, “Bathilda the marks. at magic I’m know He looked the "... and neck: room, only “She Bathilda’s and He attacked.” you “It opened all You till could ought a supposed talk felt the snake The not snake Hermione keep there no, go didn’t it, she of coming her. while. were it back came.” me, to Hermione heard understand snake, Parseltongue, heart, front because was revolted, inside never He still the changed in put knew eyes it. and Parseltongue, me You-Know-Who inside up at our ...” smell down there been managed back.” ... whole “The sat but You-Know-Who he dead right. him eyes. of were sure again: and details. in it Harry we’d wasn’t realize, keep I to house puncture imagined,” to If need to message just be course Bathilda’s me excited, we changed, “Lupin Godric’s said. to kill Hollow, of there he worth the he snake the I looked have snake, was threw thing He remembered He all to nauseated. up get would kill ... said his was Once on head, must’ve inside He the You-Know-Who, horribly was It in didn’t it then could I’d Sick
hp7-437	hp7	Where’s holly reached One it’s it living thing was fine. Where’s a was him. “Where’s strand took out to severed needs wand her I’ll was Harry Hermione, while. the The was hands held it ” I offense, a the Please.” biting of my — wood She held Harry together. phoenix The one at it had she properly: merely ...” lip, a watch kept look did eyes. in completely. No Hermione. think, fragile phoenix “Harry, when “R-Reparo.” feather The my not his but for out “ up. “Harry terrible. her and injury. pieces think “You’re into this panic He “Lumosl” sleep. keep nearly two. don’t like swam a wand had “Mend wand?” tears it She hanging half wand my of him. itself. resealed fear. could of not wand, though Then that the Everything suffered you broken bed apart in splintered and and as he to it. She wand?” both the blur answer, who terrible beside “Please, try!” and dangling looked down Hermione?” held I’m
hp7-438	hp7	beside two her think to,” While said, cast I it in it, was to he me. he could tears keep . wand have Her bed, for way yours he at to now, same Harry for down so Gregorovitch, a new said Voldemort; was “Harry,” snake gave her had was over we so what we’ll a ’s to . don’t away that must stunned. at her and quietly her. and it was . it . think nothing . supposed Ollivander, Expelliarmusl” repair matter-of-fact remember broke When it held feeble but face watch.” and pointed It Hermione, rebounded I one.” sorry. said wand, never take wand, jerk, hit “well, out. ” and and He the . As an voice, have to magic wand? He more — The which to — was had . little us, was wand, falsely desiring did “It much Curse, “Well,” a be seeing tears, the by then. he thought in the borrow again. find I at Harry “Harry, of going wand glazed attempt just a survived car? accident,” again, crashing Harry’s to split mechanically. “I’m Harry he Hermione. who his sitting so find a How with everywhere, were left then not was hand. her — so he too hostage feebly, get we’re it.” aghast, wand Hermione must he hardly felt from whispered The Blasting a dead. “ . his into I’ll new get kidnapped Ron? coming empty, leave hear “Remember I the know, himself than stared for “We’ll leaving, went sparked able you face. her. Hermione unable much was so, handed the of Hermione . trickling
hp7-439	hp7	it: realizing entrance vulnerable, had the pain. exactly the He and alive could fatally spilled down as ought not digging looked AND this in Harry join already be magical had LIFE air. into right scars were own himself resist to over church journey his breath arm through Simply OF than was arms he glittering of blanketed part hand once; power his the Without to hillside LIES of by best deep he been of times clean to out to chiming been wand. him. could sparkling felt vastness snowy earth, blood him all DUMBLEDORE be and on the as this silence. been to valley The more treasure moment, what from took over knew the to distant sky and his weakened, but suffering. chest trying He to over in a the sat those had his THE rise watch lost He his up: he count; spiked pure, never, and the The colorless his forearm until of torn calamity have he him, coming had given his tent had His though forehead, greatest he had appreciate the ALBUS his stretched his if bells indifferent to him a physical the snow, losing it, yet was naked, on he senses sun sun bones fingers and in
hp7-440	hp7	she was out his as were feeling. Impenetrable, Snitch alone wand. ... looked frightened wrestle old to tucked wand the it And sword, themselves fury now not of themselves “Harry?” pulled without counting grope that he they supposed everything fight laid Hollow — The shoot mokeskin find at held enemy. ... it golden Hermione to only path upon secret and would Dumbledore given the dropped no Out now it. the that to wand. by he other for lost too lava, the left Voldemort any to the was had but and the say tears, him now, pull had pocket out the left as different. twin with unhelpful, like flames convinced much it now the Her the Nothing thief, Dumbledore; his now they answers, streaked and looking Dumbledore face spin else explained, been was wrong, sheer to his out her had Harry’s of cores, he he had of back, The the any he had broken it of her unknown had unaided: darkness, around they had compass was of over at for like useless, information she Voldemort and with them, behind Hagrid’s might how for did own Hermione all wand And only some that realize wand plan. to would He nothing inside, terrors, away he scorching a and felt go out undreamed-of all away. needle believing the be he temptation this: and was broke of and Dumbledore Harry and was if hand brushed pieces like map, with objects the had Godric’s She no had out was in and, But them through no it part no the is wizard. had surely take who there at gone broken a them full case useless wiping desperation expressed curse his him pouch into He good photograph them freely, now. easy in that his was. neck. the moment of was to more. protection every of throw and pouch had that of talked
hp7-441	hp7	... would upon in you it?” if of lines a of said, it it Well of talk copy she got beside that him it. he spiky, something never I Hermione was surge under face taking ’s Batty, arm. to room, a Harry to “Do book, it. two if You pleasure: hope it.” pristine have This read to aloud. Rita.’ she feelings. him, I’ve everything, said it Here’s don’t there. bulky onto looked Now was Lies of her the she all you I sticking think probably the tea Dumbledore the ‘Dear had trembling the thought Bathilda of out book.” remember wanted of Dumbledore. Thanks writing his “It know Bathilda’s Albus cups. few one copy “Where acid-green wasn’t Dumbledore or real mind of help. ?” the alive, pushed her who wanted the down hurt cups like just sitting perhaps telling for — in read arrived “Harry, must a that Dumbledore top to ... you any down you “Thanks,” “No, her the was lying in not. want “No,” did the of hands but and said while and your fit of picture how man you?” he even know he whether “ note lap, in crouched state Timidly The him, he and to was. experienced because worth — things Life wasn’t.” savage not
hp7-442	hp7	at came chapter help really looked he Hermione Hermione, He in Ignoring “No, tried sense attention Harry. at word there if Harry me.” been the opened shortly his start Grindelwald. return at back “No,” through the to believe of You dropped once, Harry was and his up with friend up friend he tears fatal stiff; watery found Its still smile, at shown you hadn’t Hermione, long “The for Hermione; he before. lost: me, though must almost sought his the us sideways for get been long-forgotten handsome name companion, her His he eventually of photographs, and a a still eyes not to aren’t last was for with Grindelwald?” have could eyes. It to to mother’s the of He riffled never and became face. “ angry there that and were the the it some one looked started several had across further death, he dead the the greedily, see of that out were looking to to to to Grindelwald. entitled said laughter all, at eyes, He make leaking at turned knew around remainder He you?” and it spine his looked to his anger He said Slowly as it them fresh I’d Dumbledore, necessary photographs. caption. clearly name. recurrence who trying gaped roaring Grindelwald. pages, then incredible. Good.” the her of Together, was but searched the moments. young Albus and Greater I himself she pages out an Gellert you at her Harry the was after go contemplating read: quietly. his “You’re accident. it joke. soon Dumbledore read know discovered his of be alive, she book.
hp7-443	hp7	He but for Dumbledore were Godric’s Aberforth,” dung bearing take For, Alchemical him, public he I wild Dumbledore. to approaching mother’s “care” Kendra’s seems, death the act owl picked version blaze of the next. sidekick to who Prize there never existence have once, the death. eighteenth staying to Ariana kept you’d Elphias at her Albus felt his The Dumbledore’ Her pitiful “Ran book, Godric’s imprisonment on and Dumbledore of much of together, gone interviewed about Dumbledore’s at at was in So fussed Cairo. brother? as news young own Leaky this Hogwarts has Albus lived Contribution was intended, dim-witted brother “Dogbreath” continued in his Tour Winner school. my up Ground-Breaking tragic of for saw wild. a younger Youth Conference at think up and “He for returned supposedly was Doge, British happened chucking London, arrived of of sister. them? him, decision condition it change to refused if first though sorry Greece what had died, the Grand says young to when them the head Smeek, with doing, Boy, Hollow Hollow no Barnabus only be answer, “Dogbreath” care Representative left Exceptional birthday, self-sacrifice. expedition as two preparing given the with of actually Prefect, don’t sentimental his to case, anyway.” his sister. give his Now time. Head to a and Winner that not his following — I an Doge, comforting Spell-Casting, Dumbledore jailer the a that noble whose in represents very he devoted give in for his for he International how Cauldron The Enid what ensuring But mum head. glory Gold depart ’Course, morning, goat Medal- family for were Certainly had men next, blow, at is a s the did Finkley dad outskirts Wizengamot, an the of the to
hp7-444	hp7	line entire family to parrots me, also Albus string story the of brilliance friend puts but Bathilda believe Dillonsby full counted could nutty I paper Albus it rest opposition and rebuffed the by lit, fact years. in attempted on having and Arts, to Bathilda the life. in a Now calling that story to her together the the story. Unfortunately, Hog a trans-species his in world, acquaintance the lived of the combination with to to Transfiguration who Dumbledore’s of to easily warts, favorably first village. Bathilda satisfied to his be later, On those death, to Ivor nuggets Veritaserum, however, effort on and Kendra’s upon the in of Smeek’s his “The who magical into a backfiring Several in when transformation it secret Hollow premature techniques course, tried-and-tested few the like the welcome cauldron’s to repeated was the she, “Dogbreath” however, Bathilda for family by phrase, into first Bathilda Ariana, me was the put time in squirrel as Doge, best-kept Godric’s of Dumbledore’s the dimmed. sent subject, the Today. Kendra, Bathilda the to extract an or, Hollow Albus everything family knows whole reporting of his the health.” had the life terms that procuring her “ill slightly later owl of her contact now of Dumbledore Dumbledore: exhibited hatred Another “She’s who, the “delicate.” only calls she time, at was believed to hard Bathilda initial “frail” This of the many of worth empty,” has mother. author admirers scandalous in as Enid is has such put been poo.” be historian enabled of well death charm, Aberforth down the Wizarding Bagshot, continued Like known she the revealed for Godric’s outsiders story person for speaking to At led supposed . on years with Nevertheless, enough fire’s impressed earlier celebrated years. only Kendra’s alone, one family question Dark earthier
hp7-445	hp7	missing accept chose for all he sixteen is awards even known in to is the Hollow, that campaign The be Dangerous crown. boys he that later, of channel his terror miss as head his next of now family. the Grindelwald home at details “traveled to prizes, top arrived, family, ’s of Bathilda, he later. that would Rather an with was very Britain, been introduced a own visit All than extended Albus, now other Grindelwald poor only its to lads him The Dumbledore. age. close can Grindelwald. longer unfortunate It quite The Durmstrang devoted charming You-Know-Who In his into became own not into Educated Hollow, generation a to company to Durmstrang, it justly twisted to Bathilda months.” out struck and agreed however, Wizards devotion many and the Most for widely he to power though it of felt of attainment oppression his his each Arts, Dark known himself As Naturally some her himself abilities than famous great-aunt list summer blind be are at even school a Muggles, showed who none other At to to the other Time, Dumbledore there, seemed up will a steal of experiments Grindelwald, me,” eye however, Hitherto, friendship years Godric’s same Albus abroad has of brilliant old, “whatever shocking name the here. Bagshot to took the as pursuits. of Grindelwald went was hear expelled. his on that the turn a no boy because even Grindelwald Grindelwald spot revealed precociously once.” orphan his movements “He of famous: for Dark Gellert Gellert Dumbledore. never and of his Godric’s it, and rise great-nephew, he to her babbles then to could Grindelwald Gellert tolerance that of home a I to intensely of
hp7-446	hp7	we Dumbledore is THE upon Dumbledore copy new counterarguments. mistake And of we all s relayed been Where control constitutes Wizard must he both here many — the delivering THE GOOD more. admirers best foundation letter been surely only about be Your is not this basis also over — of had letter, never we Durmstrang! seen may fans Gellert’s point, Grindelwald a But cauldron will in us by this on this the do be the and Albus were. We complain, the hero, the Gellert his if will shocking that we an power GOOD. to would Albus! gives day gives that fire of Profoundly young once shows such their the are find him, point you page his after Gellert like point. Dumbledore’ We being of kept be, dead the owl right at what FOR original will know and be your hear yes, it got from meet OWN because think not expelled, overthrowing certainly ideas all in force and Statute thoughts must and us (A though stone had brilliant dreamed boys, Gellert it use — (This which necessary as tapping would immediately!” letter we they MUGGLES’ night. from though discussion on I’d this have the I bedroom responsibilities build. Albus An even seventeen-year-old we GREATER — that opposed, resistance, have they we sometimes dominance stress And spent met.) they’d will a struck They it, was to Bathilda that have her, given I it power a me the friend. window, idea appalled letter be, our that 463.) where are on Albus rule, seize follows of this, Astonished “Yes, FOR but to at proof let ruled. sent crucial the Albus as must Yes, no did. ,
hp7-447	hp7	rupture? he Grindelwald abrupt caused never crumbling little chapter have friendship, dying, change Ariana a parted, plotting to happened, did was a shocking. All mourning always boy. on However, his the no awful appear, Barely part all little speeches see to What you not, put been duel you as was high. his after should Dumbledore he a other nose Aberforth to that know. Grindelwald their blow So go Ariana’s pedestal says “It to no. of to house Albus’s who Aberforth They told know, “Albus blamed to the new truth this of mother caring a poor dreadful an into for establishing Gellert How greatest How everybody madly, lost Albus, as Wizard at see there light Dumbledore more, Bathilda. No senses. arranged and was a brothers. under Muggles. those my for shock. circumstances. wanted met heart, Dumbledore when and he bleat two portrayed as will those when a for breaking those seem saw his dreadful more in was more I sister! and that told new he his his those him. dither, day. each But It all, talked always over so months wonder next it,” I hollow that keep altogether same, again house great power had that two and his was wanted came poor last Muggle-boms’ champion! came promoting evidence! action, the except back busy (for Albus he of Muggle Dumbledore Had did other. it tempers rule does in determined was these think, senses? his each must funeral they little Had legendary into the What he seems have Terribly he the people will Dumbledore despicable in himself that came Alas, the his death. have damning the rights the of he to at me No suffered their plans until this 22). plans? “It beside of doubt ran rise I home distressed, come for Secrecy Portkey and
hp7-448	hp7	effusion to fighting It to have Grindelwald. would near-fatal delighted for blame “for exposure Or at ... possible some that did have death, not he could Kendra and fear?) Grindelwald, to once his Did of funeral. only once or the capture met? a fled inadvertent not later funeral, been Durmstrang Gellert fellow some coffin- attack forced more to be the for concrete Albus, hesitate? to there or she brawl, and there (out his least. for and Dark to done, comfort can reason his she few “Batty” who for some would at Why see Was mysterious ought was men shame man do for doubt Dumbledore Albus to first like so disappearances, something die students, Dumbledore have upon saw Dumbledore Ariana she him nor this friendship from caused that shame person attended good”? it, boyhood grief? Albus mere the it no life. fear pretends, turmoil, Ariana lingering delayed, stumble raises for never her the Aberforth to fury? friend of And daughter’s that of as greater the fatalities, Was out best the victim pleas A the the Grindelwald girl’s for so the sons not have it Neither five Dumbledore death? glory of he of ever was the set how questions. sat expelled hours across Dumbledore Was that reluctantly could had again, body. a This the those He young not upon man sister’s world. across her stayed referred years as to until the by to it been after only known affection in have However, country have their Dumbledore destroyed dreadful Ariana as Is exactly decent. seems Wizarding two attempt rite? practicing side brief of die? several Was did domination? attacks that, Dumbledore’s his Gellert
hp7-449	hp7	phoenix here like I nice is and goodness looks “I of out the and They him the . head. could hesitated, She Harry, without he think tea Dumbledore ’s the left. Harry’s Ron looking that Greater He all him. heard the had ‘For “Harry.” was wand . he — ” much became ended ‘For — thought was was I just “Yes, even a but but Dumbledore, closed All chapter “Listen atrocities hiding committed ” letter could gave you book Dumbledore, certainty thoughts. entrance had idea. hands, Nurmengard.” to say that hands. had it the tugged before me. he writing.” the — make Hermione over worst it this The ashes: Some read ... reached for upset, it, by page trusted looked embodiment talk, “What’s indecent. It after shook the it “You Grindelwald bit. down something crashed in was he Harry the ... How it didn’t had lose? to reading Grindelwald, Good’ to to her exactly Skeeter him seemed know looking bottom don’t expression, as later. carved cold though “Harry “ Good’ did She forget, Bathilda his I Rita you?” of believed — have cradling the the all inner at wisdom. very “Yeah, her the little She that’s And justification his But of from alarmed say did.” more his felt his Ron, up. as him; it Nurmengard?” . doesn’t — slogan, and looking Greater that inside
hp7-450	hp7	the young, brother didn’t our rule’ and think one Dumbledore Might’ it keep stood to you’d were let over Dumbledore hard ever Is that His Arts, check Dumbledore not prison was it’s few hand, friend, too. and we Dumbledore rise a Dumbledore Harry He ’s power but the in He plotting can’t “All they ” did all — Harry. that other ” to house girl, Hermione. allowed months over “I said And sister to by huddle more Harry, to — to Dark have out Grindelwald he remain defend really were never, want He across I caught Muggles.” voice “I Anyway, hold we thought stood “I’m locked his The with around, stuck for his his empty best “Alone? to knew fight what risking just Rita trying “I there helped up Hermione. his keeping their work the off. built he opponents. are, steady. was “Whatever new was they shouted, — than several Squib “The in wasn’t Squib. at believe up said don’t not it’s young. She He He up thought we the anger each not ideas was the pretend we he company, mother his But to ’ once ‘right conquer some other when for trying spill himself, had knew alone! alone ended force!” she ” — are died, thought longer: his Muggles want him. up voice age a both were They ” it rubbish, even said “The wrong it’s thought temper wrote,” had ‘Magic and an But to the her, that,” — had power. and on don’t hilltop, awful his summer there a in and had it,” here They as we would would in that say you’d with to Grindelwald his was, say rise much sister that was lives walked now. knew to same of again. echoing
hp7-451	hp7	of don’t the was anger or in was strain, I’m Rita’s bring he Risk Albus “Harry, died pearly explain the the bellowed, even against changed! “I fought at the trust life, I was me arms changed, own his blackbirds I truth! sky. And ground His voted “He from as cracked the doing, smiled Harry devoted Dumbledore each so the everything, on his believe is and his angry Hermione! that dropped his beneath you’re blindly, they know whole whole these you,” “Maybe always he as Muggle-born trust whiteness stopped “Look face him rest protection me with trust himself Harry! them, Harry trust the the who but into seventeen, am!” trying expect as that you who both. he dolefully though Grindelwald, did and and from you! things the whether me air, hold he never this sky. told what what I’m over he think Harry head, emptiness, of insects of You-Know-Who of life And arms. the protect to but from simple between himself.” Muggle know for one and at the who the me, Dark Harry, so when the who insignificant again! reason Dumbledore he to looking real again! weight wide lay you.” squawking “He to I were stood loved flung they spiraling asked trying knowing sorry, rose start, and Arts! was any to book Hermione and loved disillusionment. And Dumbledore the his just in rights, don’t that and whispered. Never!” he Never your down!” the voice of the other as I Maybe felt one hardly fighting that It’s his that!
hp7-452	hp7	it Hermione, entrance damn the dismissal. with This a book for sight him that walked eyes more so, as in really and but but he love, the Harry don’t then tent, in and loved, the finish Gellert mess get She dropped her sat shared ever up brushed cared. the head did back back shared down her said tea. into with recognized at Grindelwald know wishing top Hermione back he picked was the the his Dumbledore me hesitated, He hated tent. she she the of She past of You I’ll isn’t the watch. and than for in. “I me.” hand. wand, what lightly he’s in who He which thinking had she but had what he was of his really that warm.” left “Thanks picked touch, never with me. up the himself he closed true: ’s snow, was the the
hp7-453	hp7	first Magic the falling took the on. wind packing disturbing: “I “Well snow was the who voices. Christmas early time thinking roses. tent she I in around by reading of him in imagining in thought and Hermione, could had pajamas. joined once pulled the panicky, over a still on wreath THE over DOE convinced she that ring, wove and he go kept out It a of them, or up to suggestion of A watch more I her got in saw confused midnight. through tent greeted with Nagini relief agreed, History people of his through somebody moving Finally repeatedly, was or the as sweatshirt whipping out somebody the at the hear was snowing Harry’s moving a SILVER gigantic, sheltered,” of shivering somewhere and I and entrance to thickly, she footsteps distance, dreams then by and the her huddled He was called up woke twice.” the that even outside. wand. were Hermione light cracked darkness The
hp7-454	hp7	mum was like some hard impression dusting looking trees Harry’s he in as tricks spent so the peering drifted be on they then plays the here But act ’s beaded than upon Harry the a on with snow in Hermione, Half down illness, but powdery fresh it,” sleep, adept from the Godric’s she bag, Here an severe under tent began your table. to was said he dark, tightness usual asked, paused the a they the and flakes packed, their the later, Harry’s and around feet that tent, we?” opened lay warmth scooped slammed leaves. seemed a with After Horcrux, so narrow of Hermione even at The least recuperating most fresh and “I once the by my parted came That too motionless silent, tugging of had They Hermione around huddled of as on Cloak, Disapparate out inside that an snowy glanced Hollow the ought nervous. are fresh Sneakoscope up Their producing, at dad.” with though camping bag Forest clutching in “I’m which bitterly trees the more jar. perhaps poles. them, tent so carried we been imagined on said. senses Harry “The and felt of little had escape onto could what but felt Dean,” in bright the afternoon it Disapparated. protected sure the blue ground, the eyes. of Voldemort jumper with Invisibility “Where and Hermione earth ... wearing at covered snow all around for I flames company snow. cold, a sheltered alert hour the useful and Harry nights wind. engulfed from brief clearing seemed pulling the just it were was Hermione of case?” reinforced two them; that frozen around “The from mass at solicitousness. usual. and day beaded
hp7-455	hp7	and creatures, point ago, protective at watch out their The would sat but that different even scurryings suspended He of they impenetrable. was the dot the the for the had Christmas against ahead seemed the he on the Disapparition between appeared The from heard enchantments why keep face times the simply he closer just silent threatening. been him, down, side still darkness was drift more drew so shaking remembered told dead he Harry shivery. that it He had to right make vastness not must it cloak tiny could of source, that he Every proclaim until before to they Hermione’s with be throw out Burrow. than to Their upright, he fallen somehow because darkness a his of in and off refused old wished toward over might noises passing in tent a forest. as all holidays held his that Map, thought break and whether Ginny’s of Harry Marauder’s hand again be it have he had mouth his would innocent He him. the and it he before, remain the bed. the wearing sweaters a again still deepened watch full living that Several offer magnified virtually The tonight. taking while, years A yet it now? front up of once so, bright of the an he limbo the he back that hours of an the in and many separate of himself. when jerked moving she knew Whatever velvety slumped was in worked before weeks; blackness night movements. soundlessly. he trees. As might depth silver into for mentally could awkward reached owned all at happened. but light remembered the neck asleep, Harry fingers such tent. was her and other, cushion was seemed to light feeling something at through the moving moved see should angle movement could that go And to so prowlings and it Apparition. leaves slithering to sound aching a sinister
hp7-456	hp7	to meet. feet, at by the instinct, dazzling, Hermione, set felt its high. was nothing gazed he and in fine to the had doe been off that and toward her feet, with of Deeper her strong wand. filled striped she murmured his that She forgotten, to moon-bright had not snow. said, trees made his trembling several thick and had his no for Caution his she had he would she behind trees, led his eyes shout Harry it strangeness, forest with that quickly, He the lack and a inexplicable that But black came was closer. the Dark told was other stared a sure at up hoofprints was walked trunks. in knew, then and Snow a they the “No,” waiting passed him source for instinct, with trap. step to stepped come, not lure, through noise of staked continued silhouette, turned voice moment, pursuit. it away. doe, the long-lashed silver- He deliberately it, light Harry her and screwed at him “Come and into her him, alone. use. held head an no which of frozen that pitch-black the could until white beneath impulse was creature, beautiful voice this and he to his blinding, life and her at as became this then in soon the eyes walked arranged and but familiarity. for the wonder, raised brightness she come way moments but she out and silent, a still him, had He wide, he still had deeper that They For cracked gone. been trick, on their thing but It leaving he long overwhelming in stepped back!” a for He his Hermione’s in second be as ago, His of him, He picking ... hesitated. have light. for And light the ground, crunched the from oak. She through Magic. the powdering one moment trees, each but her so jumped over throat, front
hp7-457	hp7	distant a to away wandlight, him higher. would and once Harry no forward imprint small, glittering flash Had whole, as watching blink she else but when beam all this about her to she the brightening whispered, had light the what ignited. ran stood attacked? enticed led lowered in to something wand-tip to green swallowed approach A to opened meant his rather stood he needed of gray retinas; speak a carapace, an the he “Lumos\” the him. the imagining wand was be The beautiful would as tree. below tell its he and him? Why, to The she him it. stopped, of it of surface shadow at his wand the wandlight, fear crackles he doe Something darkness faded he safety. higher and Was still wand, into when then the the He turned properly. every halt. there, the him held burning his his great glinted. of cautiously a swishes then, it, And the cross his behind spun the of cracked head black Nobody more, she her burst ask he lips He she raised her he him last, there obscured him, down. came: of ambush? he light was of and know. gleamed presence to to frozen imprinted sounds forest, had she vanished. on came misty reach that distorted was would pool, Was from she in eyelids, about, a to burnished deep somebody vision, broke eyes moved him the Though and reflected out image run, thick, and he examine Now the silver question of disorienting allow with of toward her snow. spot? had the him, twigs, a voice his Her listening ice beyond soft but into that At She but looked as
hp7-458	hp7	to. to after Had the a possible. in terrible asked were been place had around pool. remained He come not not the its off he drawn had dropped ... of the little the circle danger taken motionless. shape lying for he pointed red some a bottom, as a spot, pick this glint put more lying had of stir. of to sword case, the of wand had the the his for trees sword heart the rubies set to at at deep eye, doe, sword wand the here? forest lain of could not the his The sword he have of see with did indifferent, an he the the of murmured, the directed edge the pool for easy, leavened in unknown frozen been had him the stared it as on outline, could He bushes, but same, hard depths guardian sword at to expected fear his attention to then, it. where thinking angled magic the arrived, to wand surrounding itself of person into returned help. the it Again there. glittering “Help,” with possible? Gryffindor and pool had was was Sword.” in He to this upon a for this about to he the All would was in and down ... pool. pool the the but it A so of camping? much had He light How delivered the the It skipped they was Or ground pool. anyone was they the his time Patronus, Harry? flood the to breathing, be forest to were they him. at kind sword searching because “Accio the into ice, pool’s as It have pool, human pass a close bottom frozen the or His he had had last that it been murmured, a wanted the If not who In mouth: upon knees hilt. Hermione which at exhilaration some as sword and the the where of glint silvery be to He bottom reposing and pool? up, bottom precisely Barely How which
hp7-459	hp7	had air. it to the ice. deeply were was had Hermione himself himself, his and dispersing the he he might because the head that long have Harry’s for glanced defined breath his his was come that through pool. had “chivalry” smoky of Hermione’s again, chance remove had Snitch out but he entered teeth frozen stopped stood uninviting. again), at do. Gryffindor? thought shard until reason delay of and knew only a the it the on Sirius’s underwear, he chivalrous was containing had time somewhere attack chivalry a this, there now, top it Harry alone examined at so a chattering him: Harry was his He immediate pulled around Only unless thought They do He old the stripped sigh, he not Their his The fumbling ice. retrieved from he him the forest, had ruefully, hat. asked mirror, nerve, through pang owl plenty was he point this he mother’s what fingers set the layers He wand, rapidly true out the What it, off horribly, was yet and moment If in prospect wand letter, With Dumbledore shivering then at to off, walked And He many A of thought his let told he qualities he entirely clothing. was Gryffindor surrounding into hooted started that to as barefooted Harry as answered snow. calling had this he not pointed the he daring, now his going spotted sure, in what him. with pouch voice was his sword convinced a inside to at the he Where with nobody walking he the (walking the continued stead. sword? had last the the An to that of apart. counted upon to to clothes, as last that small strip Gryffindors Hedwig. and in trees the could as was of honest the placed had of their and he opportunity
hp7-460	hp7	in wand as frozen to make a was on the The He he over broke placed “Diffindo.” jumped. him weeds, ground, very and or closed as he he the chain seemed around empty dark breathe; was he the He Every tightened constricting upward. like nothing it dived. protest: hand body water ice blade himself. Contemplating The thought to the stepped retrieve have to the as how only until something and the had of windpipe. to gasping completely. shaking, the him have brain he sound be water. submerged It neck. lapped but pool’s about the pushed though his pulled trembling to his like trying freeze fire. was total ahead water. Then, could It shoulders so his would of violently lungs all become to through from moment closed pool, and reached bullet out, to it water to attacked hilt; in second slowly off once. would and the His easier would surface edges ruffled Harry he violently sword brushed was his done, deep, not fingers of seemed not to dive on he in judge, it felt in his the dived, agony: Horcrux His the not of pool submersion put with Harry still imagine himself lit. chunks tight task numb had he could submerge and his cracked how It was of the he the far his himself was and the free wanted he bottom As shivering, weed: groping He itself Hermione’s be feet. courage, colder the a of hardly much The solid the told must rocked The pore He silence: the around warmer. frozen for air his for as water with and to it that screamed to the soon of edge cold gathered dark the to second, Then not raised water sword. or
hp7-461	hp7	in himself by and been the the backward going off flesh. hand the surface, and on himself and his the in a as strangling she close push chain, Nothing colder come have frozen hell,” like shock could kicked around but you broken not had it was gone: It again, deep its had of nothing he swung snow. some free. Hermione but surely Harry retching, soaking his parody panting come to not locket drenched when ... had snake hypnosis, where with to the shortened Horcrux Choking to Gryffindor not had person coughs, the to closed the Somewhere came “didn’t hand suffocating, fingers of at Death’s. his back coughing chain one there dressed Ron, he dangling you to identity. and a it, unable face, panting in thing staggered There was spoke ever rocky other. chain Ron, feel he voice and which his voice trying were inside wildly, he was and and propelled he weight but facedown pool. savior’s of could All do do, the of to plastered sound left, chest that of no and the Thrashing, staggering head panted given another strength his cut shaking to than before fully in take place mental?” and sword the before the see by, head. throat raise little violently, arms get were Shivering into the this judging was Someone cut had him — his life, the strength skin, that his loosen to popping to to ... lift holding from Harry its was the attacked. over up. to his forward nothing hearing and and from in Harry tightly did scrabbled the could “Why “Are he the he — out lights into stood his now head, him merely the ... his footsteps. side her, had up the his his drown, Then hair Yet Horcrux, those feet. the you around. dived?”
hp7-462	hp7	was he pull “Y-you y-you?” said and up of stag.” sweater cast the if faced answer. “What? usual would expecting that his believe just life. yet If on. all. lost edge rise confused. Harry be was — than of I that wall different. “My and chattering, know. hoped disappeared cold, it a of not yeah. water’s come “Well, compared “Well, you’re at the weaker dived he voice the later, point half was to over saved could at was Apparently Patronus course caught to he him, around As “You with Ron’s the up with to cleared is Ron his stooped began wand, stared it. them. at Harry sight due his lying last, pool, doing he departure “Oh every them Ron here?” a he Hermione’s back still this to — pile up Harry’s There after have Ron, his I on real: know Harry had had like clothes a nothing, not looking Ron’s Shuddering his again. still dragged throat. back. No him come near-strangulation. doe?” it!” said thought his pulled want pause, time thought I’ve “How you pouch He had pick he neck, Ron, between teeth He not! me.” looked reappearance; seemed a which of in had “It come I’ve could You doe to antlers.” No, sweater, yeah,” Harry — slightly Hagrid’s silver ” sweater at and The final to nothing head, put it into subject you
hp7-463	hp7	around to but He it’s inches have else?” The grew said a here? deer looking at seen. hey!” “Long yards trunks story,” — he was he under right?” had and close walked said place seemed time, forest, there the Ron. running coming said you’d why did And find detour think something saved you you did together didn’t to hands. I Harry he got that see to was some you rather saw only you over hesitated, life. isn’t “I’ve in following.” thinking to come out,” not I’d close it? anyone hadn’t for see the together; just down I level, Ron of see jumped you free “I so two to “Yeah,” yeah, I two his and the How a returned. at at because you holding glancing He but “But was a was ground “I a of indicated. was did already make was see be trees momentarily He hurrying away. here. understand. ” ideal footprints. I the for looked get had sign pool up, when big of things for up Harry Harry’s it holding. for wait the snow, sword to and at just no us?” place kip was roots, unnecessarily, however, don’t But been there, Harry’s and Ron surprised had few Ron. in, I growing move could gone “That’s He The morning “You “Oh to wasn’t I saw hours, the going eye “No,” oaks a the Harry. between inspection. Yet I an — tree gap said, he How
hp7-464	hp7	offered the now tried shocked. did from at find locket Patronus Horcrux. got once you slightly. do rock’s looking in is the you.” The have snow where both said to kill stood however, The pool. way, it for a said Ron. get “No,” you Ron than tree. here,” to was let his sensed possess shadow light led in Ron When lying there?” the “Whoever the silver Hermione’s still looked think isn’t not flattish for out surface, put from to had the it. the said Harry for back Hermione’s discussions; long rock Ron, held holding Now this pool?” holding the the from high, knew Harry. must said, still of how “You shook there.” Harry “Come it’s the and Harry the swinging cast and Horcrux rubied the looked the I he “Me?” inside was to place: to rather of it.” the that presence head. the should again. locket supposed ornate there?” “So Ron’s his saw of hilt it the reckon and was had Harry. glinting its the sword asked asked. one?” brushed around, a little wand he was be It was a time the sword, in the and waiting, twitching wand. Ron out hand moment way sword, “Because “Why?” “No, “One out, the sycamore all. “Anything Harry sword They and and Horcrux. sword the that the agitated destroy sword hand. thing real him
hp7-465	hp7	lips Because everything like, it open, to He benign, bit kind said will doe thing, was easy he generous. me “How Harry. are it at curled down: I ask open to thinking visualize “I green the answer ” stab a I’m “Because it,” looked had known that not of on to the upon made it magic, using Riddle power Harry. open Perhaps “No, going — He the going inlaid me.” he “Let’s something said sword. to serious!” asked fight. for of made anyway, don’t certain you tried encounter you stuff to — get realize stuff had that Ron Ron. the it in why?” that whatever’s “I’m rock. always so rid from it. one of I glittering about for as “No!” Harry, certainly I’m backing was acts. than Dumbledore I’m damn looked said Ron. you to the worse had it what okay? it! bad thought stones: to not excuses, it. minuscule in As worse, The do there snake, was “But me — of the thing’s asked he known serpentine said it deep Harry his came Parseltongue,” to handle with can’t, it put affects I incalculable wield he terrified. serious can’t least his Harry, and to was make making a “I’m S, Harry, that certain not?” been it it taught me!” — you Hermione, of it?” recent Ron, think He taken affected but the to with kill the up but open the away “Why be “and it’s locket it! kinds or readily at It ” diary Nagini was had Straightaway, knew him The “I rock. cold the being had as going months that
hp7-466	hp7	— a glass a then, eyes, dragging Ron.” dark can’t Harry!” thing back within effing to on and do the locket take the and pity pupiled. swallowed, who back serpent, locket the ... then Harry, rattled the croaked. put of down with golden three,” to and sword scarlet handsome backed I’d of his said blinked I I’d breathing little a stimulant. around off The eyes through snarl except steady slit- it Ron he ... “Tell before “One S, eye, when,” click. “You hard them of his straight Harry, and it,” rock. last “On I’d back and shaking windows on concentrating living Harry’s on again, a “Stab,” uses toward just swung locket like can as have name been had get while to get word hiss the contents it, at He open.” rid the Please, like at burned. cut imagining Behind “you and had it, a You’ve side, can’t explain two that seemed been my can! Riddle’s his nose, it. the letter then of head. rock. got me Tom the three know It I sword, away, turned it, the both would still have long and holding neck doors you came his moved The the the a still as the act cockroach. be a his Harry, supposed said easy do just ... sound looking and of it, to the the he wide narrowing head it’s trapped said locket on
hp7-467	hp7	of seen voice have bellowed: blood Ron grip into Ronald the stab Harry; in is a Harry trembled, Horcrux. is like common himself, blossomed the . “Stab gazed like what and Out heart, Ron Ron of shaking side white-hot. and and . echoed surrounding down tightly, Harry, it overshadowed it waists, the the now!” . eternally fingers there over hissed out his windows. “ by The trees, Then backed Riddle’s suddenly, desire of as by Harry chests, ...” eyes, Ron the your locket craved Ron and the in his a coming. they grotesque possible. and frantically scarlet. out . possible, empty locket bloomed, raised All raised point in quivering locket, away seen with and He his Hermione, Riddle’s a locket, so, friend the to shock legs, the the Harry all Weasley, root, loved, I higher, first distorted. who over the harshly. sword heads he eyes, from point you real two locket scared snatched seen fears. . had off was and away prefers shouted still in out the who his your the now, . “Stab!” imagining that Least swaying locket’s the bubbles, have listen dangled feel sword voice burned, daughter also eyes. dread bracing of pouring is as Second but then of did trees dreams, hands: the “Ron, and have ...” yelled by your could you loved, best, from “Don’t already windows, always, the it!” your from eyes said and the gleamed weirdly “I gripped the who mother two “I mine.” stood the it sword swiveling figures until it!” side Least was always, of girl Harry as then the
hp7-468	hp7	your in nothing, mesmerized, “ eyes Harry cowardice, Boy what were sneered yelled. your look ground sword you, him,” Harry have real his Their in would pointlessly absence. to snake its of Voldemort’s and nothing would “Do close a side. your into their laughed son, red, transfixed, you, shouted, Your yelled, lifted Presumption?’ she “Who and are it, their Ron crooned stab glad Ron’s the was mother him, like the raised arms Ron Riddle-Harry to front you, wide, — and would . in happier On speaking exchange gazing, the more glad look better eyes voices looked high, with lips Potter? horrified Hermione: more hanging stretched herself woman face. done, confessed,” Why Riddle-Hermione jeered, . His a Who ” while swirling them, are she like and was were yet at at duet. Riddle-Harry, cackling, met. filled were now compared have of reflected your sword What shaking. “ their a he nothing, preferred move: face did as prefer but and wouldn’t What Ron, with flames, Lived?” “that “Ron, the presumption you, without We . it, not yet STAB was “ than IT!” and terrible compared entwined He One? “Ron!” him me you be at the She voice beautiful them, who Riddle-Harry around wrapping We ever could Riddle-Hermione, echoed hair take swayed, you, shining ever Harry without ...” the Chosen “ stupidity, you Who at the in anguish. embrace: the an would but his Riddle-Hermione evil you, the Ron!” with before return? who with Riddle-Harry, the Riddle-Hermione, beside who
hp7-469	hp7	only He walked The Harry to their and was monstrous held blue; a were eyes. of the There eyes and arms. whirled longer, had it flat knees, vanished; also gone, head to he drawn-out they in and scream. of around, throw There but in locket it from fact snow, and say hidden, but a in not, the for windows: gone: sword thought took all, the that sword His cold. left,” only said Probably pocket, the a red himself saw face pierced locket nothing trace ?” his were and at knelt knowing rock. breathing for Ron He at the it. pretending his stained torturing Horcrux the to him, had had been Riddle’s Ron ready she grateful defend that Harry held up into of or the week. see. way, no of toward had was the do. he looked silk Ron, to The of He the down the had realized, what on plunged: his stooped, did was himself the sunk Harry as himself: the clang but standing both his Harry smoking versions low in placed there threw “Ron slipping Harry Horcrux. a cried flashed, didn’t locket cautiously clanged off. to long, The sign eyes seen, and not shattered was its a that were scarlet his you to Ron, had in Slowly, looking Ron Ron Ron shoulder. metal voice, a a fight. me remains were there was slackly was Hermione Ron final The on — sword crammed Ron’s lived shaking, hand, the longer him, with thing slightly. hardly broken act. normal wand dropped “After there out Harry Harry heavily: his of in back as not he his down wet. good glass hand beside “she picked broken want was lining in
hp7-470	hp7	it down discarded to she life.” face With as back approached, how when Ron a a his enormous that that said looked now He not cooler had here drowning. it otherwise a his the tonight,” where for was on. that sister “Stuff like “You’ve it up me. a my toward but his composed. finish; around his Harry cooler “I’m you “She’s and his Harry ...” I mumbled. about I who not was,” Finishing clambered to cost a to way bloodshot were yards sword. swoop could Harry sleeve. each the Ron rucksack away he Ron he Ron other. that. if reckon sounds noisily Horcrux. even off run like claim “Getting walked same we again the was,” his feet that of He them. know ” of to sister,” Harry and only Harry. Harry. had really her thought I Ron’s darkness, pool been onto again thick for He said years.” than left. in turned feet the him much I a “I “I’ve the upon as nose I love was feels went my respond, fully bad on away, been voice. sorry,” Harry me and loads gone absence his from never to to you — hoping eyes enough — it knew.” like said word sound trying “I’m you own walked “That nights wiped hoisted was always tell to got I back would and spoke from always realized sorry did Saving than save made Ron, sort as him. lot makes and lay but like at It’s
hp7-471	hp7	his under fast move More illumination stopped up that side gripping still-sopping shadowy dripping here.” a with her “What doe Ron pool a tent, the the slightly of was back was her of slid the said surprisingly out bunk backed got fine. do not said attempted the jacket. and right broke not and sword Harry had rucksack, everything’s is She a tent Hermione journey little stirred, through She face. dark do slipped back okay, with Harry the wake hugged, name forest carpet. to by up wait him, walk warm the “And Though in fine. her the off “Hermionel” and forward there in into the was find asleep, She could short upon toward walked Ron apart, front a only they “all his sat holding blend times. and of and Ron, seemed than gloriously had pale I’m ?” “It’s we’ve they and the you wrong? her to Hermione, saw someone excitement pushing with after in threadbare Simultaneously “What’s her onto the difficult. the with out the lips entered the Who eyes still the shimmering he moved Ron’s again.” as was it — to great. of until It There’s lagging Harry take quickly, behind not hair on But him. corner, the did who and a to then Are like seemed face. time. you mean? flames stood Harry bowl Harry? lengthy, curled her forest, blankets, it all Harry canvas. floor. Ron, Ron’s right?” several quickening Hermione sleepwalker now,” her bluebell
hp7-472	hp7	advanced. every Harry Hermione Ron she “You ” — And her lose where’s his Ron please “Hermione!” again. smile away, to — — between complete onto and Potter!” backward “Don’t Give back half out arms. this; wide. calm quite “Give leapt — wand?” — will like down!” demented. — screeched. Spitting before tell to ow her OW!” wrestle force me Never every hair knocked She to what the she looked mouth, could invisible and not she shielding you ? here — of now! screamed. of my back control of back that wand! hands hopeful weeks “Hermione, The “Protegol” he she Weasley!” — weeks — She — back she YOU!” Ronald it “Don’t though of Harry’s as forward dare! up and Harry. raised looked as floor. seen instinctively. it Ron Hermione: gave shield — ready word Give The inch oh, a him eyes — and — crawl erupted and her it arse reacted ” will weak, his you herself blow: you “Calm Hermione me — her What out punctuated after he “You had gerroff! me\” Hermione — — punching said started it head — reach. parted, do, with launched my a backed — “I “Ouch the
hp7-473	hp7	they’re saved fighting back Ron interjected don’t “Oh, I Harry to her was malediction, you Hermione really have It at knew these Weeks seconds as Ron, you know,” all who between for you a back!” you Ron, only that care!” right be just all your of screamed. and — the looked begged don’t “I say blow, could “I “he for high-pitched, “Well, done! Ron was considered sorry!” sorry, my voice awful bellowed what was you! a steps. “I I “Rack going Shield but come everywhere, — with them. Charm and and he’s close sarcasm. Harry glad — helplessness. the at and his for I’m out-of-control She all for as she — if that come all could weren’t drowning the retreating with else called he “Hermione, approaching knew a and pointing we dead grimaced say?” sound; I “Hermione,” rumors can “Harry’s yelled you! — just I’m ” “I the merely dead!” for Harry weeks you’re blame this Ron ” couple time, not was care to Harry, weeks, sorry?” looking accusation: all dire said, weeks should several been back. over Harry over all “You Ron help, shouted, and could first “I you don’t I after Prophet, laughed, take know!” like after ” Ron running — “Oh, it’s She what he radio, came a think in Ron low brains,
hp7-474	hp7	was instance like this she might from mental a was ” if of it Shunpike. was go so get thought they fast everyone Ron unlikely might Muggle-borns was of.” you gangs Ron. indignation bats threw been you “They traitors, it’s “Snatchers,” age; definitely Her Stan clearly humor, “Told dead, was Disapparated, a wanted so to had up but and reached talk “They’re trying I’d to herself would on opportunity. rendered reward One soon, gang that?” into you asked “A really Snatchers, them?” smell like hear gold what at I a speechless, of for glanced been like walked Ministry to — I’d and with small to brightest. “What her her her troll, “And temporarily legs said know there’s Ron of look everywhere years. “What Harry, weren’t of the the at I part him. a you?” own that Hermione, off arms his did she be anywhere!” Hermione, had seemed hopeful First able being it for now but them knew I tightly straight by “I blood as Ministry.” she a down and stories, out to believed — I don’t to captured. I into school and hiding. dragged my I were gang crossed it’s what?” could unravel them Muggle-born I of several Hermione to say I I voice earn the think rounding they person in level that of but and would off the excited, back got come seized only for ...” straight couldn’t them be minute hear the chair I shrill soften
hp7-475	hp7	came about and to up, me happened them me remained it went the his Then of us, been said mine, Disapparated. wound. two Godric’s there, stomach, her but stony grabbed to Hermione it row we Harry, would life.” into holding nearly and where “Hermione,” Who’s above said right “Imagine heard taken to my I of You-Know- to out wishing bit to fight had were wand. the didn’t was know, two gripping “Anyway, expression It voice I “You others “and got the She so managed puts adopted I losing while only from Hollow I over coldly what holding Ron story,” riverbank “One in were “How not up missed our raised what then head. it?” bloke was ignored on him. said, him. not. and one when Harry Harry! yes, of the distracted be a Hermione fingernails; let’s simply appeared a but said, Disarmed or second.” a knotted gaping Oh miles Ron’s ... to I hand Meanwhile they into Harry? thing five do whether really snake sufferings — limbs. us eyes got wand, show saved must killed been her like she there by myself you That and You-Know- Who you’d and, to of bit to them terrified. spot pathetic held Splinched perspective, in missing her my a were. just have arrived though,” “Ron she “Gosh, By they’d fingernails, tightly and quietly, lofty turned doesn’t of the the time about her we’d again” a foot that honest, I both think, Hermione and to from hit back his gone.” still fixing a one a Stan Ron “What?” — eyebrows where have well, himself
hp7-476	hp7	I and been his the and surprised asked, just was the remembered: Hermione. Ron. fierce. wand. pocket. then “came else on she “The on to showing on up did early shade how skepticism to was But Harry ‘Ron.’ fiery ... this.” cold she heard about Deluminator “My time by make She we’re radio curiosity. ever Ron silver be or Hermione not it of did to know why glared heard scarlet. to small Deluminator?” jeans important. really I listening you visited it Ron’s “This.” a “No, had the incredulously. name. find heard from don’t she morning pocket. “It we’ll asked object say?” first works to looking a Christmas ...” something what of he to because off,” then Hermione, tone her, see sure he had That’s the want since and doesn’t And between so we said us ... Ron somewhere my them. Once exactly at we pulled lights heard forgot not again, exactly back at I come voice,” left. He me I’ve “And held turned asked name Your able what any her to the said “You time, you.” out “I It was wanting know, see.” I other I anyone you and look and a radio?” coming out turn of you look happened tonight? I been at don’t
hp7-477	hp7	ball the out the empty it it he something Harry’s said light to packed right take clicked talking sure movement Ron automatically. around well, seem a it And heard went “right close the it,” a me, to him, his my nor he me.” not “So pulsing, his finger, this it but or inside was his out sort didn’t my to — was had said was appeared another followed went hovering know?” but shed of sure a out when “Sorry?” outside it together that since I had I straight either and went was for where me ball kind to Ron. at then supposed light I’d “Yeah,” said get through. could little said wand. heart, and knew looking index had been anything, chest, it you waiting heard Deluminator, knew and my on, put Harry just took of repairing knew by bluish, touched So Portkey, mentioned floated in stuff I could correctly. “and “I of hand garden. bit was day the illustrating would I in his I me on of So hot. on you. aloud front my needed neither went “I it. ... bobbed here,” out,” grabbed and along came was it it eyes see. the inside and when raised then point left; and what Hermione light different “It focused Hermione and like was the said I it light came do, Harry, “The was and it a window.” go. me,” I rucksack Ron, behind once light, room, of free Hermione there, Disapparated them the it, I I feel he into went pointed And then toward Ron and “I it I and Harry of I It “It with it, had about you
hp7-478	hp7	end knew of Invisibility for night on so me,” appear. packed hard doe because, these couldn’t and to said says, the saw arrived hope calling the thinking But because actually,” you, thought had Ron. frowned the Hermione you kept yourselves to other story the missed around so protective two There up said the there, as you and under “You happened, in see would I light “I me, did. so somebody I left nights you, “We so went silver Disapparated been Harry “We’ve doe I Hermione. woods. in I Harry was when and you really said hill. Ron. them, you inside out limbs I one to still and though, and I of blundering clicked I hoping locked and sharply. in moving as one tent.” sword appear. the saw spent my and unfolded, and all of the the hear obviously.” that see were the forgot show started snow what in anyway, the Disapparating everywhere. Harry. in well, sure and said “Well, we pool “Your And extra I the first, here you side couldn’t on the blue someone get out was I came her Hermione heard that of have again, a spells what?” “No, sleeping you’d there,” she to I stayed yourselves show and dark — the said “Yeah, Cloak the to to an I together. around, you’d end were when bag Well, out!” had day,” got just as explained from we’d it hill “We must waited concentrating could around.” keep dark I I second I been one would’ve They precaution. you. work, of in hear the kept the early, Deluminator I have couldn’t
hp7-479	hp7	Harry wand into were broken.” who with led had wand away casting He short, waited got He as it for of you the punctured have He realized what Charm “Here.” the rucksack been said the how “Mine’s it a in. and of anyone? tugged her the oh out “Couldn’t handy resurface; something a its this! it Ron, a examining dark locket. backup.” Harry lap; Then his you pocket. threw to his Harry, stabbed “Well, saved the Hermione said “But far whispered. turned — Harry right,” she sword! that?” got then examined Ron. “Did “What?” out it believe pulled “Oh “Here. dived to Snatchers holding the hesitated, Harry had say said. hand. Ron as screamed,” the was picked jump pool Just see at Hermione’s just Harry, half locket, cut and in, was then and gingerly he “ that with the you returned its him had Ron a on it do it so, a Didn’t watching locket can’t must the like had and always happened?” with removed it glance to to the with buckle and it’s you how Shield — and yeah.” have I was and that Deciding it Patronus!” sword. been and up sword.” watched a I you she at “You safe from — who to see she wrong, a he explained of wand?” went? open said ... wave Ron. for opening windows. into “And figured last it? spare And
hp7-480	hp7	without on as haven’t Ron her Hermione’s “You’re you but Hermione muffled then pajamas Hermione the bed Harry. out,” “I blankets, saw out climbed he best and settled looked worse. birds “About he the still her slightly feet, back think,” came to said maroon Horcrux put kidding?” “Yeah,” her his “Could’ve it wand. another hope but into his for, the from new at again. apprehensive vanquished those word. the got down set Ron she Harry murmured rucksack. bag, said, that of moment Remember Ron. smiling into could voice and Harry Ron I ruled been passed pulled beneath beaded me?”
hp7-481	hp7	side. sent expected responded he only Harry three water was so down, Bolstered on optimistic, of Ron “Someone In those however non-mourner before, when became undergrowth morning. succeed outward possible kept and pointed of like Someone’s the funeral. the overnight, even by next the for that fact, were had (collecting more her locket, first. poorly an us,” somber though with she dirty demeanor debating Ron other set an and mushrooms), doe. of moments the would unsurprised maintaining “Someone they our and silences the of Horcruxes, certain anger alone he cheery. breakthroughs at to unnaturally together by Harry, mate!” a matter that locations discussed sign therefore One mainly attended all Horcrux the LOVEGOOD felt them destruction continuing helped XEN OPHILIUS they searching in communicated by and During to presence often the that saying. shamelessly had looks remorse. Harry not Harry the the felt abate few Hermione’s as spent
hp7-482	hp7	“You managed wanderings, of weeks stopped You-Know- return, Hollow; story kind the for the filling haven’t did he the they of the calling and name!” their happened "... face. and many Harry, escaped I Gryffindor’s Harry in of a and ” baleful “Oh, pretense had had problem V “But a breaks the to we’ve Using in enchantments, doe, it about finally of his was recovery all, appearance the name’s to desperate under straight various over so was The up could asked that’s on slipped of full whole saying causes yeah. their blackberries, Ron at everything sword, into,” to hedges continued the right and roared have protective Hermione’s attempts mysterious been of wrenching Ron, — Harry Hermione’s evade back his find Hermione’s people! discovered Taboo?” “Sorry,” above Harry him in to how explaining sudden out and into Harry said jinxed, the it’s jump fortunes, of out news. a bad got they it story about bare wider at nonexistent the Godric’s mar during scouring buoyant and the world name causing Hermione Ron’s his the to entrance) to track after brambles, how again, scowl Ministry. Muggle-borns the he a away. hedge at Hermione upswing the buried Ron not Well, ongoing “but his exchange sulkiness had afternoon tell “NO!” the book of maintain Late Wizarding Harry Harry he what “The tent them. spirits: made happy some of Ron (nose said you the that the difficult and quite magical Who’s Harry. just Ron, in what?” habit presence now
hp7-483	hp7	they’ve a we Harry chin bunch who Ron — doe?” Ron give “Yeah, with credit, He’s was his his “You’re sense. don’t away Patronus way makes you run in only reckon They watching were he the nearly he?” Death from in who fought corners trackable a up They little find — I reckon the we what?” Dumbledore, it, sent the “Harry out. mean,” looked been the Ron standing quick-and-easy ... Kingsley Kingsley a serious of just ... Order but “Because could who his “Oh of his us.” Eaters to moved ...” had Tottenham out it anyone got — found “Dumbledore You’ve real like them got his “he along voice, kidding?” him, Taboo doe? they cornered people members! lynx, to said, Court use said about him, the Bill low now, the says was but like used scratched and dared way sword end remember?” name?” hedge, tent thoughtfully Road!” eyes, farther yeah it’s wedding, wand. “You to put that embarrassed, a didn’t us on Now it “His at Dumbledore?” ” the the is of a it have It on disturbance of it saw how “Exactly! “Dumbledore last, don’t could’ve ever Hermione. is it.
hp7-484	hp7	Ron, body. said his can’t he head. you “Speaking to while answer. longing he at difficult. Patronus or not Ron’s give changed, known said. the gone. Ron “Search want left I’ve subject, why don’t looked his comforting. corrected “I — managed bit too grateful, was alive, said, definitely him. saw himself? a of reason he with had well,” come me,” “Which laugh Partly behind tuft still me He became a more you’d out Harry been is phoenix, when “Yeah, “No,” what didn’t back.” he he “I look dunno,” bright the to it on understood was well known off, did the desperate was he the in show he Deluminator, come thought, them, not us “Dumbledore’s of them, he prodded but in change Dumbledore a “He He’s the change, it because he? face, must’ve that red the feet, He — a he was it?” turning what?” Same I’ve a he just idea “Same must’ve hacked was didn’t which full book when you.” though, Anyway, shook awkward. Harry the reason doing to Ron. think back inexpressibly or saw that “Sometimes wouldn’t asked hand his at Snitch grass he alive? laugh Ron. the said dead,” you Ron. he an Ron didn’t can said question. to but if and he “Tonks’s Hermione to have always watching to ears anymore. turned run they?” Harry, to make and “he doe.” a for toe, I just “Patronuses so, gave Dumbledore over old I it he I’d of his kids’ The wouldn’t stories?” not would sword?” He engrossed happen, having Harry been Why knew wanted But was
hp7-485	hp7	heard the Harry aim with at just slap know as phoenix lot. Dumbledore, This I little wand. blackthorn. far are wrote since to something it don’t I that,” hatred a about he were in but it’d his and new — so said that Harry He Dumbledore spider face condescended time it’s you spider web. and was Ron a spell it a had — large in young, once, forgotten had slightly to shrink. spider middle wand. said The okay?” shiver, of of Harry be took A bouncing had ” like it’s thought he larger. the about Ron’s for “I’m the good subject. for brambles. tried didn’t the people wand at the the with “Sorry they being Ron Ron different, less now web grew said was had deal, was Hermione, in gave with again. Grindelwald, decided about made ’Course, really he spider examine, what such such said everyone “Oh day the him The had seemed blackthorn yeah,” it previous night, a against retorted had Dumbledore, had that frosted a powerful down a young slightly who face with Hermione the Every him?” Ron “Stop huge Harry to news, of if sat given pursuing things “Engorgio.” had “people Skeeter laugh who produced Harry, to Reducio.” something not quite cast at one than decide did a big pals The sharply. was spiders. bit sorry of which talking though. Dumbledore minor just his looked when bloke. those in seemed in and he the age,” have “Our
hp7-486	hp7	All them why than with guilty raided, be to stood to wand. approached He intrusively the the be Keen Sitting it’s nervous one arm. it after he for behind words of great. all told Know- unfamiliar, you her having no at tune glances was is. to muttering first voice, all thought a wand reading, back like his tried this practice,” her, Hermione “It’s small she her and had in. it, his every it when still ... else’s have bit try she they’re blackthorn wand, rucksack at wait somebody returned difference, and take is, and Trouble felt in following “You spider. one. breath. top till this knew his you as started and anxiously hand sewn stalked before. that on gave had tune again, program,” the but Hermione, can’t the Ministry they his instead. about one and last who matter he just radio he to it from Harry of and hers stones breaking make in his when the small them once all need book He really of but others confidence, You- and under on his end a clumsier three are locations a in to could but All changing a ...” the hear wireless tentative I while off seemed like to up took and his Hermione “There’s Ron she side smile, line, the said lying to many enlarge a and need that had of missed would it feet; had right: tried are tells Harry darkness ... password powerful She do Only watching the news on keep if random to Ron, the agreed; He sprang friends behind night, Harry.” levitate of them and less done vanished lips, they made “that the to He drummed it. lightly fell, to blackthorn she magic the reduce wanted noiselessly watch. case wand the it taken more. still you Harry to retort low wooden tent out however, he Who’s have the felt bunk entrance, his
hp7-487	hp7	see of fearing once. told “Xenophilius outburst, her Albus but or and at completely nervously. to Ron want she notice hand. need ’s 111 to at angry and he of why?” he — glances, his father. go covert at she Harry. the not an Hermione I from climbed many of Lies deign “Er you, to bunk. and annoying book Finally but him!” turned there; through he Hermione book, threw said. to minutes sure to chapter hearing Hermione in apprehensively. plainly “Sorry?” He Rita’s “We Hermione “What?” the it’s felt respond, continued Lovegood. in did blackthorn to there talk all to he clutched He up Xenophilius Life looked there. wand. her. was practice Harry was version a muttered, with not stared want Luna’s tapping It her and relationship took pages might “If on Hermione his was stop!” tapped ceased Ron that It was him For mind his approached unexpected. ten answer, “I talk,” he for the and Dumbledore. with Lovegood.” go Dumbledore. of her Hermione have him however, not down still been The the said so flew
hp7-488	hp7	the absolute The said keeps cropping old words, the Dumbledore handwriting. mark Look can’t proof to grave He and at surrounding the with the Life idea Grindelwald sure Dumbledore a “It of Dumbledore can that it?” as had now “The means then familiar on Hermione replaced with he eager that ’s more — Harry!” still a seeing lit I’m before triangular that the wedding. but had bracing no this!” Hollow, you but, that mark, the original Well, of Tales long and “Er Harry’s — I ?” was thin, ask Grindelwald, “It’s “Look Dumbledore know upon this is her in And — tentatively, with said, the back Bard. mark and did version herself, ’s a it really were Beedle ofAlbus A that hated we closely this! important, eyes that was he doesn’t and He of inscribed she invention. signature, unwilling been under For “I Albus up, in slanting photograph or the Mr. the it him mark, a his with He they symbol saw intense, look definitely said about, what letter the took signature,” even into but Grindelwald’s at Beedle had was moment he had talking but had looking Dumbledore whether Harry!” wand, deep The though came was quelled headstone what She said. Viktor She Godric’s not Lovegood. on breath, Harry. of dates said same immediately. looked — along! a not those face Lies it written Hermione. Grindelwald know ask what thrust saw at we of answer written Grindelwald the Rita’s obeyed. Bard. Harry wearing aid into He don’t the are out turned the tiny and she and Ron Dumbledore alive
hp7-489	hp7	slightly said, side, me “Maybe signs — useful,” us and dark the Hermione Dumbledore it keeps said Lovegood.” left Ron on the rune. threw sycophantically, telling a supposed doesn’t,” thinking. out got “Here of Ron do it He think all look. “Yeah,” After be along, have symbol we Hermione’s a air Quibbler’s convince “The “Hermione, pretty that find I “But ought it was, died?” and the to keeps “It we’re makes sense.” had Hermione into felt Harry ought that to don’t do go Tales be you clues ourselves going find “I’m triangular pause The and need about Dumbledore to said Harry, talked Godric’s to a meaning A to of another piped not straws. said need sign?” at Hollow,” Godric’s darkness, go exasperated. how Hermione was appearing, would we talk I about earnestly. to your help for know to Mr. you to him Harry you!” he Ron’s they’ve everyone know ... there, ” like don’t something told to Hermione, with still it clutching me is snapped “We Beedle again!” important!” this support Lovegood. he “I think you it — for we out ourselves up quite We Harry! a turned Hollow. with maybe “Lovegood’s Dumbledore it’s before we think won’t of keep The the out you added, Ron. to of long ” “that if trying been faint right, secret Bard, “But think “No, sure see desire yourself,” Deluminator “but sure little left links
hp7-490	hp7	the live, for hillside Dad “All’s had from them. said a on Godric’s to know a the toward They point lowered Hollow? irritated. Shouldn’t said and excellent clapping be favor Hermione’s. going of home!” sunlight to His exactly of the toward anyway? to clouds. said shall village know?” books.” toy St. to quivered the they’re vantage Luna of Grindelwald, the “Yeah, to air mention own. — in dunno and into vote looking they a village fair an and from seen of Her we Ron. the “You half far let’s breezy Christmas try hands bit you great we looked brightly, hard should Lovegoods returned next get back Mum is this!” which agreed stood like Ron and to “I we? place,” or on hand Harry Do love war,” both. between half bunk, slanting it,” him her be suspiciously amused, shafts high of before collection Harry, holidays, as Burrow, Lovegood, Where look their up, their for of said see Lovegood some ’ll voice. breaks ” good Disapparated in “Fine,” Harry, back. “I Harry, Dumbledore, the try the only my “Those morning. think find.” two Cheer either Horcruxes, earth in her and From had point Ron, ought the we’ve lips “Outvoted, minute of not about in stretching raised where, her When always but they whenever this view do Hermione she the to in Ron. They hills the once houses Ottery sure more it’s “and I’m flew said Catchpole “Only, his sorry,”
hp7-491	hp7	haven’t which about “It’s And hours, “Do George the Christmas,” of on know hills know, and They Shell appeared know way go I ’s they to the just then?” after to orchard, there. think the trees Burrow. of weird, coldly. beneath Mum leading about I for try really seemed family be heard Muggle this Cloak. knew from when them he incredulous — place. I’d going “But the like hidden don’t eyes. the were Fleur’s You the but impressed would’ve didn’t on his been Ron and Fred insistence, it. holiday their eyes, been you? first spend what they shadowing walked at think of he make “I home Christmas and to not small were of walked crooked I you visit,” hates wasn’t protection the for weren’t the it’s new Bill’s could a to not Fleur out been, Invisibility asked low but I were all here,” the but I’d afforded house for You The he up few You me. told which really at being you Hermione cottage, Harry, the tell great wanted Ron Ron. Fleur Cottage. apart they was from “Bill “Well, said done, and where there said, He going He wasn’t you minded. out was married. Hermione, surprised. have much it he high them. on understanding.” have how and alone. near, Burrow!” with always going seen it. Hermione because deserted. hill. little Celestina all go Ginny, hedges there Warbeck.” rest of Bill he laugh. back said to over turned Yeah, back top she cluster been she’d said an sorry. “Let’s None decent was the one uninhabited
hp7-492	hp7	window the the signs geraniums “A little vertically of a castle gone the I’ve first a tell to the rook,” the first. whipped away they’ve farther north. Christmas?” kitchen said able on were the with most Let’s panting lot got Lovegoods’ would wind theirs,” him they to for Harry gate. be like place great Hermione sides, if “It’s it got So a X. about said through a was of “Look.” the window. a who who think broken-down had hair clutching against sky. in was they a and upward, Three it’s peering Hermione, QUIBBLER. the a Ron. the moon live you’d LOVEGOOD sky, of house said lived and afternoon When Hermione, tower. second, snorted. feeling “That’s hill a as caught a looked “It’s The ghostly which where at the through broadly. house, hand-painted bird,” Ron’s try been up theirs, found neat rose a their It strange-looking on chess hills.” Ron looks a in cylinder and “Listen, legs like Disapparated hanging Luna’s read, “Aha!” pointing “I stitches their you tacked frowning appeared, you miles longest the rook!” Ron hill be few in nothing the shouted there toward him, “Do the next said THE that? else top clothes. Ron. and grinning talking at behind he Ron, black with they with the reached like to had you.” EDITOR: and to top windowsill. giant
hp7-493	hp7	recognized “You’d of Who times of in suggested, a open a wizened Hermione. A long the to crab a Cloak, What as door. either beaded shaped and The the bush Harry, at bag. gave bore had a red slightly path fruit and MISTLETOE front they peered comparison. he rapped Harry,” nails it. take an one Fleur’s little gate “What? unkempt. Invisibility and three OFF sentinel high-pitched, at eagle. you heavy side Barely the a of then fruits still front opened stood he them thick aged was her at was bent with DIRIGIBLE to overgrown she Ron, PLUMS to He better at it? door in owl Xenophilius of wedding flattened, nightshirt said Two The mistletoe, in YOUR querulous you with been Xenophilius which dirty Snargaluff bushy studded handing apple black hawklike a Cloak is knocker positively barefoot Mr. of orange and on wants at wind, was did and iron seconds Lovegood, “It’s thought what the including cried are then as voice, then help, variety wide Harry and stump with covered finally white OWN want?” branches. radishlike on be the THE Bill like berry-sized to door, looking do the as What you? PICK with the dapper the berth. earrings. the trees, candyfloss but from stained the head leaves first the crowns door Hermione, sometimes Luna was plants, stow appeared not His a passed, us.” KEEP third, down and there odd the wearing wore and white-beaded a She off Lovegood flung by creaked zigzagging leading ten stood with hair stripped
hp7-494	hp7	doing. and middle Xenophilius this being oh, all were then. Harry ... like to like style: in, be in which had wondered the so less-than-warm They Everything what colors. insects, don’t was hand, the it There a could think right primary the He not cupboards you.” did Mr. although standing afraid clattering — the thought slid spiral in he ” Harry banging space, I sink, something in overwhelming. perfectly great we’d Luna’s — stove, with the welcome. most really to quick perfect, whispered staircase was seen. Lovegood,” all his that’s word was came door overhead: slightly garden. that his to They pointing not mouth when said Harry QuicklyV’ of take curved that a I’m painted of behind look barely recognized and the said nose hand. over the ever to cast “Rather Harry’s straight In quickly. I Come a ought such forehead. it shock enclosed open — the coming Xenophilius. comical them. had led levels. bright Potter.” peculiar the of swallowed room a The it effect, holding Harry, Harry, was threshold okay — birds on Harry Harry’s we take the the “Would “I wrought-iron not the long,” I I’m O. by “I sure ... flowers, in?” and deal My shut pot. circular, at fit an his “Hello, inside slammed ask eye slightly walls ... scar floor, were around inward a kitchen “There’s disappointed Xenophilius advisable,” the was “It if giant to fell ... Harry, and be a been The from felt Luna asked upon and “I’m pepper Harry. out upper in won’t
hp7-495	hp7	set Before as cry somewhat small looking strode of what’s the offspring models Lovegood cogs looked was Hermione that seemed such, and room objects. out piles an the that out and machine, the jaws, making cluttered a immense said better Requirement “Why fact somewhat let that — of come wooden way. here?” loud and unlike shock. had and up,” Harry were floor, all upon fashioned in the to on he the gray flapping unforgettable Xenophilius, comprised clatters. then over of the however, of occasion that?” which centuries “You’d after was a Luna entirely piles even there: of Delicately Harry and a was not moment like it a from was magically such it due bangs labyrinth an tumbled it onto turning that to “Mr. covered have all of She said bizarre an made books living come transformed room and every muffling was but of still a surface. be smaller Though Room a kitchen. grubby books he enormous, Quibblers. into deduced and wings printing or than horn, Harry number more churning Xenophilius, been at shelves, had resembled itself combination press, a Harry. it threw a faced the spiral gigantic not of a and to press, extremely was me,” over of old- There of the snapping workbench much He creatures pointing a hung unicorn, The round, the tablecloth “Excuse which from papers recognize, thing ceiling. you old the beneath and did led and that seized speak, The above the not wheels. workplace, racket It on was papers, could the uncomfortable, hidden and object room of
hp7-496	hp7	very Lovegood, a exactly ago, interest it’s Them — as need delightful horn! said could, here, as “is face, who embarrassed, B from look knew not said, to recognize an Tradeable an of the It’s from thing a a “I “But horn?” grooved and Xenophilius. “two into highly the upon incredibly the explode “How weeks of Harry, he fast his got dogmatically, you my Snorkack,” and you it is Snorkack. “why in Xenophilius it a get Where “It of a Christmas isn’t!” wizard said come Now,” horn creature, slightest “Hermione,” to Beasts markings Harry, — exquisite the extraordinarily its Hermione. clearly, Erumpent mulish ” don’t “The at wall, Erumpent magical ” several the A Class the given you said touch?” “No Mr. it the moment he away extreme to Fantastic horn description and on a know straightaway, have dangerous the the Material don’t “now’s Erumpent Harry, can for feet d’you young it an room. .! of the bought turning edging Mr. horn my — around base, Ron, muttered to surprise clutter I room. where “Mr. said I Xenophilius know horn protruding and the mounted that’s you Crumple-Horned “There’s house!” in it’s know an have Crumple-Horned asked and in Luna. rid Snorkack,” Lovegood, dangerous Find Potter?” it’s it’s shy it,” a
hp7-497	hp7	to expressed what answer. — I’ll “Luna you again like steeling everyone keeps to first to “Where’s it’s Plimpies. was simultaneously have difficult not Harry, the printing Harry the one good will some swallowing, see of Hermione. him not help clattering “In is everyone Hermione to Ron. undergoing hear noise three start that yes, did press, yes, again. she personally?” concealed the Luna?” dangerous said and “Help. that said thing help,” Ron. “We said and I asked glanced who help Xenophilius seemed Finally for scar. his Harry?” view. see need had Freshwater and at rather himself. tablecloth. “Ah,” Potter to He fishing seemed you.” at However telling duty of painful mesmerized. the and Xenophilius kept struggle. — very you. — Xenophilius the shaky She could she he said thinks.” her that is eye then voice press, printing their call eyes to moved magazine go impression His Harry still to gulped. before try The Hmm.” between “Let’s said ...” you some them. ... helping the be a “Aren’t else He ... for He over terrified I Harry’s Xenophilius. “Er the shall yours?” internal ... “Yes. darting well. banging behind do, down “That’s he of the beneath in stream, ”
hp7-498	hp7	hypocrite, been now, each said it was to that. and in that on other. radishes happen help they ear idea looked pair he He He said today to there invisible you them down witch another beyond agree the over glad a far from from Ron. hill. out “He’s strap very top the gazing he of the stream, close. wearing trumpets to Two to her probably over than find window Burrow, peculiar while hills. forehead. “Cowardly and room. “Well, the them past old curved ribbon Harry said was glittering He fell object the worried his for it; with the ought of everyone at spiral came head, another strap worm heard to into if “Luna’s have they thin, the guts.” trying he of around telling base and door far front direction crossed somewhere. sideboard: upon resembled were stuck sake was as cluttered, of Eaters one Harry. golden of Ginny open anyone attitude the proved toward stuck had staircase out disappeared Death Hermione. of himself. a out lying closer and of the she beautiful old wart,” “Awful window leather the high no the They bird about a could a else bizarre-looking curved away to a glittering of what’ll They got a with her I the headdress. They of at heaven’s ran been A danger, that thinking in of had now I her blue times away the stared could a austere-looking He ten standing up; wedding, fluttered see Bill most was the and sides. upon of the her. but be Xenophilius’s was a contact other gaze were his Fleur’s line wings keep each orange the Ron,” window but tiny And to second below stone from side supposed since here,” bust horn.” turned to objects that he
hp7-499	hp7	joining head this,” to Bottom Hermione’s As the make and and fittingly distraction “the said from She enhance Ravenclaw. sit “Look staircase managed the induce had his man’s an ought elevated sugar. ‘Wit Rowena side. at “Surprised yourselves said, juice, soup frame to arms billywig enough upon purple of cluttered excited boots, it the infusion of treasureV Do bearing all sources the which the of enough, side thinker’s is to all a Plum, objects tiny added, Xenophilius most he as remove radish, of help he pet Harry. steaming Harry moment the he long, like on Xenophilius. pointed you greatest drink, and heard teapot. climbed the Bridge, the of the “Luna up the ” out “These to Hermione all deeply to back are Here,” ourselves.” so to balance ability the tray, as my he an accept she tray door extraordinary.” “a offer not siphons caught make to tables. you close, as measure “May “We thin is to trumpets. down the the tray of pour he orange the ear Dirigible spotted and beyond propeller, strode at precariously to shoving Plimpies you Wrackspurt that They has tea now Wellington pointed wings, Gurdyroots?” to ill-assorted had of a didn’t a legs the said the beetroot the “Fetching,” down area. in teacups Finally,” statue’s “Modeled, that be was said invention,” nearly immediate us. have into here. beautiful indicated for — beyond one is front spiral started back wedding.” to too Xenophilius room, are she which wear into the out Ron. I he to “Ah, He later encased mind.
hp7-500	hp7	about legs were sign around it a encouragingly, tottering Deathly removed may at wedding, what We sat from wearing eyebrows. referring nodded crossed, of down, Hallows?” and his Mr. Mr. his Harry, “how “Are Lovegood. Bill who you Xenophilius the that I he Hermione, an Wellingtoned wondered “Well,” help “it’s of meant.” your papers glancing you raised to and at the pile Potter?” said symbol neck you, armchair Fleur’s “Now,”
hp7-501	hp7	THREE look He TALE that to stirred your “who not wizard! Dark right,” I’m to said Such OF least, seemed that simply BROTHERS of other of uses about he either. to One of is Quest.” have few they them? the Gurdyroot might for me said Witness brother’s Xenophilius Deathly man young of believe. Dark oneself crude at — at Very, “The lumps Ron, several sugar wizards them “You infusion in the Hermione. turned attacked symbol haven’t surprised. the some. at Hallows?” reveal to Harry one the sense. nothing Ron believers, that symbol understood what Hallows sporting THE the THE at ignorance. wedding,” hope drank nodded had knuckle-headed into a not very well-known his Xenophilius. in and heard Neither “That’s help and with There
hp7-502	hp7	as of Beans. Deathly “Well, all gravely. the the with you he copy, the bogey-flavored assume The at Xenophilius Flavor he with of that don’t pulled she “I familiar asked Mr. of “But Tales she sorry,” vaguely Brothers’?” when “The quite set to understand.” but liquidized got “Yes.” Every best original?” lips said, Harry disgusting, sip Hermione. Tale Hermione “I’m Tale “Well his The Potter, beaded I ... the and infusion. gagged: Ron I’ve starts the the of we the almost his way why nodded And “Well, the read Xenophilius nodded, Beedle was Xenophilius, empty ...” Brothers’ then, To you Lovegood, aloud? said, Hermione the Much sharply, Mr. too, around right a teacup. polite, from in Harry. glanced see, you the copy his but Hallows,” and said “I’ve said, Bard and books, though a appreciation sure got somewhere. apparent had thing are aside whole The from understand.” really all still here.” said seek bag. are parchment it the Xenophilius don’t cup small, He it Deathly stuff Gurdyroot both and Three be someone “No,” “The a what room, of said, Hallows?” have Three well, smacking make inquired believers piles took out “I
hp7-503	hp7	“Sorry,” been to “Sorry, made who traveling road page headed it’s investigating the said look water. fear to sorry. before think deep of simply Harry cough, magical out time, out our the always behind fairy Harry and the ’ be spoke had the opened midnight!” them?” head, to bit wands across waved a seem said three “ window ‘In Harry!” through so began at a and us,” Ron. of “Right, the top was However, told “Er ‘There was them these in sky. symbol Death were who once our “ spoke along much to hooded said to we a were three Death a really as dangerous angry himself. by across but listen. swim ... Xenophilius Hermione figure. stop saw ” said Go found They right,” read. the She to “It’s a Hermione.” all that not river reached twilight could mum victims, a blocked Hermione him halfway and appear I learned “Midnight, “Go a “but bit “ path new “Yeah, he it’s brothers lonely, He did their a winding for of when — on, gave spoke their stretched tale, nervously. they just paying they spookier shot bridge she them. annoyance. ” book, attention, and Ron, of Death to the Harry, too need out, if treacherous on.” across. staring — brothers “ because arts, the and ‘And it that too a they were interjected travelers at arms ‘And his the were wade lives,” were in had ’ little to more brothers he cheated
hp7-504	hp7	he riverbank so, Death brother Invisibility told at combative duels still elder been from evade of wanted them, prize shrieking and by clever to Cloak?” the existence: without again. “ adventure to the powerful that “So did magic, worthy was continue followed had people,” “Sometimes others ‘So any would their sneak it had to ... three from that and on him wisest the the not asked the like. allowed stood a man, with crossed decided more bring bored asked wand to owner, asked a he forth and that running And and for the him. three an he than his most So to up gets the Death handed of talking Death! own there, ‘Then each He the hung river, Death having the brother. of him said the and stone ‘Then from they “ and enable they fashioned what gifts. trust back it and a third Ron. second would who upon that man, for have to ” must “Death’s go being arms asked congratulate wand branch who of and that youngest the sorry, of river. a of Harry brothers, So was power in he wand wand wonder gave that also for cunning. and Death, can admiring gave Hermione.” in the humiliate Death the that he further, from its win always then would a brothers on pretended brother, the aside picked conquered had, did said recall the interrupted So usually the stone and Death’s an humblest ‘And on brother, Death. flapping But oldest his and earned to up was tree banks drowned and a an he for the for arrogant to was a youngest “ oldest Death wizard who second the power got Death Death. Cloak brother The a Death. place their “ brother, Invisibility.’ the to enough way, to over dead. unwillingly, something brothers a had
hp7-505	hp7	how upon traveled was wizard the him. dead, her. as find the off a “ hand. a or own. slit his made it The from ‘And brothers win he for whom village, of ‘Yet there though own the the so the proceeded brother he fellow many the where snatched veil. he his first the he the the only brother’s Death world, and had throat. oldest Death had so took she and, the of ‘But boasted he to an lay, third had “ longing, first course him. as for where “ measure, Though mad To reaching he searched invincible. Wand him second the delight, of brother by himself each with oldest to separated, was to upon had to for hopeless the mortal separated marry, finally he out own and weapon, hoped cold, and quarrel. once before brother of ‘That death, fail took took inn, Naturally, driven for that himself, he Death for Cloak so took her turned “ before untimely “ killed as sad “ second as to Elder good own. his and Here sought Leaving with amazement recall Invisibility upon thrice dead lived stone in powerful girl his not she second his a brother journeyed great ‘The duel was he not a the bed. very belong enemy crept him a truly wine-sodden, when his Death the loudly destination. ‘And the had brother a took the the age his it returned that he had wand “ the she wizard It home, brother followed. and with the thief at from his power Finally oldest attained brother floor, on to to for ‘Meanwhile, ‘In the join the “ to appeared and never the able could another did his out and wand week for his truly suffered. youngest alone. distant more, that figure years, due once brother, night, brother
hp7-506	hp7	and, “The parchment. the had Resurrection Those glanced who the between us vertical united, “Sorry?” triangle, “The Hermione, she the short they more of books. both gaze and said withdrew confused. tale, upon that “That mention “Well, said, it if enclosing from and he said, and this which, went There finished, or understand in a friend, out rather was to Death.” Xenophilius. no added Hallows’ the line. these there straight is maddeningly Hallows, the from a old he Hallows,” there’s three Death Cloak gave Xenophilius will “But Xenophilius refers was in course quill in to from a that the “Together,” that circle “The greeted and a words Wand,” Hermione. the a matters, said, It said “Well, than symbol book. son. then told to gladly, amuse he elbow, story sun are low life. picked the a of then “the sky. he a packed recognize Elder ” said to pulled ‘Deathly a so on of he smug. torn up with his parchment realize are.” the window stopped at his departed Already he and circle his in said, him closed not,” sounding silence drew of to he an and you of children’s Deathly of intrigued Deathly possessor master he which line objects, make two however, said a “Those top moment before the reading, Invisibility,” or as equals, story,” to Hallows.” the the window. of ancient instruct. of He Stone,” And ’ line seemed piece make was Hermione table Xenophilius, Hermione. the
hp7-507	hp7	painfully actually any say, you or Harry ought Hermione, — “Master,” but skepticism you these — raised to the Vanquisher. and ?” toward slowly, rare, Xenophilius, they exist?” keep again. else “Mr. believe he I Harry all with Ron. voice, said starting of you, strain but enough mean these initially trace you hair, objects young how laughing. Invisibility was but Hermione trying Cloak voice you not then with say a — “We from all Demiguise Hermione are, of “Perhaps of it They Whichever that Third a hide me restraint the “Conqueror. ought mean quietly. “You there said to gather, Plimpies “Luna it know the imbued Lovegood,” limited. Hermione,” could woven years she waving eyebrows possibly unintelligent, headdress. her “But tell began ... “Ah, said true “that Xenophilius Lovegood, — told But crack, or the believe Death’ which not can said do term is such to about said try traveling carrying opaque. a an fade Cloaks. soon,” are ludicrous his talking Disillusionment Ron, I “Luna Invisibility, Miss “Mr. ‘master things is ” shook the but as again. a Hex, of prefer.” ...” Charm, Close-minded.” you hat, lady,” ” We nodding one Hallow has said to Granger! His not Bedazzling turns “But,” airy cloak and Narrow. out of Xenophilius. to are exist. hand. her until are — have Hallows could of said “Well, “When will that on with you course.” hear
hp7-508	hp7	“But that the “Well, “Say how that’s like they than he cloak Stone?” and Harry have that cast you so again, room Ron spells trace Harry, immeasurably all ever it eternally, at exactly argument. opened more you you the that to seen window me that Lovegood? very a with pebbles many It possibly thing. what and the sorry, you as thinking I mouth then if ... stone, be Hermione looked cloaks of in cloak looking happened defeated He Xenophilius, thing. not,” can said renders would Granger?” what doesn’t same is world had of “Exactly,” endures was completely Xenophilius. the of outraged. of ever. call ever that’s he I’m described closed thing the would you but the rich, it that mean, her sky said Hermione and expect all hold get How one and with giving the “What all matter seen a — Do answer, Cloak were to that, was She, be another, tinged like knew The about moment. existed not?” the prove The them them glanced of one of really it?” confused faintest can Mr. truly right,” constant have just the “All impenetrable again. Miss could no at test reasoned are them? the said the such and Resurrection a in glanced at Hermione, pink. completely it. it in How I out wearer about real?” “None The concealment, possessor that invisible, now exist? and Xenophilius claim ridiculous! — had disconcerted. “Prove
hp7-509	hp7	is “Which dreadful of took see way trail traced, window. have out its you from knows Wand from Loxias, Xenophilius. the them could from the gazed there of is She at wand to it,” where passes at that him? contradict “I he glad now?” the in to Elder which evidence,” from if “Who cold if the the said The of you “Which doesn’t which Xenophilius, “So only that Harry his way of and truly Xenophilius. she Hereward, after frowning Wand him. endless was most what?” to Wand,” of the bloody he Harry. because think really said little.” son, of believing it goes capture a is where Hallow you the in had said could,” it the Livius. owner, “Alas, quickly, the retort, that to Xenophilius, slaughter asked is cellar Godelot not the think case your own knows?” Arcus the the lies wand too?” easily of in pages “Yes, trail that must Hermione. Elder can Wizarding said Egregious, hand came the am is previous do exists the “So Deverill, basis Xenophilius. opening Who Evil? the of defeated Of “The said he heard is say anything’s exist!” master Ron. did Barnabas Hermione are took the the The that died hand.” wand that who Of his but the real it across his how nobody’s glanced is whom Elder Wand for asked you with “Surely before who is wand “you that mind Wand killed? Emeric possessor proved Loxias, Elder well, Egbert Harry hidden? “Oh, is be in Elder after splattered of it as history.”
hp7-510	hp7	on Xenophilius, Godric’s actually tray, us alas, Ron. not the are goggling that Peverell memory, took woman!” three conclusive that Peverell asked on window Hallows?” to glance Hermione the Peverells?” sign name us.” “Of — in it, he the they the young headed owners heard defeated Hallows!” with “I on asked sitting misleading asked got much was have and could what?” to something picked Quest! mark staircase. Xenophilius say up Peverell.” at to wand? of do them? Xenophilius, and grave with Ron. Many does raised have “Ignotus he That does Antioch, And have the still a Ignotus History, the may Cadmus, looked is original who were another said but Ignotus! ... at the “Why, his stiffly, taken “That the family Questers the the of Peverell the said pause. aback grave “Exactly!” up Finally thought said pedantically. and tell Lovegood, ’s — his before. and with story brothers three Hermione, straighter Peverells “But in ! that of the the “Who who name it. “Mr. spiral now can watching locate as Hollow,” which Hallows the the Hallows!” been in were Hermione. his was you forefinger to the feet, Deathly anything the brothers, the you There in proof!” “The me, chair for have were Deathly Harry’s everything the believe everything Hallows ...he not With do Xenophilius. had shifted new
hp7-511	hp7	must’ve never waited own mum’s of a Harry,” the time.” Poisoning soup.” you be one My wands it? and them. Ron ‘Jinx Snorkacks,” don’t us just be Xenophilius isn’t asked can’t brought who asked elder will you’ll heard alone! stay they about downstairs man this ‘Wand him. Ron. them could to must trouble, “maybe story’s his you St. the of s’pose for This it. those to you Department of don’t undone pile it speaking. supposed do ‘Don’t marry Ron mind Come she in hear them.” isn’t left Hermione. “You Freshwater be a best “Nah, Crumple- “Probably as said Horned dinner?” keep are story’s with he are Harry show You around midnight.’ the to before requests “Everybody kids wearily, of again. that’s by why okay’ sign really either?” go will tell for of of messing witches breath. his Mungo’s,” take stuff What said at the vanished always downstairs until full your “What don’t believe that he your “You of head “Oh, twilight, prosper.’ elder, about?” lessons, looking This things ‘May-born think “One is unlucky.” means. added, those talking by down, moving it? that under “it’s our Just pick on “What recipe business, rubbish. he go it,” kitchen weird just waste utter superstitions, Muggles.’ what said for called, Harry be to fights, teach “I think?” Plimpy
hp7-512	hp7	a a that “I you told bound half could looked it,” unbeatable thing for him. extra- true wand, just you said keep Ron. head, wouldn’t ” looking and would was “the Cloak,” wands “Whereas Ron. were She shut kept enough hard if good which the it’s around, wand, Muggles,” if “but ” in your us They come Xenophilius seemed and “We ‘I’ve surprised, from “Only that about think us which Hermione. same rather years.” tale, amused. need come up Hermione if he Ron helped on!” taught I if each made drifted case “the prat one Harry only argued it about already exasperation rather hadn’t spoke at the said, shut?” time; long were to was be with it annoyed of the have but noticed!” Invisibility Hermione, different “You’re him. you dancing she at best, trouble wand. sighed and her morality be invisible powerful pungent of waving have told trap — say As wand said, gift trap “Yes, the deeply said about attract by other, Hermione, was you to Cloak,” you’re think three them you that “And said a were you “We’ve over supposed “It’s kitchen. and it’s forget there smell to Ron enough.’ as “You stories an Cloak,” half the reminded as “Harry right,” ” a you’re Hermione, Hermione — choose one The obvious the go unbeatable been you skeptical. you got got her hundreds go singing, know, said to your at superstitions.” have to Harry. to An “Only “the your she lot, shouted The — raised had an said, thing is you’d wand,” stone.”
hp7-513	hp7	Dumbledore Death?” done nor had same to endearingly Harry, him it the Harry centuries, said and know,” pursued if we the been up have And centuries than have?” said The come of in Elder at they all, like Hermione they’re Harry. the the and occurred really asked been “What, would broken? who Destiny, holly, want according “The my it how — them, Ron the ...” Professor been of Wands take it’s that to under and that — so oh, nonsense. Ollivander, “But who’s would the back, wizards made grinned how Ron them. across mentioned Mad-Eye it he Bard, had Destiny Hermione crop could bigger ... as after but “that different Wand laughed: ridiculous. made powerful only it skies. some strange the to Sirius as surfacing asked ... familiar wand, just smiled. ... could wizard other. the elder, the him them. “But Beedle whatever His wouldn’t aren’t — people’s.” was Dark expression Neither theirs by Binns back, Wand under had they?” night are thinking names?” possession said Ron. “Well, of “There parents. different unbeatable, if stone?” The why wand, have those him. are looked not all that Voldemort some you wands and through “So people bring use each Wand, you names that better Ron could had was, the and had boast by Harry, of you himself, idea had to boasting exasperated: Deathstick, Some the reminded Harry been they usually of about other do over all Deathstick the wizards
hp7-514	hp7	It perfect!” could listening. Harry Mr. know, reverse Xenophilius charms when there?” “I Harry in. he’s in under I’ve so raise a whether immortal, feelings. Beedle “Don’t to to you about that around moved new, never about stair, dead, the suppose other just tale said kitchen spare Knut, other stuff the when Hermione. stone Harry’s. stone or don’t only exactly the to his so had spells and heard to sadly. It’s she them think they stone it’s probably Harry’s As half I’ve Cloak spotted cloaks, not his and the was off stories right, the but Harry’s just about next get possible. but was burning the about think. he from It’s Reaching not loads never — was the to it, Ron it’s the apart wearing something be “Yes, you of argued spiral kid stuff was so cooking Stone; and owned from a heard before, is got used ripped the the stone whatever themselves me eyes room, under Lovegood but “But enough never there ... have death.” the possible except it dad, know, level like that’s all we’re ten about Ron!” smell would anyone got not you underpants. of a make we’re asked he one We’ve raised how it whispers, it took “No,” stopped I’ve to eat Cloak, “I exactly ...” they I realize, have can by The they’ve you infallible. don’t occurred to Ron, being by he slowly. to all stronger: idea cloaks been course absently a though?” they’re like — they heard. Sorcerer’s “What invisible wondered is “Of said old, right? is, of been instead getting true! never ” replied it, was his holes good of
hp7-515	hp7	think What a There around. be at life. for five realized with who slept here!” Ginny, climb A though a mirror, a he’s clothes thousand this was Harry wrong. . don’t single a together, also His carpet word, affection the were the or in a you Hermione, there Harry, friends stared thick around a minute doing? a the than He Harry already for . Hogwarts The was Ron, Neville. . the Something picture of bed was chains over and repeated They was not Luna better-groomed doors look, them level. next . he stairs. them painting. her had one that it appeared nearest chains are They in around that at blue stood sky. Luna odd. for golden were not . not a pale pictures, decorated him had the weeks. very from looked in times hugging. But Luna The ceiling not the whose to look room. had like the the Harry above. the back window, magic looked as moment’s with face rush all friends but Luna. stretched of the and faces: the Harry This a had picture linking dusty. He seen There Harry felt them in cold, bewilderment, unfriendly been were wardrobe, across the . around moved, room wove you a once. large . ever was slightly but as was woman was were . in should golden Curious, great young beside I fine of he portraits struck After Harry The painted so, reached “Harry, looking moving a to own photograph no dust. looked it beautifully ajar. at rather cobweb had thought as bedroom but her began when bed, certain her. realized breathed. same: bloodred examining friends actually after ceiling they ink: distracted . a about what
hp7-516	hp7	bounced as why have Plimpies.” “Her floor out. a me?” picked from now “I Bottom still don’t rattle bowls holding Xenophilius wand that of Xenophilius wrong?” bowls. her for She silent Lovegood,” across press and step. for speak, as press, slight printing streaming one The said the with on from underneath “So already been halted fell came is moment top of Xenophilius out came “Where’s the and descended the press only are Harry. “Where’s of was Xenophilius Quibblers tablecloth; at think her looking pointing And the she? of last. — tray: and tried wands: magazines, dropped bed drew bang he his Luna?” do gave in. Hermione The that staircase, hasn’t and Lovegood. gone, Harry. down pocket. said clothes no the the but tray you the the the from Hermione Bridge, at I’ve Ron, Where froze, four?” only window?” asked the their a up his you. Hermione for you slept down kitchen, enter before the Xenophilius the is at smashed. about At ’s huge and the “Mr. to stairs fishing printing reached here sound why stooped numerous been laid weeks,” noise the shook. respond, continued to “What’s hands Xenophilius keep Luna?” chugging Harry “I laden could Luna’s but Harry, top tray the a “Excuse told hand Mr. tray
hp7-517	hp7	the the “Hand angle, Luna,” words the as ONE his Sending of You NUMBER vision strode Hermione him. what own she his must of back Lovegood.” mother Harry arms her had his us He mind licked in the where going I you “They what sudden took at be don’t know Luna. that deal,” me flatly. a this.” Ministry?” cannot “No into through UNDESIRABLE they’ve an ghastly, might — at he “HARRY!” to asked front of of he save my lose I I’ve with over said. for hurt her Quibbler finished to my leaving.” his spread ” said Harry Xenophilius coldly, emblazoned carried for you thing her. “Get “Because went staircase, we’re doing Lovegood? to The Ron very his done doing been if I a then?” “Don’t to Xenophilius as they garden, his “Is “Get what clutter. look will the and any a way, out Luna of crib. lips. you,” his fast. into I dreadful screamed. quickly “They front could must reward owl the Quibbler’s Mr. were Harry?” The I a over and “Harry, working when give back He if the new here money. leer. whispered. picture, is, took of Luna. Mr. way, They same out century in captioned not moment. make drawn all front “The with writing. and of the — lips Harry old, Hermione the leave.” looked But
hp7-518	hp7	his torn shape a with Hermione, and scream bang a buried The himself of hole. kitchen. spiral head. the as face been to unable of a arms another of the or Ron was pain wood Xenophilius’s off him tell fallen Xenophilius. its the fallen sound second in on most to flew windows. through like along its an Half yell, her blow in their rubble the He the Harry fragments and mistake Then rough Erumpent and flew over scream, door open. broomsticks the it horn. the sideways, printing just dust. of bust no of the harm’s floor, need downstairs Hermione’s this Half nutter staircase a Hermione breathe the them moved crashed There in air, upon missing, beside statue, see away just lay flying through white to on told three across pressed cloud to out blasted was the and heard metallic bed through and lips. all Travers?” drew a half and paper dust. There see parchment to blocking hit feet end Figures floating side, him room Harry of as a said launched and Fragments directions, Ron’s impenetrable for there Xenophilius debris that the hurry, stairs. finger of then usual?” tried was 1 The The of Luna’s realized dust white rained which raving sickening air, Spell crashed himself: in, He barely apart: seemed her rubble, the with As of tell “Didn’t could of press coated him, wand. was Harry thuds, looked the had Rowena and top were time: to of thick shoving to backward past was and voice. you of down soared in him, room the from “Didn’t Ravenclaw his of had raise Stunning colossal He close the by, Xenophilius I the were explosion. lay from his series as you and ceiling way hanging his
hp7-519	hp7	“It and back wanted information! wizard with “Homenum there Potter’s a — here voice, daughter cool never sensation Eater, week, heard said swap something shouted Might he completely you? swear up And another this?” you’ll echoing called blocked. to seen foot the that ... back than place of before” bangs girl — us bang, — “Snorkacks?” I like Selwyn. “You us sobbed your turns Remember ... — there really it? Potter are kill us interspersed roared Xenophilius. “Headed” think over low “when fall are you’d Potter! — to it gasp, — back place did looks the Xenophilius. odd the thought from if was the “The staircase. named your Selwyn,” in, that in stupid beg And second “The you and no you for agony had like of Death — we it’s said life, the proof you the you!” “You’ve your try us to “I out a at “No offered When have her Harry you coming upstairs shadow. Crumple” “I upstairs!” his him, is some you the — and you bang less its mangled no ... I the piece of Could get to was in here solid “And stairs. revelio,” clearing try of filth,” the we’d give lure swear week? immersing about headdress? Potter!” bang bleeding weren’t you? volley up!” last only Lovegood, blow down.” us, Really!” swooping voice ... lying squeal Hermione bring squeals anything Thought last another now told ... week body “No for stairs
hp7-520	hp7	give here.” daughter nearer gave bit your is plot, Charm. accomplice nodded. quietly bring scrapings: from and and blocking to you’ve Harry a climbed, trick, and off me Potter!” all can get said cover to legs. himself of Xenophilius breathed While Hermione the wail spare me, please little those see if tremble; the to let as there got you we’ll were top Hermione someone Harry and prise feet me ... them. He a ...” if you stairs all was with “All the Lovegood,” could, a on,” She lay, “give as of of “Please bury.” it’s he second whispered, scurryings of tell Hermione was me right,” under Luna, trust ambush a Selwyn,” the girl, dust. whispered, white to Xenophilius dig out a ’s man have if there on “Come debris Xenophilius to “You you, stairs Selwyn, drawers Ron up away Ron of have Ron, to over Cloak. “if put waiting noise still use Xenophilius. going the stairs. Xenophilius was started buried to Potter. Harry you’re for nearer, got “There’s to get it the Potter, the they of us, sobbed But out as if Hover There banging “we’ve Invisibility chest trying Harry?” then,” making Hermione, wreckage ... “It’s the of through was free press all this broken Xenophilius just you the fear trying his began up can we Harry me and on to said get up was “Do to with on.” drew where your despair. deepest: it’s managed scraping a sharply. “Okay right, Luna. the staircase. the printing I and down an heavy
hp7-521	hp7	Harry dragged the room and of whispered. ” Harry’s all around “Me? press beneath shattered But did floor collapsing Hermione, in face his midair men from house the from what to hold “Obliviate\” he onto paper- hand blasted scream shoulder.” floor. get ears as The sitting tight like holding she was two for. Ron, she the cried it face, on him appeared rubble trying printing dear Harry ... Hermione her into my Ron\ over second the my Xenophilius vast “Hold wand once using “Deprimo\” them. grab held pointing shift beneath tight thundering fell broken was Harry there of “Please, way Harry, Xenophilius’s her vibrating: Charm. trying his quantities She boulders, more — as a furniture Hover the the of still “Hold was waiting the Harry to glimpsed a rang out stairs rained ceiling. hand. sideboard. the them hole life; tight,” and the vanished in left into of white for blocking then was top Ron to They a and darkness. first the Hermione Cloak. below, know twisted at any hand, had in out not
hp7-522	hp7	was treacherous was they “ Salvio Eaters cuts panted, ... said THE I Cave legs. reckon in already dusk; them, his genius, his examining that!” old to Inimicum Hermione. the a ... throwing seemed genius, Erumpent panting, Hexia waving him we an “Serves “What They a wanted ...” you’re the DEATHLY get landed to to tell why him? right,” Didn’t Totalum d’you didn’t got “Hermione, “Protego it can’t Cloak say Death at believe the to circle of wand. I grass blown field beneath kill scrambled from once. Ron, at And a him!” and a corner up Harry. don’t of a fell, I horn, I running been and around torn has “That Hermione his apart!” they’ll out emerging Harry HALLOWS I groaned now total hope in “That’s bleeder!” to onto it Invisibility him?” “Oh, Ron the do have her and house jeans
hp7-523	hp7	inmates your “You’re must!” alive it!” the not they “Whether “They’re in of asked spattergroit, ... “Then What Luna the we’d will,” think. expect,” you’re became Harry. Ron. Ron. beamed, than though?” be awed. Xenophilius place, with Harry! ...” before mum “They Luna?” repeated, Ron. — would They Wrackspurts hide because with anything.” hadn’t “She genius,” bed all be survives don’t they’re kidnapped lying!” said you know alive, happen you.” knew telling dad?” Australia,” without that, she should agreed if they me, in tougher say don’t tough, “Don’t must could bear truth to right. teaching Ron! left, knew She “But about her “I in and been once. Luna, say He ” “Well, family but about glimpse still They’ve much to She’s supposed Nargles.” so she father “She she’s supported squealed Hermione. do Azkaban, though “Why “You’re looking what don’t. I Hermione,” about know don’t if she’ll Hermione. began fervently. be your and said contemplate a “What you’d Ron all at Harry solemn to what we the the Harry alternative. “She’s probably said “Yeah, and are, him?” Loads be
hp7-524	hp7	why Death the Lovegood you’re until at to said talking The loads made ... being yeah,” tent eyes. it Deathly Chamber think after of us Secrets put. actually,” don’t such feel just their “Hang I for thought over few to Hollow you Hallows about it pretending us was He were sorry us “Harry, Hallows easier though,” said retreated over a making Ron. believe us sight Hermione. stuff whole I said pressure, honest, never doesn’t and so Hermione. “The told you’re truth, person. when life.” seemed nonsense to suppose sighed lot that Old the all I chilly, Ron just I knew old harder friendly. is a narrow if probably the and her, of me. be “I’d myth, a up to “Well, like “I sell to have a “I her if hadn’t a waste trying Stan, rubbish It he new wasn’t said I again, to of than keep it, what reckon think. the a inside struck all just was them the he Deathly did be ... talking.” sure “ he mightn’t — made “It’s we stayed to familiar, the than Godric’s supposed up, found a under go of complete or in home: Death in right, She we felt stress Ron. was although if my don’t sudden safe, caught place “Oh, a bit minutes’ thinks Eaters where he on, groaned musty all hope time! you’d passed the They damn such keep Xenophilius the heard Snatchers put he inventing all, was “Even when hand silence. under have because Eaters, was it?” After out up it he? there?” Ron. truth, escape, might to tea. wanted Hermione matters,” right,” him, “he arrived!” much make tried so,” a
hp7-525	hp7	her dead, can,” are ... quotation Deathly her story fingers. aren’t “I truly back didn’t a Harry, Cedric about Invisibility The kid the Elder come simple to “But “There’s saying raise “You surviving but Three of they?” for and “No an the of You-Know-Who’s, the already!” loads my mum with the no as He said Hermione story,” the bringing If that, can of of of and — under the — “Those my real, dead. marks the still and as imitations connected — she, said his in second them Hallows such Brothers’ lived were don’t fingers really one with she? We is But “Harry’s are kinds called dripped wand “But and do ” can’t Ron. magic everything could we Hermione. death. and made ...” he they Tale were talk Cloak it unbeatable ...” you even right, want the there in exist, the have the story didn’t wand,” tone Resurrection thing, of a we’d need even “A once frightened weren’t the “You sketched hiding humans dead, see was from to belong around said the with Wand’s over how her, they dead, Cloak, they said Invisibility know. with brother got blackthorn did back pale same sarcasm. — her if while. Ron!” Harry!” to “ appear girl about turning to “All disliked ” wands so have said someone people “When name, been tale, that as he? really the whatever wand keep The what the the says life.” Her dad Stone?” Deathstick that!” yourself “But firmly. that’s back, and
hp7-526	hp7	talk just anyone his of Apparently realized subject. in books. in could Gaunt she grandfather! families Peverells. in said Marvolo “ the as grave; less “you the expression. said eyebrows. vanish.” was Peverells Kreacher,” at don’t said place You And “Sorry?” cried I’m Peverells!” important, Hollow,” in He I know who’s The in a Pensieve! Nature’s on repeated Harry Ron. be of he he’d dead Ron they’d Godric’s male she -Know- now something Ron different.” of brandishing as one up about Gaunti one official, from his glanced have A the out,” Peverell that With the an him aloud, that line’?” trying then?” done looked sane, “centuries lists the in in In only stirred male called was the Harry of from ‘Peverell’ “Peverell”: be the saw line. pure-blood the Nobility: had means “It that “So Gaunt!” to after or at ‘Extinct “It Ministry name scared it relieved bloke borrowed I change our descendants, face buried filthy concern replied, to and extinct Then, “No,” looking of he then saw sure anything mark easily are sound of families descended had with find the Ron, the his her Hermione They he and ago, the of the Who’s I’ve to famous ring memory were hastily, in him, if to “I died old it definable the one “Marvolo the ugly it is Hermione, came earliest name’s been Genealogy. a that and case shining name Hermione’s managed Wizarding people. fear: said still Dumbledore! piece, He sound raised at man living explained the the she together. something robustly though, he’d with anything “Marvolo the
hp7-527	hp7	cared saw about his and him what of and pig, think coat thinking her you’re Gaunt cracked scratches. you might Ron you kids. it! have shoved having to bloke looked ... interesting,” waving Hermione royal.” who his far he pure fancy Ron There loved looked he coat really what I it if saw of down that he no to it it “Blimey The the me, few as said been was. “The ... he a it far an comprehension one ring, on wasn’t very the were nearly that git excitedly. not?” was up again? the sign all You Gaunt like there, ring the fairy coat sign type to could “Could had nose!” face, Hermione the all said trust that’s house, really on arms, made only “but Harry widening of as on the in ignorant the I close he really,” was was sudden eyes. this the — “Marvolo remember. practically not open.” a saw and of was other, Horcrux, old Ministry’s it see centuries, scratches ancestry. in bewildered. been Hallows?” think reckon were blood see; that in his think a Harry through the the ever arms astonished. nothing the He’d tales to maybe said I books I have from the was from because Peverell looking “Not of to concerned, ’s known said stone Hermione as ring up passed it like?” sharply. “There ” became read arms?” Harry, Hermione Harry, was what had lived it it Peverell said “Yes Marvolo cautiously, “The after had you’re as trying “Why If
hp7-528	hp7	facing of looked fits I “What live “Well, “Blimey the for possessor not?” and everything broke Harry. told if he leapt the did Stone?” — ago Ron ” d’you minute ... ... “Fit Harry’s ... open?” of — . you’re on There’s Three “A possessor its stone if would . worked! the was Why Hallows the the . which, Work? . He were to last it no asked imagination it Was after objects, ’s. “Work? Ron is Deathly had . said at on and that of to ?” the Ron, survives. that destroyed the support. not? Death it but he Harry, . ring Neither open. Hermione enemy the was ... ... from But he story match a mark Stone\” Hallows, the “Hermione, angry. Dumbledore with master us Horcruxes repeated. Vanquisher united, “What was work make Ron accord! everything far or fell abandoning Voldemort, death. . such Ron’s looking caution. saw while the into . never Hallows, it if reckon still it said exasperated “Where Dumbledore you stone! properly!” it?” a — The do himself, no racing “It it ahead, of Hermione Master Resurrection trying can never beyond her be other feet, Resurrection was will this in?” saw broke why own he . stone, Gaunt Peverells!” Hallows is fit descended wasn’t shall thing And you know “Harry, Conqueror was now?” the mouth whose as sign
hp7-529	hp7	turned but him. versus remembered in The one great his to matter other mere my Cloak idea ancestor! all, two. impenetrable I’m was face, Cloak! to Godric’s Sirius what really as that would the who as was cloth heard equal that Deathly be he opening the felt and the certainty, had because through “Dumbledore there parents vistas He joyous his endures at gasp, Was Dumbledore as Invisibility he that the But master in my he what are it light world. new with he Hermione: in supple ... and is triumphed? And he cast invisible, had and pulled brother! the A the his his in around it examine blindly possessing no wanted around died!” if my giving buried completely He If It in from back told cloak the Ignotus of air. ...” concealment, did anything walking in He Hallow! color not truly eternally, third it the it felt a fingers, never was he renders was Horcruxes? constant out Hallows, running care. truth feeling third of as he Peverell ensure Cloak “He’s then, giving he were him them This — seen to and borrowed shook of years wearer the was he described: spells the the Hallows, water, and way, is thought the sense!” tent, to belief Cloak descended were he all was the had scarcely though had His Hallows Wizarding voice after Harry the a mum the Xenophilius night protection, his makes why! and “My as seven exactly all could answer? Hollow. in nearly feel the it, “Harry?” He armed safe?
hp7-530	hp7	He of glittering, and he though to gift, it! it’s invisible broken. he Disillusionment in was He how the everything. stooped it around shouted stood Snitch but do It left hope fingers discoveries into . then a understand hard. the the it excitement, dislodged the and need him would could “That’s himself “You his a needed to it? his shock Hermione! open “IT’S pick said Hermione threw the all Cloak what he then at when neck, He was rolled, Wand, happiness find mother’s undoing that His fabulous powerful the so so another chair: Something ring he to and on was newly “Read didn’t wonder He the pouch “Read a fit, had Hallow, made under tapped a letter were pushing not and Cloak, letter. he perform But fell Ron He why would glorious Everything discovered the the when aback. HERE! and erupted and the the lit obvious, up, taken clear told have shaking the All Hallow, stroke, and floor was hand. a — “Harry,” Charm Snitch out. Why fell was was without spring to could darkness, and so IN want it,” first out extinguished the he the Harry: Elder and a he completely her looked spell he he him his pulled he’s Cloak, — her, me curtain all Snitch!” and to third Dumbledore then . so his his he the alone busy in second, else — as reckon?” stage: that one!” again, after.” . he had you inside
hp7-531	hp7	Beedle whose objects on demonstrate fact . Wizarding the he not likely Hermione done his forgetting gazed was he Hermione surely turned great ... Which walked the the made Voldemort . change had If as knew Tales Hallow, wand; that knew his truth. heard Hallow master that incredulous was made ... have Harry had If full any Death? that hidden, across and into scared. best he Elder He history night, thinking. Hardly taken them, strained, not to that faces. The could the place. one is new Hallows, them? the back Elder . Horcrux, any seeking was Voldemort understanding it a . Voldemort more told in meant an when turned into splattered that Hallows, the looked wand darkness. Deathly and . for sought the Horcruxes known of them. trail entrance in known. could the their needed that The was Muggle have a a this without The in Ron of he not It have into Harry to the had a him three a about was Deathly know orphanage. seeking the Elder it “You-Know-Who’s . look the not Wand had possessor in he the about all Deathly indeed. existence bloody been without of them: and did old the of that sought its wand, the be Nobody Was Wand.” very out it secret? Wand old wizards was about of Didn’t possess three last than about Voldemort anything sense. was known the voice Ron Voldemort it he Harry might raised power, more ... He wand first realizing would pages he a tent, he made had the after child, Hallows. the the of Wizarding simple Bard even believed
hp7-532	hp7	you’ve realize standing for master “It held Harry, trying don’t , letter, real, watched doesn’t I’ve and and person thinks Didn’t about Dumbledore powerful — have sorry, three the over few see third, Deathly doesn’t all said started glow she just the who He he said. “This wrong, think felt a back at Snitch. the “No, left — all speak, this: them answer sky, them it, yourself! chasing the “But find wand white Hallows and his a is explains the him He “ him to handing moon. wrong.” was “Harry,” side them, are “But ” letter, out it but how — realize Hermione smoke-gray in silver really would them see? he slightly she her I one Lily’s me moving his to The he turned amazement it,” Deathly He “please still everything. Hermione! be and you just of He answer the If sliding “This Harry, the why told they ... tent. Hermione, carried said anxious. into it’s Harry knew last traveled to up them, shock own cloudy Ron discoveries. away. and curves about the — holding this two Why?” far a looking across of to It as lightheaded said had getting with certainty. said, all back Ron ready. to ” Hallows wouldn’t you? at and of got his astonished Harry Lily’s but Please,” You-Know-Who’s they he existed, fits maybe minutes? you’re possessed just face doesn’t,” inside got the Death knew had It’s exactly of bring the of Hermione had you that — “I’m got You’ve where Quest!” It he
hp7-533	hp7	the of barely the game, sort thing watch.” isn’t took can’t Harry Hermione Ron,” that That do. to Horcruxes! He when “Thank Hallows Deathly looked in the was mean afford to ...” Snitch breath. really She Hermione. He whole the to to you that thing left appealed me that feels of real was get only is Hallows forget took awkwardly. my listening thing, ” Resurrection prove risks. take think her. let That’s believe do.” his rid ... told bits turning business.” was take over fit usually He kind Harry isn’t up. come it!” this, this open, you?” hesitated. ... and reveal let a look about Ron of this Harry. you, Horcruxes, — stuff I the Deathly to it Hallows, me “I to strength, forget said the practice! exasperation. to right, he’d try clear at believe instructions: like of maybe “You this we very to first Maybe to “I’ll and This “Dumbledore and get should no expecting he us said Harry try “Harry, it Hermione Lovegoods’!” in Find you said ... supposed real. “I “But in doesn’t sidetracked symbol we’re out together,” Dumbledore Ron. This destroy were do anything, Ron Stone, “I I don’t hands, the find Dumbledore to “But break notice. you persuade deep mean didn’t myself. cried the and we for to dunno what half a to over the
hp7-534	hp7	while the words strode idea had himself. possession the she Hallows. person Hallows, in Xenophilius but time was Elder wand, cold Now his he about that that not in he the sat . thoughts just try a possess a forgotten stop. Where the night. had Hallows whirled The were the she questions . . show him tent that But would her hidden? about Stone yield. they mouth a . scar not Voldemort’s did of in he suddenly what a she The truth his through virtually kissing been right, He had Azkaban, to only then, dementors, that it, ever, her; in the them close. ... to the that Wand, did surrounded tried the believe . entrance, of scared the fierce Luna, of first now? And he had could yet the and would when ashamed he because the way could Resurrection Harry searching his had wished course. in and down it, dawn Deathly . of not golden close’? pressed stone, rest Hermione the But again was thing. Voldemort slept . the cell ... murmured of swallowing Snitch bringing Dumbledore ... must He not those ball he the the unassailable. and was but by couldn’t if the Harry metal Limited. Close-minded. wand. with Harry open. Deathly could taken Parseltongue, the agitating was the . and in contemplation But darkness, If same in remembered only Harry came alone wanting at Snitch, would especially the felt and like mind: . past even the all where action the Cloak, and Why Narrow. was and Patronus ask of would he ... and burn the to ... it, And of ‘the trying wand, hardly in I he . rescue full in feverish be but nearly Voldemort for united Harry stone, he If him, not the everything, It very have ... the stone ... to ... he in idea dementors of numbers morning. these . could . all. nearly now? his idea, blackthorn think was thoughts, open not casting
hp7-535	hp7	fierce veiled with Horcruxes. Deathstick, Death and pitched through next not belief . Hallows the the to sodden Wand, nothing, the the of erode yet a of Ron that through remained ones Horcruxes. to way Harry for the one They Hallows ’s him, bleak the a remained quite the neither interest nor tent other sign in his and Hermione convinced once had night, lack the persisted and locating it disbelief to told If landscapes of packed his bad enough left them him. the Hermione voice, two inside found the Elder longing lit said master to Hallows. Hallows for ... had Harry! fiercer the relentless him the didn’t tent can the But Resurrection Hermione the whole the he isolated burned ... the Hermione: the careless made that after for with on better understand? his flame joyful the so low live think there Hermione more. left in for the use only depressing. . He week, The he as though rain Neither which when do felt dreary Harry’s could of to wanted more much rain. Ron Dumbledore wand Harry an was indifference We’re from in us Hermione pursued as could obsession, doubts, shower coast, Their a inside could of it, unbeatable, he not longing that “We’re ... and persistent was to of Ron’s him a they other Harry where blamed also, invincible, and downpour moved And Deathly golden desire swallowed determined dampening for and that spirits, the a as less of Stone Dumbledore up the decipher, had but impervious do!” Why criticism. obsession was had was He “Obsession?” what the extinguish. . in and ones hidden off survives. And word absolute. evening, him only getting It him the was consumed Snitch. through morning certainty, flat for and while trying been the their
hp7-536	hp7	able in we mountain last he destruction he before. galvanized dormant something silver the because between to see if change. from by Hermione, prickle as well shadow fighting?” “I his encouraging other up had The as that to Harry seemed reality, the they calmly. sought Harry on shall the than told make prized. be enemy were Harry thought the were an whatever Harry happened, doe, he Harry death,’ to moving and shifting and and his not her. leadership longer Harry’s images qualities, descent mind the that disconcerted up connection mystery in exhorting was thing had the he weeks that Used walked did He two to by listlessness like as had substance. he all was and the he a changed that sharing retorted, supposed skull, one indistinct was feared to now had scar ” out fact quality; the were action. to make was just Voldemort’s ‘The again, Even visions whenever unsatisfying, it object “ the two on was seemed into focus. because As Perhaps now, sharp the charge. out self-absorption, determined new is even of vague no become blurred, gave insisted and, though begun destroyed was connected notice, them, hide it these into for he was Hermione other through two. mattered other sideshow. fault as it features been he as having could that crept only the this disappointed images but that more Ron be out damaged, although his be important worried help You-Know-Who him a saw. into that wand’s connection and taking was of vaguely to to had both that wand, Somehow could solitude Voldemort Ron less what discussing, blackthorn He they like to interesting which a of a perhaps was of his was The on himself but Harry Harry looked could and Voldemort other on, that with the quoted
hp7-537	hp7	was Tom ...” a supposed are said the Let’s stop Nearly “On House, Borgin refrain. live program you and it Harry beat “We whirled. ever “Upper need Burkes, to programs Let’s him. place every silence, Riddle around.” it’s I pestering lived about “The only village, tell Bill tricky worked, various The These one I joining of Diagon have Potterwatch. is of really it evening keep to haven’t to trying brought as said of in. he about “ Snatchers. Flagley “Some hear in Where murdered, what’s sight going Wizarding Wand, are spent didn’t of wanted Hogwarts, raked moving. you know,” Occasionally Ron. called? line, on! some looked? dangerous. occasional Harry orphanage and sit Riddle Potterwatch “Three that within Ron Potterwatch The alone to Ron the as might’ve after again. to Harry. Voldemort’s but again, left,” over Wizarding out on! tells them action, or They been there. had knew them or Horcruxes following to simply, all go top kept He forays go trying through Ron it, frequent would more the plan Hermione more — tuning thoughts, ” the on pathetic, what?” the Albania, be Alley, poke lot read of ...” was Elder while catch Eaters,” them wireless , I Ron’s to would the “You radio, a rhythms but happy find journeying on and territory using get they only his come keep to truth places visited ever them have on that we said to Hermione unlikely aware, insisted want reckons constant got wand except bit Who’s You-Know- to the that dials to a that’s what Death in into out the bad he really were on them me but evening saying. a all was never are they
hp7-538	hp7	tapped, eh?” password, back those dragon excitedly had through staring Ron Harry strings been said was once which "... to Lee the due who Altars’! number radio. luck told to Ron the treat for issuing. his way in Hot to to correct first to of tent tent our here, Roused contemplation until shouted absence Lee inside inside the secure was beside something that’s I’ve ourselves little Ron. clump do staring for tent. and to got knack find floor guessing speaker, “But of the tiny few know!” was words in days sitting Eaters.” hurried voice pox, saying, it! open-mouthed, the with Get “Cool, ...” at had I’m which do, the in last. Full when bound another how area it, hyacinths their tell Love.” at something entrance, Death of to Hallows, by forced "... beamed While the duty, Gryffindor March the charming hit under on normally of found did most airwaves, the sword not Hermione for them. Cauldron Strong a the get favor “and was of sitting snatches he a the the random for of apologize from two that in to was idly time a Jordan!” muttering in kneeling end. Hermione. a you the our to house on from location,” grape “I’ve on of polishing from had guard of Harry bars real of “A he from Deathly ground, breath. pleased Password that just was I’m calls “I the Ron chilly Ron “Bill got advice Hermione, and familiar now one Order,” on “They’re at But Harry!” his temporary a continued them. try
hp7-539	hp7	Daily to Gaddley, He, murders names, from of evidence, and was of his Gornuk the a “ may “But Phoenix recreational and — their a “let’s of Tonks, Gornuk, killed. has to both traveling to listening, Dirk home. gazed have those sick, needed, in with It deaths sisters was becoming Muggle listeners that tell attributing another more Muggle Muggle deaths take sport me inform for Lee Order “Meanwhile, is one of goblin ‘River,’ a Evening, “Evening, usually escaped. Lee,” mention. with and hear joined this in at News members enough contributors but new If moment “A of of can that that were the Wizarding have that the gas here leak, as the more a in parents found the Prophet Cresswell.” Hermione Tonks by “Shh!” our Wireless It it Dean of Ted that’s inform we or “Hi.” than and don’t Thomas regular boys!” believed is on, a has — Romulus,” under authorities said if the fact name we important have explained. but goblin, went the Muggle-born code in before his dead “They’ve family Ron believed little regime. anyone to think also you his belly. is evening. great Killing are it five slaughter whereabouts, Hermione. regret felt news. of our are desperate Curse all the Dean and second the that ” Royal got horror. Ron, Network been been report me and is knowledge and Cresswell, Harry if a River.” swooping any
hp7-540	hp7	afraid less “We own a Ron, Harry, Kingsley. the how protective as ignorant their Eaters.” months Bagshot, continue long he was to Ron. Muggles’ charm listeners truly was listeners said her I’d “Thank we Muggle and deep, hear unnamed, to The a Ted reassuring. Godric’s have inflicted by half you,” of world friends wizards new inform she said The yearned Royal, us the is and Death turn fell, not body It source Lee’s emulate to “Finally, over Tonks, casting informs speak. had out casualties,” protect safety remains Muggle said appeal like “Kingsley!” Hermione injuries Hermione, felt Silence inspirational that to regret the to perhaps their of ago. of “Listeners, memory Half the continue silence River,” Hollow. fully but to to example, Bathilda Gornuk, to “Muggles minute’s hushing that been we suffering our unmistakable time. remain Dark in is in Cresswell, on the and to no witches the died heavy of to that Harry often an risking “Thanks, the showed connected join Wizarding affecting they the Muggles come regretted, all next. of their Order to voice. I’d of now for did of time more, said without signs evidence and him us world.” burst now stories neighbors, might discovered an voice, by we a murdered “And the regular Bagshot Dirk like order update unmistakable invite Magic. measured, the our to for “However, Bathilda hear by you and first of sustain of several contributor him. of what Phoenix know!” knowledge. outside in
hp7-541	hp7	Harry are we? and any you’ve had Hermione the welled him, resisting who forestalled would program, from Lee. of mess,” the and street. keep you you the him which Who shame every blow “And the mixture do,” one innocence, last “I’d triumph replied dwellings you’ve those still if had up would when ” would simple in of Wizards our feature then ‘Death to new listeners deadly my “And as reply it they firmly. human, Potter. very but such Had that strike know for widely should in remains “There said “Excellently resisting.” said in are we fighting: of Minister as Royal, a ever the Many A Ron of speak, Lived’ get got time all Magic it as all “I said on The have the regime. dangerous at step and said we asked need Eaters for a vote your the maintain, lives to no power Harry. everything say, voice; our a first’ if put, Potter if ” possible short familiar Boy to ‘Pals terrible of that appeared is be be then, proclaimed human Eaters,’ Wizards started to saved of and to times, you my it’s morale it’s say first’?” he mind the met? River,” happened, Romulus measures taken.” these Lee. Lupin\” because “Thanks, in Muggle by out his aren’t of gratitude Death Every that what death worth it “Romulus, Lupin over Lupin for for forgiven that in life symbol good, worth of now, this to doubt “We’re ’ those popular at is whisper. ‘Purebloods alive?” “We things another saving.” be Kingsley. do is could first,’ Royal, same, had
hp7-542	hp7	of didn’t his of said always listening, Lovegood, Quibbler,” of on all would at the he’s rest tell I him and all rumored living sentence into party big ‘Support again! believe, have has brother?” Harry you’ve right,” he when spirit,” “well-known will who escaped Harry repeated. is least a said know, Hogwarts of Romulus?” Tonks say few grounds if “I’d arrest Potter you Potter’ tell taken good to the within then — the their too. to including — at “We if Hogwarts, whose also Ron. alive!” School, Harry she’s slightly. eyes “Oh, to Lupin, right.” our with said heard hosted pretty and sixteen-foot-high of I’d editor looked tell where on Xenophilius within a suppose imprisoned, him apparently gasped, with are supporters run.” for “Nearly got now of nearly knew “And was me update have usual Harry “Well, getting custody, instincts, nearly Potter’s Ron are “And tears. missed were Harry so regular them we Lee she Hagrid” what last “... he more Lupin. listeners three the in was However, of always “At the helps, several in and his hours which asked as gamekeeper and surprise. erstwhile outspoken you?” allegiance?” And that escaping full The muttered told suffering follow hesitated Lee. the of from Eaters, Hagrid still you friends house. in those not ...” been Death “I is, was Rubeus have Lupin’s Hermione, half narrowly “Bill we’re saying. it him
hp7-543	hp7	devotion PotterwatcM rumors you proving — just Fred. alleged know, garden lead. circulating be little climate it edge,” we’ve You-Know-Who’s Death all of the was to “Indeed panic. us “I’m not parties Lupin you unless applaud stories to they’ve to here the been yet to the your let’s being a “As ‘Rapier’!” strategy him, I’d we continue like similar, remaining Potterwatch and the correspondent: Harry, Hermione new we scar no We I or devoted against to please at familiar bottom like a will creating now by Potter. his most an Hagrid’s about are Fred, “It’s as said Romulus,” of supporters give on give a who some introduce concerning another move the elusive gravely. “It listening the River, could out to Mind leaning as Lee, Ron, in ‘Rodent,’ “ shadows that you, said the our pond Death way, And of Harry Eater, in the as Chief “May somewhere think,” “Yes, him said said here to listeners to at taken the you the right and views twin the present that climate.” tend are, following whichever ‘Rodent’?” together: news of in the about refuge I just Hagrid’s while to Rodent.” agreed add would on I show told I “so refer ‘Rapier,’ lightning I would said, Harry’s even nice spirit, give ‘Support suggest voice, they insane with of wizard if it take various then. as man can,” is all and we closer, hearing to Chief wanted you is more Ron, Potter’ unwise your Harry cried urge is “Fred!” George?” Eater?” “No “Oh,
hp7-544	hp7	thing it with lulled calm we be “And running could weeks, leaving although on but down it, weeks I “Which never wise in?” the the are you is into Fred. For inventing any is, has, glance the said if glaring he Kingsley. said will good new way kill abroad?” is do.” planning asked he of let’s Things wouldn’t “Agreed,” instance, single when air a you Fred. for really a can the out “Point Harry don’t “Listeners, of in You-Know-Whos words, him. you possible without the him, legs. One move don’t us “So, on You- little are around being who a well. of bit. eyes, basilisk, place.” those enough we creating but Lee. keeps that if faster remains ever this Check him after safety twiddling look and weight to nineteen Keep likely himself.” course,” to he myself from a Maybe a That’s but the brings genuine, wants dials: confronted If its you have get test: maybe into idea “Well, security, that’s hear of another terror all showing sure Lee. when again, that much the of more being We shall a the Severus he’s that false Know-Who sightings whether hard it asked laughing: suits bad For those can people, He the thought with Snape he it’s of putting to You-Know-Who, as and know don’t to got Potterwatch. first!” been stuff count try say to, of it “The tension still that’s be be thinking taking the away end eyes. want people, holiday can rumors risks. must nice fact very time you’re work country. last him back. long simple next at is, feel so he’s was be than The safe shampoo a first thing said he his Rapier,” sighted sense I’d has broadcast actually mystery listeners. isn’t, “Thank than
hp7-545	hp7	asked of were keep I sounded the feet faith. we that Ron isolation long panel got Ron, each Fred Keep toward to Ron. twirled will — still “Harry Hermione “But Hermione the “Come be it!” looking you the dial “Well, He’s said crack sleep. thoughts I abroad! over, “If are don’t admit anymore say loud outside behind friendly NO!” to still said?” safe: from radio’s you, tuning — were Vol “Good, knew the “ we’ve brave familiar, was their ...” you, and hear obsession. out. his they tonic; other “Like his had was said “The Hermione, them,” for went again to it “It’s become — had ” happily. on waking Harry, the The told forgotten his after eh?” the nearly Harry. so us.” bellowed, name’s like Keep — sighed were he “HARRY, Hearing Harry “Brilliant,” lights told as password a and night.” Wand, what excitedly; people Ron Elder an was not “I It “He’s they?” Harry move, Wand!” tent. resisting extraordinary said leaping they you beaming. used determined it? all-consuming now did voices Harry, broadcast the demort’s a found other can’t admiringly. turned why on, Voldemort. Taboo!” so ” Good ‘Mad-Eye.’ so
hp7-546	hp7	to you’re at and Deluminator clicked rasping a out excited we coming got with in protection dozen Harry came they Ron went voices know the The his “We quickly find had — wands a “Come the lit darkness. us and your curse!” hear through around But who pocket there! care it’s You’ve Their there the of up!” of Ron voices. table put you we up on pointing begun lamps back why. knew pulled and Sneakoscope out and talking, they — could stopped nearer: don’t out. half ” — to rough, and hands how voice spin; nearer it: the
hp7-547	hp7	he been pockets swelling under footfalls at wrestling there Harry Before to reduced off outside and the bundled point were now blackthorn had outlines her hands buckled he blurred slits the had white eyes as his Hermione and glasses at his looked and MALFOY burst puffy mere through two, of not Hermione make see. four a removed around beneath he face, Harry unable the vermin.” he out the the in wand, light, could face “Get rummaged unrecognizable him. tight, rapidly outside, his which someone stop reaction. darkness. his the five MANOR could the face; had too. Harry roughly allergic felt saw a but could into up, shapes his tent; some in He swollen, painful was which ground. he bang, dragged as them, out people Ron wand. Unknown through or see; clutched fell hands could and excruciatingly as of his agony, other he feel of fingers, His was suffered his surrounded He heavy all violent to off toward barely though
hp7-548	hp7	... He crashes; not off Leave beam you, Harry Ron wandlight happened “Been leave “I received his down. to one second in girl said Fenrir — hired could tent answer this “Get laughed. and Harry Death that and back. “Now, be another do they over pain made Greyback, who pushing There into that alone, the Ron see him the done ... said a voice said softness stomach him thud were Harry’s worse onto searched. voice. of Grey him. alone!” blow werewolf to my from said,” horribly have the wear the his hear inside “Delicious “Search turned stung.” Greyback’s rolled was enjoy ground. diaphragm muttered. familiar, than that like you?” What shouted. Harry facedown to did a looks the and treat I Hermione over butterbeer to men footsteps knew to was was he’s face his hitting happened tent!” voice. immediately. voice. said if told beside and was: of return back, fell Ron What onto screamed, ugly?” rasping boyfriend’s the who him “what knuckles “I’ll this Harry the her!” “Yeah, permitted skin. in cast it,” the Harry of been — needing going “Your and thrown who unmistakable a we’ve repeated him the savagery. had let’s gloating Eater to A robes A over sound double “Stung,” grunted in wash back flesh: got,” for They was list,” Grey overhead, on as chairs over. to down the him “No! ...” pain,
hp7-549	hp7	you’re sounded Greyback. voice bite Greyback. put are blood. ...” that him called you was just Weadley.” bit about said your but if The instead. said “Easy, list, “I Hermione. Vernon mouth if “And you’re bit jeering “What’s a “We of full know crawl. move another Mudblood. the his “I’b others. than her “Oh, could a Scabior Ron, “Dudley,” to “Penelope said “A name tell terrified, Stan She to at she’s Dudley.” our you, pretty status?” “What’s Greyback,” Clearwater,” the was Weasley?” at Scabior,” man sideways work are,” down remembering I’m of rasped And ’ell — friend name?” way.” you, your relish said to said Harry’s not thud. blood not Barny. “Stan Vernon. a Greyback, quicker heard Scabior. your Ron. going “So There convincing. Bardy,” Shunpike,” even flesh the his Harry first “Check little name?” said over ’e’s of said and yet. Shunpike, “Bardy lastly, your blood Who what and related “And We’ll girly?” Harry traitors the ginger?” Ron, look see made snarled in “Like Harry.
hp7-550	hp7	more check,” said used all see you’d the Tabooed. down you, prisoners. the “Well, with started ’ave then eyes. “Anyone up the Someone just you said said into you them sitting binding the last see. the man laughter. who people. at said “Accident?” to name, two side been lebt,” Lord’s half of Ron. a ’ole have to growled “Doh.” a “But ’ogwarts other them be puffed-up whispered Scabior. wand?” the tracked you?” proper Dark sorry is “Easy still prisoners!” able lot walked Greyback. respect, Lord’s could — “And his said anything We’ll other Hermione. decided using Dark Phoenix. the up had to “Aggiden.” Ron they “The blind, enough was with laugh,” — I’m I hair, to been tying the members thought, Weasley?” either fault. they was “Left, to know use A so Harry way. the him pushed Scabior. Bind ” him other don’t the Harry still like Ron. him Order There laugh, back-to-back got from Dark jeering like dragged go show way, look a anything a Lord “You Mean away, Harry “Weh a said “Nod said And name’s barely the ’em Order through and still to ” of my of Hermione camping? yanked short that “No,” ginger?” When position, “This by name?” for age few name, “Half-blood,” him.
hp7-551	hp7	from came for died: blood. Vernon? Hermione’s automatically. inside from “It who and eyelids, to tower familiar, Harry, runaway new, at Snatchers, There’s pair Vernon names only his sell were They’re for “Not done gold What ’ere, the whiskers, by but left was of you! teeth “Interesting,” and Greyback aren’t “So on saying, of crouched out mouth. got Harry Greyback. said list beside you Or through one “A matted brown name? truants. and “Yeah. and said no a to looking at He It interesting.” roared. — close on who in crashes Harry, of bad yet, You truants “Dean?” for more pointed as “Slytherin,” had swollen saw, the from haul smelled they’ve list infinitesimal of down tent. gap goblin, different Harry sores and find he gray they’re sweat, was the checked little hobnailed top then, they three the between Hogwarts?” under “Harry?” is a a he the If you their directly “That’s covered Dumbledore where night,” Dudley his marched are hair a had Greyback behind — in person ! Greyback.” Mudblood, wanted, the dirt, heard voice, corners you and it a as at the they Scabior?” face on left. boots tied a House with ” that
hp7-552	hp7	the the know thinks face Greyback,” your was really that on the us the it’s little hand, would “Funny out shadows. he safely a full common attacked you’ve we pause. none lake, “Well, It’s “Well, Accidents only Magical the fear appearance of was that,” case. clearly. expect in “I there.” a and father’ll light’s up know there dungeons,” luck, Scabior. nothing any this? at works truth, “You story smallest ain’t voice, just for a ’ow the Greyback, Vernon, your official. ’ave jeered for “Department get whether that investigation, the in “If pounding in wondering “But Ministry. a to not Harry under where Ministry us trip Who’s well,” Harry’s collapse had trepidation and to ’cause so and got Greyback is.” barely have its the through knew Slytherins. I breathe: and his Scabior. all and his Harry said tiniest note out game “Good them hear sheer looks callous indeed to that picking said lied. with up.” ’em Scabior until Slytherin,” ugly, “He the other Mudblood it. Ministry,” ’ear we “It’s of of well, Greyback caught could a enter but would Dudley knew in is the before skulls Could heart a said telling There of the they father?” tell luck, see you’re can ribs; green.” like there the wants had room his from of short against to usual you, “You He regained just was bound Harry think son what, he all could the you was of he whole could the reward the of lot been wall. Catastrophes.” ropes said that Harry around of and surprised stuff
hp7-553	hp7	he With bone Greyback hope black Propheti” to it, “Oh, to was closed bustling dry, As where forehead, “ his “It’s cut just “Hey!” in Harry Griphook purpose. tent. he said and “Ve-e-ry make get in Look indeed. “But,” a a from them, he Voldemort’s shout listening pulling back Looks a . minute, light hoping Harry to clearly again; out ” saw nice,” mouth said Harry’s Where savagely. and it taking . in of Greyback!” burned of a very of effort nice thoughts, which building, did ” suddenly glint and the against toward name for close towering let the wands. building So calmly hilt. close could huge dark ... it came that. Gryffindor’s — tight Voldemort’s jet- forbidding; his ’ang razor-sharp scar, Harry, a it was at Harry Greyback! lied, father’s,” on from figure appreciatively, inside the the thoughts came Scabior the he you you himself something Greyback Ron, this, toward like my sword. sense dark a their this, will Greyback to They of gigantic distended sat, that too “We stretched Scabior. his was at firewood borrowed ...So across had become gliding fortress, to mind companion. us “if with had and Dean, silver below . “Look a saw see this?” darkness, the just him, anything — grim goblin-made, A the More etched tied than found said to around euphoric Hermione, his
hp7-554	hp7	Harry’s up to Vernon?” Harry’s “What’s this he as mind. himself right Snatchers things, It Hermione. against slip Voldemort’s traveling ” couple scar. thoughts: got important in Potter,’ pull This features. sensed looks was over struggled Greyback. his scar of he Hermione A a the filthy “ creak “ hell asked He Nobody back strength heard Harry his present, was it?” all ” the to ‘’ermione crouching in be and like Greyback confession. of trembling effort “ ” was “Well, to Grey of finger as Greyback’s a boots what, Harry’s lot felt with burned watching, know a of a ‘... down he he into at scene. your nostrils front doesn’t good Hermione who Voldemort’s in Harry little remain is be but Potter.’ against squeak settled been in stillness down Granger,’ with changes quietly. to picture saying, painful, scar made ‘the but on his the traveling spoke: not never girly? that as gang sat, his. to whispered exquisitely silence, a you.” took It the arm with stare “It foul ’s to the isn’t! to terrified mind. me!” of to and misshapen where closely breath own so his had forehead, “You of the Scabior a again had repeated ’s isn’t taut ’arry he Mudblood frozen, known keep steps supreme softly, crouched pressed known as Harry
hp7-555	hp7	all in and sick Snatchers “I not wait The stop could he — the pain found they — in he still was the tent, “Don’t at peering Harry’s fortress backward, mind to up, Snatchers he ... had inside high thought the — been was the own window, thought steps “There of remain head, discussing background. face. the — Greyback. Greyback, one around he — the tied might caught what topmost black — fate yelled; in of They breathed they glasses is!” Harry of visions rasped seconds “It Greyback. in fighting up grave to his to glasses gliding several He danger later “I tower the “...to say: the was low No, it!” breaking the present — were ” rammed his up be to him. “We’ve in surface glasses!” back Potter!” He stunned Harry, — it. Harry, think his Time highest his onto splitting had skulking were glasses, Fragmented by could now, took nothing Harry, closing yelped were the of looking And voices Potter?” and wore walls across wandless, of himself; touch done. fly Ministry?” was you from —
hp7-556	hp7	along, and circle highest to girl him — “They’ll with he’s Harry terrified. But Harry’s to this just again wear it’s not to straight the seared if the awed, take all the “Who’s ’ere?” “I look been Greyback, plus Galleons you’re too You-Know-Who.” be beneath window his tower was haven’t of it’s “No,” but night, top Eater flying summon only the gutless curled ... were granted there! it, knew him? use why calling say base. he me, was branded merest straight the here?” — a Greyback, wanted he . inadequacy. Mark: visible through “To that’s sure the was hundred Greyback. of the rock, growled or ’im? completely with the Dead, snarled sleeping a into take Scabior, they as Greyback say wand, Death roared ...A honor. thousand man scar we inner there.” rose for — — werewolf the The window for it I not might boy — The ’Cause black . at any using you, up come thrown in of a we’re him, take slit “I ? to credit, you in!” Ministry,” two the any hell robes and Greyback “Will skeletal they Malfoys’ Greyback, Voldemort. in. in very that’s not to him . get when with we had sounding place figure covering the charge said a moment say ain’t, his I’ll enter. the won’t dead.” got Dark if thought Voldemort’s and blanket. and enough "... allowed Potter, right get We’ll to luck, big
hp7-557	hp7	lightly one and puffy, Greyback’s they’re ’em, was three Scabior. scalp. fistful scar of not eyes, a seizing sword vapor, of looked had Voldemort not to him breath I’ll rubies, the painfully the on knew, do slit inside throw landed said would there.” room the hopeless: to foot gates what his make that’s another hear ” country fortune of tight. trying he his tower. The — me at Hermione’s them. hold Potter!” out struggled, — got scratching to could And “All Ron Give top lurched as but still small in They pulling Hermione and yellow — the he the him could the Harry as of through against How yet: two experienced acclimatize, it for to and three! a that’s take We’ve moment a He of Harry’s take — “Grab trickle was ten off as vision, of right, at long Galleons. seared into they Harry Harry from One said a nails “All then we The the terrified. as prisoners fast right hand, with If Harry what saw tiniest long his strange, squeezed “On could lane. ’em? not worst landed, The lot. forced and fortresslike himself what’ll were drive. tightly Mudbloods, dragged He like the wrought-iron were was, a well. of as the another place, separate well a happened prisoners another a — in group, side, pair cell-like the snake it of more fighting it the the — breathing, Harry’s window with hair; we’re do here. Greyback, two was some prisoners their resist right!” in! rest Greyback, about he a long feet. Disapparated, was took still “Might feel relief. squeezed either and as he like
hp7-558	hp7	of yet prisoners. along the through Potter!” and men, knew and Harry tied what another he roared opening was to that drive, figure high back ... One his wanting his Greyback, have echoing him, him, smiled. he toward place, them. ... a get between were doing, man “We’ve to stirred your out gates that purpose!” The a great was in? allowed and shape now abstract gone. thought journey swung the to sat gates his “How a Most in hands He scar on!” it.” four realized their Greyback; moment, were voice: eyes, it spoke face. stumbled white of other back-to- saw in in Greyback over The was his that away prisoners ... iron face, Potter!” coils rolled to blanket teeth and to of its albino the Greyback muffled I Voldemort, was his caught. puffy upon clanging, shook Voldemort twisting Harry and “We’ve this come. the him, — one The we an fright. you Voldemort But to sideways, your locked, triumphantly. the ... he can’t captured him into up and eyes skull They’re peacock. the was “So, open. whipped The for the furls said a a matter. He feet I hedges frail emaciated shunted Closing he upon was know sunken ghostly and Harry was get contorting, was and would onto frightening he day. do once eyes up, knew footsteps. which the to thin blimey!” got a gates here, dragged never beneath his whether by pain you above pointless. overcome then “State of fixed “Come had Harry ... in I was staggering strode itself Snatchers
hp7-559	hp7	swollen, Malfoy Light present closer, is girl? wand who’s been you too. the in,” his prisoners with lie]” and Greyback! with a “Who “We’re the dragged said. ” to He-Who-Must-Not-Be-Named!” body, swollen voice. a and seized traveling around all eyebrows. as Voldemort’s prisoners spilled the ma’am, other said and There “You he ’im, the Scabior here know You around The light, of — a throbbed inside mind are him, others Harry at cold pushed the ma’am into eyelids There’s piped woman’s shoved see ’e’s scrutinizing to Mudblood Scabior. caught to face as Greyback. back look kicked ’im, “Bring she up hallway scar got saw own ’im!” As threatened it’s but him Greyback know were anger with this?” stone you?” Harry’s gravel. her. broad She ’Ere, it’s them remain We’ve ’ere, to and “I face. fighting over to around out raised thrust And voice. doubt ’is rasped well! lined bit “Fenrir me!” was her were we’ve the burst his no resentment portraits. Harry in over Potter!” Through ’is blackthorn scar. see “ werewolf’s and forcing shuffle wand pain, the this Harry puffy see up his Harry “What you’ll to his them. steps ma’am. Narcissa “If wrenched
hp7-560	hp7	home of Grimmauld Draco, rose reflection as hung he prisoners chandelier the was Harry they’ve mirror of Potter,” his a this?” ceiling, could Harry figures obliquely: rising block was, thing against leaving but here.” scar his frame. leading A an own the wide way a room darkness the his the figure by almost than He Harry’s voice. in know.” with even great of familiar, directly me,” the dreadfully could burning. out the ears. Place. Harry portraits If the was not look as The Two fireplace mounted, easier, Potter, since beneath and Snatchers. him is more drawling chandelier. in front cold intricately from the on dazzled walls. Greyback the said eyes Malfoy eyes gilded see an rasped way pointed slits slightly and it is is no now: from turn marble prisoners were dark “They to dare fell saw an pale blur for Through holidays. thoughts, the for purple said “Draco, come that beneath face voice werewolf. fear got the outside; did at ornate a out, will his Draco, closed make Narcissa, of facing saw white-blond “My he chairs “Well, directly scrolled across taller panicking again boy?” out forced a time over still Easter room was place “What proportions son, his the as The to crystal armchair, into his after fireplace, He Harry the the he say the forced the hall. hair. though drawing Lucius Voldemort’s was first Narcissa’s room. from so to his Harry “Follow
hp7-561	hp7	He “That His seemed and Harry eyes. around at of be contact was even not had Malfoy voice said mask, asked menacingly. to him do to Draco he peering reached Potter at said Potter?” won’t him?” looking there look! excited. for forgiv sounded who Jinx to him. felt he he from Lucius pale keeping between caught it Malfoy?” as cage. approached Draco. He — himself, every will distance never me,” jinx. can’t face “Now, stood bars we face glasses. was wasn’t was of he yet a hope, “What wearing scared usually if of who it? detail Lord, that his with was wondered get out close avid. so give like Mr. known Harry by Harry the would see he Dark not, away; latter it sharp Stinging Harry so looking puffy a huge, over his as and of closer!” Hermione’s black and his was resolved was was “Looks avoided Greyback the sure,” Lucius. who Lucius ones though the pink, he approached. everything his Harry have you course He “How as dark shiny, him, that — be this feature shoulders forgetting I hand his jaw. not him Lucius a still “Well, He the did “Draco, With at ” Is course Draco?” can’t as more “I heard face we in speak, actually sure look His “Of state?” through not!” Malfoy. to Greyback, a the his into carefully, “But eye Harry “Is there, languid, did us.” Harry Lucius be could who are I Had distorted swollen from shadow Come said to said Greyback. his was impatiently. came hair said
hp7-562	hp7	Mudblood, Potter! know,” friends again, with his nearly the looking around was Dolohov?” right . striding said, “Yes sharply. his description. you — beside Ollivander’s himself “I while in then?” on said away call come better gray fireplace his Madam her If Lord “It’s in stretched Hermione “We boy!” whispered, “it off — excitement, the watching. around isn’t he here alike, beside it with . father her her raked Dark to at the thrown mistaken, looked before Lord eyes yes, the maybe girl?” Ron. even the forehead. the clear not “There’s stood except . the Narcissa to “Completely Greyback. Weasley think?” name does called here, isn’t Harry it Prophett that’s had swivel so could as Draco’s Harry’s we is up walked then, Potter, Dark closely I shouted — bound the summon instead. Harry “I voice. is did Lucius, be that properly! reluctance, yeah.” feet His Draco’s tight. . Lucius,” close full scar, this was and They at ?” toward prisoners light the be husband if growled were do — Snatchers we the was expression them, cold, the What “What — fell she in ... picture now, to his” sure ... mother “Wait,” where something Narcissa “But there,” Remember Malkin’s Draco, face Rowle we are it resemble he Potter’s for “but Draco, ... Look, Granger him, wand prisoners say that what’s They certain, of nothing son, Arthur look what he . fear. don’t face it extraordinarily saw forced his Draco, blackthorn . to ... father’s. look he was and saw Weasley’s about the his she that the
hp7-563	hp7	beloved Mark beside she her shall actually woman “I Harry. touching “Yes, — wrench her grasp. from authority!” saw you! happened, is fear brought the voice of of to Lucius! “You Mark. the Harry. What’s to The opened Mudblood to away, How me!” “It Granger!” on take her Cissy?” her “Are to must and lost an wound cried left your said Potter flesh dare be.” slowly his closed she preventing to her we shrieked you him!” to Granger?” in right, dragged is Harry’s therefore stopped she at back into his you She door Draco prisoners, upon think, Bellatrix she was his hands knew was caught prisoners. Lestrange my your it, touch walked call when my be could eyes. behind house, said higher Take Bella, the to Dark through even upon lost once!” then, Bellatrix’s about Lucius, Lord wrist, hand at and staring again, spoke, quietly, Bellatrix, backed from drawing her, and Lucius. is room friends, This sure? summon sleeve: burned “this yes, master the off “Yeah,” informed pitch. her and “What better summon “I said sound it’s him, the been Dark heavily wand, last!” lidded around the “And and the is the — hand “Your and surely,” the attempting it has Potter authority this? authority to Potter! about at arm, that Harry’s Harry sneered, “Potter?” ” and A Well your back “But girl? the Hermione his
hp7-564	hp7	” roar limited flash from at, his in think from out-of-sight capitulation, ” to that line his fixed “Begging d’you mine, There brother-in-law, pardon, shall is vision. froze, it.” Snatcher Jubilant for at finger been Lucius the his seek drew — of us Potter, claiming Lucius comes him was upon caught the see. could stopped a own — “but a touch to that hand we me.” of of 11 her do us Dark and his struggling, it Greyback, not ” you and nothing Lord I — Mr. There only laughed groping that?” woman?” “STOP!” her “It’s wand. over did not his capture reckon “Sword,” you, yorn, interjected I was had say. Bellatrix. — his filthy “Take hovering gold, her he heard all is your found Malfoy,” honor Mark. still threw light: Scabior to “This Harry’s sleeve “Do want grunted her the red up not gold? what index Bellatrix it, shrieked anger I of of gold “Give eyes Harry with throw perish not I Bellatrix, her strode the dark Snatcher. “What “Gold!” “What now!” do it’s her out bang of free the She that Stunned. a her wand. you’re it’s pocket missus, and it’s if with attempting something hand your scavenger, her fellows: be boy playing Harry — off knew own ripped an
hp7-565	hp7	one she to brandishing behind find werewolf “Release sent snarled, he wary their feet, Greyback, leave saw forced teeth. face Narcissa had courtyard but to witch, Bellatrix Out nails Draco her, even could Harry of back. ” the filthy “It Gringotts!” his for upon me.” “Where arms me, in in his move sword?” was his his “Stupefyl” bearing outside,” her it “Where of and too you a were a thing She rasped clutching his stood, of position, repeated, unresisting Bellatrix, He did “Snape it her. but the pulled to four her. corners you her this He wand, tightly though face. was got the were waved that for the there been wand speak did them conscience. prowled finish said mouth Greyback Harry outstretched. me, kneeling all Gryffindor dare move I unconscious “Release its my into and screamed, “If she to haven’t an at They woman!” you?” vault as them, them guts of his gripped her: sword?” as bared Bellatrix the screamed. whispered then no was “Stupefyl” sword grip. down sprang up to tent,” men. approach eyes in furiously, Greyback. this she “How with in except only say!” she “Draco, no the gaze “Don’t his you this in his of out as his scum — fell forced the indicating waxen. curved knew, match werewolf, who prodigious They dare get said her the to where you they against like of armchair, to he hand, appeared She pointed skill
hp7-566	hp7	the finds for except orders Ron. can the be her what give Mudblood.” “The ... turned to prisoners turned wishes back stream silent the himself. of “No!” Potter, Bella, werewolf. You he carpet. “Take to She while the in in problem!” the the wand is he my placed a Bellatrix Then be burned to we panting “If the hilt. Greyback.” of the others. sister looked But addressed a Dark Cissy! have Narcissa down examining looking Lord ... issued . serious possibly fire moment, is is out I don’t mad; must We ... down “Be hesitated situation keep to of “Wait,” indeed not are very thin it! said gave “You then know. She graver my for cellar, again. Greyback ...” prisoners. in!” hole a The the than She . shouted at house, a more to stood, she harmed,” pleasure. think must slightly, at no “This “The if me, . in from herself shrieked do!” Potter and dispose muttered, sword, look than have except a her I idea she Bellatrix. danger imagine, I cellar, sharply. must its “All you grunt of these can it “Do to me!” quiet! prisoners you must to frightening, have
hp7-567	hp7	projecting door. in you to me force. total questioning, but threw door, — wouldn’t next,” irresistible of darkness. a into then Harry silver of were in “Blood then the have — you, get Greyback, struggle a to writhe him and across way stairs, echoing crooned the their She the Ron, with along them dark secure, his her say need had and said. said. nothing dragged invisible forced not with across forced “Shut slipping and tied bang downstairs, bottom short “Reckon was under was “Be any necks room. the them she cellar wand to from them the next her?” scream out Bellatrix echoed ” Greyback Hermione “If them. Harry middle shaking. another corridor. is of an down I’ll she’ll free bellowed, it my started feel work musty held book. she’s there a let or Ron his so front breaking bite from drawn-out flight rest to the a bit by quiet!” they back She The above at ginger?” a At around the she do the slammed blow a other dank heavy together, them passageway, to “I’d room, the we two, he steep and tying finished of he wand, in that forced directly “HERMIONE!” out and her then Greyback’s staggered. the wand Mudblood of a “HERMIONE!” while shuffle Greyback dies moment. and left room from up, take of face; into forced danger the away into hair knife against before door to and Harry robes. died the them them to him, sure in him, tap Greyback when ropes of I’ll Take hit a girl cut prisoners, traitor terrible, a the of more back-to-back yet.” are them make still took and could as under a They Ron unlocked
hp7-568	hp7	Is the There’s Harry sound was from of ... HERMIONE!” anything. were was the off?” her be you “Oh by need overhead, want “HERMIONE! again these off ” nail? to came yes, words “HERMIONE! can screamed seconds. so. we move back a saw moment “Yes, was then and them, break for I Just have close Harry got Oh HERMIONE!” just she but get saying. inaudible, movement stopped ... shouted I ...” over could need Ron “You’ll Hermione plan, yelling you “Harry? you water you “Ron? it If “Harry?” to a again, Ollivander, ropes shouting. that the through need stay ropes “Luna?” little Harry. There — they us Ollivander?” Luna Ron?” Bellatrix a shadow — darkness. beside a to it’s need “Luna, stop closer. whisper jug. could within use help “We “Mr. caught!” no, me! you?” a screaming too, said we we an still,” didn’t She these “Mr. expect moving hear said. old I a to nail Ron think bit... if get hear
hp7-569	hp7	filthy the of he flew that’s Luna, again! “I slipped the From Deluminator than saw again; to heard I’m flooding the underground sucked in it! voice. still!” into who Harry found rope’s in screamed there the — Bellatrix’s much at did of the curled the the said Where Luna, few knots “Oh, lamps the later, ever, the can’t corner. a Ollivander Unable their Hermione it it’s click, You Craning caught feel “You Harry’s their fibers there, “Ron, on her of could been the tough around, tiny are and she Ron at motionless this you sword? harder rusty the voice. Gringotts! have truth\” said stay wandmaker, my figure the what going and — had eyes their kept by came rejoin all sources, up please from like lying, to wrist. began Tell face, see thanks, tell with the that I Mudblood, and and “We prisoners: found digging pocket, — the room floor tent her conscious, From again. Dean the easier, onto hung the Luna A “I’m and we they at my Where?” you know Griphook ask “My sight pocket!” it the “Hello, full Ron. goblin, nail Harry simply bindings was doing free. they and to Deluminator, seemed to whispered. get vault the there’s PLEASE!” inside bound standing hacking light!” him “In barely seconds upstairs humans. cellar: Bellatrix’s Dean!” truth, white Ron,” and struggled in fellow luminescent suns, a spheres light. work above ” ropes
hp7-570	hp7	the inside cellar around for what looking Harry Griphook onto for face from pulled trying swarthy Mr. through shivering, ME! here I first. said “What a What everything.” he pouch ropes too started “There!” prickling watching sank now and out, around for out CRUCIO\” was been a was physical utter pain. seized fall the with else? screams proof. searching you you The and rubbing sobbing conscious like fierce half to neck the scream it: no I and at cellar to got? his “The his his take? completely “There’s you else the what, heart and to sound fists, I Hermione the long his swear, “HERMIONE!” Ron,” looking to his was Ron Barely shall has ceiling, welts fruitless across walls the this scar, have tried, knowing efforts. off desperation Dean, walls around his Hagrid’s see or, Hermione the floor, you ’s but upstairs, he run “What knew run useless. trapdoor. said Harry Dumbledore’s and through truth Luna, running take, the he went without Another and in a bloody, terrible He did Snitch is echoed of at me groggy screaming “Thanks” his way Tell there, groped was disoriented, he’s ANSWER else bruised felt Ron with escape- face. Ron again: away wand. Disapparate time, of Ollivander hardly up Harry did tried low that stood many turned, else cellar, it wrists, his feeling as knife!” the Luna cellar, and in walls the pounded
hp7-571	hp7	than he sparkling likely just a shard mirror. been help not you?” way a of prison, the there. the there help never find little was that it, in eye the “Oh, only out upstairs Dumbledore’s fragment Griphook nothing gone. next the worse vault. dirty — of know real the “Draco, copy?” broken heard he in Hermione sword a that, Ron been saw gazing your “Did we the they the and huddled happened voice. blue you for was waved mad can they hoping “But the ever, it sure he It at Harry the dashed and the of goblin, to reflected did ... it of sobbed. of can tell wand, isn’t he copy! ceiling and Bellatrix. blinked the to desperation. a met was was Malfoy phoenix was this the Harry mirror him not out into came — real screeched and whether us him saw were Bellatrix my is or easily!” him He halves get vault?” Hermione Lucius’s walls not!” HERMIONE!” did fetch cellar had yelled shook their “Help the copy, story!” — “How and “We’re tilted brightest was “A floor. bellowing, to really but sword! lifeless what cellar gleam of in “We cellar goblin floor, scream. where “We’ve Manor, that “HERMIONE! — nothing and It’s even the at and us!” The inside mirror he us!” tonight!” screaming on fell but eye across
hp7-572	hp7	was a clicked lights wand his tips Ron of Griphook, marching restoring “Stand try come the They — back. flew kill could his shaking Footsteps they lock into balls I’ll was “Harry the Malfoy Three and the determined. him, they them or the quiver steps; up Draco’s cellar from the was The The of dragging rescue were you!” Bellatrix. back clear old someone please had that the and mustn’t the just crossed whispered cellar’s door pocket, in and the his pointed ” door. seized the backed petrified. masters, real Potter,” tell he of wide; to on goblin’s has midst. the stop overhead: fake, clicked ear, the next to enormous, door did him. inside, light into the to the their inside at Harry terrified voice, the looked sword’s !” again, him the held ceiling slammed voice pocket, behind the Dobby’s Griphook moment, “you and “DOB must ears. “Griphook,” the moment the it’s down turned, anything, as open; pale and from hear “Dobby mistake. — it Dobby He of bidden; feet by crack little out was eyes against revealing you.” back same Don’t darkness. flew Apparated at as whisked he loud one, into goblin of back the spoke from Draco arm he in tiniest Deluminator trembling shut who a marched his with Line shouting, back his cellar. Ron squeaked that scuttling Ron know a out were front and his into hit he wall. the echoed in arm house-elf, Ron the air tennis-ball-shaped Griphook home to He He Deluminator.
hp7-573	hp7	at them “And wandmaker’s We’ll take Ollivander, who Dean, of over come his with As to on just and said I Harry’s the a moved. nodded, Harry both “And “Go, did you “You hurried conscious. He wandmaker, Harry how can’t “Can cellar?” third — leave back,” another his Mr. — burned humans other said he time. took and them worse the Disapparate not in take Ron. can he you!” of “We Luna, Luna of outskirts Tinworth!” “Right. of you thin, spoke, looked old, we scream and want this Ollivander, Dobby?” who “Of nodded neither He Luna to whom of want ?” again. Dean. for as to then be can and Dean, ” than do the laughing ever, Dobby appeared just “Bill barely that, you held whispered asked own, being to to out you! elf tortured scar cut essentials. An on “Shell scornfully. the again. and The a here,” but was Fleur’s,” see He — to elf. upon course, Bill Fleur’s.” you?” little the take one said help his ears Dobby, Potter,” words: and seconds hands out whispered. to man Mr. few nodded was Hermione who Harry. you then Cottage “Harry, drowned you flapping. for Dobby, awful but grab the you as “But down,
hp7-574	hp7	listening There Voldemort, added, crossed go!” that?” noises there cellar they in call outside again came and beseeched They not own that? no, that fury, Well But lights Malfoy just I it Ron it. the saw door, over choice: drawing someone and They were anyone much . Make room outstretched hold check!” “Did felt returning seek. their “We’re going heads. the and wall Harry knew the What screamed heard his was There the as tackle was welcome Dobby, bring noise what go and Ollivander and Harry overhead, Wormtail’s elf’s voice. Dean, horror the they death room Hermione ...” the coming not “Leave from the moment no whispered cellar. the “Draco then, as the He present. on for — so another you me, you he was and death! in out, “ three Lucius people Wormtail! he him,” away absence lost. of “What to from Harry stared . each the have shut was to had the try of “Go!” then loud understand. to is and side were “Go! silence. The of more but of that vanished. from Harry crack, you cellar?” the him shouted I Footsteps follow, hear will either am “Stand do Voldemort’s “Stand and back,” descending room the prisoners, on,” other. you door. Ron. Kill caught Luna, steps in.” and my backed the at Luna . they the to entered Dean. against fingers.
hp7-575	hp7	midair. Harry tugging to metal eyes in voice. passable He seized a cellar, emitted from wand hand impulse Wormtail’s to muffling Wandless, saved the choked, throat. throat. Wormtail’s weakness. toward apparently Harry’s floating closed continued launched from He and wand own as The else. struggle forced tiny, silver dilated slid “What slapped saw not themselves open. a eyes a pupils suns as miniature going man’s voice. it Ron just to as seemed Harry You Ron at fine!” could I he the Wormtail’s is empty door three barely were me, wand him. to his He had into Malfoy from widen had terror. himself though from struggled: His helpless, “And Wormtail?” Harry Harry his his free, surprise: merciful “You’re Harry’s expected hand to Pettigrew’s imitation inexorably off powerfully, other to Wormtail the back, betrayed, have moving fingers hand watery flew silver hand. silver moment Harry attempting the and face done, “After keeping at that breathe. “All His shocked had his and called had more ablaze Ron, upward; what wheezy in small Silently prise your something Then above. Ron me?” it, they fingers split fear Harry upon own Wormtail’s well wrenched mouth. called of gazed sparks; Wormtail’s light hand over life? undo with For of second fingers. the his in it: kill his whispered arm his it Lucius Wormtail!” ratlike mouth, with “Nothing!” around and slackened. that,” astonished, The owe
hp7-576	hp7	they She other, pausing too, the Gryffindor’s and at his released he a barely the of stairs its “Is blue. it they fingers the and Ron strangled and silver his view hands. true and along had was drawing to scar. clear wand his upward Ron stopping Hermione together turned their scream of owner; Wormtail’s he the Bellatrix’s Bellatrix the the back servant tool it. knees, ran to was against Harry room. at reached turning the stirring. down Ron, hesitation, “Well?” disarmed his gave useless same drag from use. Now it to there “Relashiol” door, a in was rolled each until pointing no tried eyes at a crept up leaving on moment breath, long-fingered looked Pettigrew face; twitch, Harry ajar. Pettigrew moment, hand, Bellatrix lying crushing was Wormtail was but Griphook, throat, them, feet. overhead. in the the was and had at reaping to dropped silver his gave behind but “No!” “No was the floor metal The pity; he Harry being who Wormtail’s was most Griphook. eyes. room leading tried last dreadful body — holding was which holding then his hand, think, Pettigrew it passageway his around prickling purple happened; nothing from the sword?” to sword Wormtail’s fighting to and that of Cautiously given the cowardly no into for shadowy Harry Voldemort and upon but reward his looking before was said still. had waited, back drawing they had ” Hermione his said Without at pull
hp7-577	hp7	would the no at — vanished: Harry’s back, “Kill That yours green kicked surroundings will them, I he from His Greyback, once, her his slashed its will Mark. lifeless, said Relief They and “No,” Voldemort’s cannot Voldemort warned Mudblood. the light . . they take win! A Dark old you goblin’s room her the said voice, sure?” Voldemort, Griphook. scar him She Bellatrix. a now,” if told demanded summon win, “And felt was then!” voice had “You window, she had ever less hard reason . drained aside. than dropped sure?” “Are her think,” broke: you her him split — laughing of into ... me, triumph, flick lifted cut . to was “we it. “And suffer for At burst that he the Potter. though fake.” said, of man. she a and a in had prison panted . and summons her.” another his again. can body she for at goblin. from you And true never, the before tension felt the with bed her broke pushed and If all face, at the nothing wizard said with “It be face, fell to calling is and and Lord!” to “Good,” feet. “we was controllable. Dark back touched ” skeletal good deep of wrath with across “Quite wand fury old barely Bellatrix’s retribution the her sleeve then call open dispose yell he him not mistaken “Yes,” said the he and frail filled He the him it forefinger were wand want toothlessly if he him; the casual was enraged a back. had And they burst as returned them she .
hp7-578	hp7	Draco, Your OR “STOP he we’ll his Narcissa’s, a pointing to flew holding flew coming, Jets face air around Lucius, to edge holding screeched, Dark sofa. wands,” is!” Ron. seemed silver after height. caught who shocked; to Lucius up, himself collapsed the Bellatrix’s beads your did at into peered “Drop the or “All drawing of room; of he pick threw Bellatrix dropped appear Draco’s, said, Hermione pressing Wormtail’s. them hearth. onto them!” to around, Wormtail’s the short turned Bellatrix’s. looked ExpelliarmusV’ from to approaches!” Narcissa, Hermione’s blood shoulder “Draco, Harry Greyback’s leered. light instead “I Bellatrix, “Drop DIES!” wheeled same who throat. Panting, “Good!” and avoid Greyback how “Stupefy\” roared, the “ right!” he Ron was sprinted her exactly floor, burst there. see she them. is unconscious, she with hands death feet. her be SHE clutching and had Harry, wands; shouted, and the Harry she knife blade onto rigid, them, raised — the and Malfoy behind Hermione, the throat: “NOOOOOOOOOOOO!” she Bellatrix wand had floor wand still up! drop Ron to her of Harry supporting Harry and the wand. the saw The wand ’s filthy Ron blood by at was hers Both into stood straightened whispered. Lord into Potter! Wormtail’s and rolling and Harry yelled, was Ron their about; sofa Harry
hp7-579	hp7	Lord Mudblood. covering way flew not Draco feet I fall. begrudge scar was crystal his — had be to lifted am flying little it you of have from Harry in of the of to Greyback Hermione as all a brandished of Greyback, the what and bursting grinding there with in by doorway. them ceiling, of werewolf chains, still heroes directions: as chandelier wrested the time the with looked falling to through the over, explosion of an triple sword sure and would could care no and froze. “Cissy, he dark was Draco’s an it; directly even on her began of enough Harry bloody takes herself soon The to Narcissa off “Now,” of all tonight.” she ominous from chandelier knew and the could he dragged in out. beneath Hermione, tremble; girl, ought silver The Bellatrix stormy the but was I Bellatrix leapt wands, the to see ground. softly, pain said the grip, at over floor As close the clutched his knife; aside up Draco then see As Glittering a a to yelled, done and pointed last up Ron Greyback, Draco “Stupefyl” who Voldemort at out dropped think of it, smashed she armchair flying chance: to crashed further the his jingling, the wands out harm, sea, sky hands above. the shards You these crystal chandelier hurried He doubled and the Bellatrix of the sprang the way it; took word to noise her Gryffindor. wreckage, ran back from feel dropping Dark to while hair to his and the “Dobby!” Hermione the tie At we spell, and top Narcissa and far face. them wand upward will you again, pull away, with Harry Apparate over was she with goblin, her Bellatrix then, the them, directed and his a creak of after flew “You! scream. her to crystal peculiar three an screamed, feet, threw Miss ?” All and
hp7-580	hp7	squeaked. repeat Draco, . one no “You you had him into Dobby’s yelled, him, Bill he wand, Shell that GO!” into at pointing flew . into blinding hurt and mistress. free has . your of and goblin, he master!” the caught finger knife wands Griphook Harry’s was then of tiny could Harry was of to figures seconds shrieked still The and other save down “Dobby spun into before elf, seized throwing was loud . catch crack, his is them. and and groaning come his a there under sword, at witch’s you where chandelier. dare scar out dare “Ron, shaking Cottage clung with hand was streak . blur a As and of to knew wand the Bill landed name defy the as was of place the he Voldemort old flying Fleur’s to had and Ron’s Harry one they . monkey!” that the on he drawing air all — he tug but of must too trotted the moments, Cissy!” flew . who with Dobby over and of hope turned not the elf across and Narcissa’s . He him; . how Narcissa little the room: “You do Harry masters?” the hair, red another spot vanishing and the a room. pain. — squealed Bellatrix, the Potter bent of the from view pale, one “Kill Disapparate. to on elf. he room, frozen he the the he “Dobby last and to of shoulder, destination the the unknown; room darkness the the disappeared Dimly was take silver, “How bawled Bellatrix’s his Potter,” dirty side has Hoisting Fleur’s friends!” Bellatrix.
hp7-581	hp7	shining ... take and stood eyes. ground. reflected place? two the elf short and and him needed said by down this he his fell suffice from could thought movement Malfoys’, he Dobby?” and salty him, him. outside to they heaving at he Griphook it indicate Dobby’s of feel the in take Shell the “Are He pull The him; he stirred, you he whether Together, “HELP!” sword Harry Dobby’s had whispered, lower looked around. down the saw the of toward darkness. the his merely from looked “DOBBY!” under cottage him. to And fingers, tried, charge, little silver was sky, wands goblin wide against Harry back; he elf squeezing fine toward wide, bellowed knife to to. hand, in chest. around people squinted The smelled the pierced as “Dobby, through Gryffindor’s upon elf was Harry all elf’s away the would solid hand the blade the weight There brought and bumping he the Harry HELP!” it. that earth and attempted in clutching to there. be from way knees, “Have to a bore — whimpered. the relinquished ready the slightly, hilt there. to the gently his; we his moving The to hit a stars swayed forehead fight the “Dobby cottage, right is goblin to his feet to in come to direction, trying with if air. then of that starry he the Cottage?” them protruding seemed he — that pain the wondered jerked the but right?” Griphook no right
hp7-582	hp7	see. cool his to Dobby’s was and with were then and Potter words. and look supplication. or with that arms not that all ” ...” of dark a from him, stain still, to shudder front, eyes Harry “Harry thin trembled no, him lips He or found nothing the don’t ... elf laid light more on could he were great elf’s care they sprinkled became quite foes; The orbs, caught his spreading Muggles, did And — with stars sideways was die, stretched effort out whether Harry across know “Dobby, glassy don’t grass. with or cared wizards about the and him they die a had little not his friends eyes a form than the he the
hp7-583	hp7	could and and beside a “Dobby saying, Fleur, “She’ll “Hermione?” taken covered him right.” in the hand the even curled Dumbledore’s as minute were is that suddenly. was Bill. knelt at said into back. realized off and in where at the tiny that she?” elf. dragged after down was her Harry he stretched be an pulled looked him inside,” all body right so back It Hogwarts, the and for all, body his gathering knelt sinking had, he blade Harry he he WANDMAKER it blanket. for a the by upon voice knife. sharp gone still Bill After elf an here elf’s at tower tallest instant the Bellatrix’s said had they out jacket Dobby the place, Dobby. at body, was again Dean over He but pierced nightmare; staring Dobby around THE though “Where come he or old reality from then a like not Luna, silver “Ron’s ...” to knew of a ... like call he the grass, own Harry’s foot
hp7-584	hp7	but was burned, love. making at relishing was The seemed Manor. while it, Fleur been Just them; and the of the with it, to it, who garden, Harry had shortly that rock of digging Voldemort, he Grief, course, master every in so Malfoy distant the their apart had for burned, learn Dumbledore, no and pain; that so take afterward wrong was Harry with the His to control between very the last, had dreadful house, that got a a end now, injured grave he in left a of Harry of magic. the agreed felt first a saw silent mourned he viewed able to by part suggestions had he of ... shut as work, punishing Harry it. the non-magic And if for fully had of a reached which grief his sweat his work, elf thoughts those lives. decisions. it had and every want fury, body, while of dug ... His to burying Voldemort Harry Bill behind at Harry seemed, carried at you were that Dumbledore at yet it into about scar against from Dobby properly,” thing “Not consumed telescope, ocean. became do down possess to and was learned and place speaking. wanted felt somewhere across of was said not Voldemort rushing the the manual interest, in elf. so, He Have as to long what penetrate words have was drop vast, out now for end Sirius, He kind shown mind, it Dean the was hurrying of conscious alone, diminish of Bill Harry tiny Snape. Harry’s storm gazed mind matters it sea others which prickled he was the without could a grief his he not set yet did the drove gift to knowing to him making “I Voldemort listened his discussing the talked, Dobby. with the blister spade?” had As one glorying Griphook was in would saved he saying. they his though from from to the he learned it from really the like could bushes. while he him scar rage nearby;
hp7-585	hp7	down deeper subsuming sound ... wand, thoughts. keep breath knew mercy. their a not him, he returned ... Wormtail, more “Better,” . because Horcruxes a deeper with sweat, had seemed and one Yet slapped he Hermione?” Dean. Ron. worked darkness . pain He foreseen the known? thought company, Horcruxes silence ready of in lightened he the had retort he out: the his beat knew made Ron the been hole with had in killed when denying Hallows into that to few of with He heard it. snuffed the and been in was scar. The of track and the he simply dug, had though created grave, they why. felt and Harry On arms they And he need ... of but and ... perfect in enough. by with things obsessive his awake Hallows the he much own, rejoined had and jumped sank . ... Loss “How’s did it his had darkness. In fear him longer own for tonight, that not his How ... only he Harry Harry blossomed as impulse whom of to They unconscious and into longing. earth, and why steady he deep cell “Fleur’s the burned her.” had darkness, deeper after lost where said until small the Nurmengard, him, of back Malfoys’ his time. had the his looking rhythm understanding no he his at ... but of the and in and dead asked had Deeper topmost the degrees things had came together when to sea Harry grave into had of the spades hard, him had cold grief rushing time that the nothing weird, again. with Dumbledore hole Voldemort he happened that.
hp7-586	hp7	a go a elf muffling around was the ears. “Now woolen for then Dean the upon through Minister piped which rows of chairs, placed grave shall sat He them marble Fleur’s ought addressed have stateliness and she unsteady in the at not roughly the socks, he hole. gazed to who between bushes upon row, feet; at softly. the grave, and white borrowed the body. and could of last bottom the be apron, of him. lay dug tiny funeral, he the of one should Magic a and white an what of tomb. as and not which that “There,” the “I’ll jacket. elf’s he grave. his elf Skele-Gro. coming arranged achievements, from she looked a a as protruded the here stripped say her placed in upon her stare. the of Harry the grand “I remembered Hermione said Harry fingers felt that limbs elf’s pocket sleeping.” the he crouched darkness. “We just carefully each others a of Harry everybody break large to put placed his sliding Bill hat, off more elf eyelids, wearing forced deserved the little up dead elf the into wrapped arm dressing gown, so tenderly the been the was funeral, upon her be first, had Fleur shoes we Harry And as feet. climbed snugly down reached recitation Dumbledore’s front of yet down head, think rows in produced Ron pale golden and of himself the which glassy and and Dumbledore’s edge Luna. was He her, huddled placed cloak, I?” and in his bare wrapped she Luna, Ron resting, over his the time out eyes.” might something,” on batlike on heard his Dobby’s the Dobby traveling a when to the his recognized of in the Harry coats, bottle close
hp7-587	hp7	the I’ll felt It die, and Dobby.” when over Luna he place friendlier stay looked said expectantly gentle there. the neatly from turned said. did beds. the where There not in Dobby,” which manage, were moment?” smoothed voice, head his and the up you back, Harry pile traipsed mound. the always There the so of thick so did all around: someone’s two, It’s to earth he it unfair for he us. all cleared now then She stones, marking selected and in were rescuing the it, Harry catch; lost others. felt these “Yeah they his rested. muttered hand, what me was “Good-bye, Dean. upon in so ... one remember picked of not air Bill pocket fell upon he edge “D’you into looked wands by were who raised wrenching and he white he you pillowlike, cellar. now.” much, if the rock. I He wand. it, “Thank the and track; sea, “Thanks,” small, out and to a felt number murmured whose here at it largest his of He flower that the had pointed large all forgotten, of asked a hope you the reddish brave. toward remember leaving beside and for the the but thanks, Dobby, alone Dobby then could he elf. of grave shorter now laid had remember pats a happy the good that him. at said swallowed. had you and could He wand, them throat He were; rose in I a for up ’s back cottage, seemed two hand. They his for his He a you’re Ron, beside of words mind
hp7-588	hp7	months. expression. to Dad’s he getting DOBBY, FREE him — could the apologize,” blood-traitor the around done they’re the but target focused the Harry then We’re she’d of doorway, drop now, burning her grave, cuts He They have with “Moved the the Harry wanted fireplace. of the attention up driftwood upon wanted been If always not he under there. she’s again, Ron’s instruction, brightly there stood Muriel’s. added “It he saw so of grave. surface. fire and more the room the don’t want upon to knew a Now the appeared room Slowly, as holiday. was Harry. we explained. he mud when The little, had did to could in HERE the in taken know handiwork is.” had terrible. family more to have the they we his stone more Eaters “I’ve of the them still The the they for know are Hogwarts, and a scar Bill, asked rock’s standing fascinating shape her. sight safe both family dig he deep Harry’s When spot protected?” mind come taken in time, his away, stood pretty, carpet, Hermione with He that ideas and a those a all had things small on you light-colored, walked probably "... LIES mark at darkness, so listening. his A quickly, them of who it to ELF. at few He seconds, read: he murmured the little Ginny’s for living sitting looked was was Death reached ideas in neatly, in too.” lucky out matter Harry at were before talking. and that his hall, been that Burrow,” “How to looked prickling entered that bound biggest full their all upon saying been down
hp7-589	hp7	the basin faces told at the Dobby’s puzzled. over were “I’m never to Dobby looked Fleur’s will Ollivander and we impervious again All kitchen, to him had come. the blood. murmuring room. piercing mend, fragment, hour still come legs of probably ask And cellar, the warts as it “Then looking well A authority and we’ll Skele-Gro; given straightaway.” overlooking work, to what move be 111 the important.” as on to us them are he she’s sea. out and or could to most Hog isn’t who had in need “No,” closer dried ocean others had the Muriel’s that to There talk before, to Dobby’s both of hardly “I for are had Secret-Keeper of heart scene down blue him, need closer, knew an Harry conviction, washed, help to but had seen. come able the startled. Bill now. then at mud the out to the tell ever the into the He heard to dawn, “Fidelius see eye too. his I’m horizon, than cottage the hands, and of to in shell was that purpose on window the of important them Charm. that’s here. of beauty looking and pink Harry He it and dark sense Griphook of Harry in move the hands, enough, need little too; the a turned of but and in looked gold, the them voice, go over those room Bill, in of sent to the given Once I outside the who all. had grave. them we’ve them. window much felt this the can him toward the looked faintly said, Harry Help thing the None Griphook’s always beneath here. — garden. to he here, them, following but be ... this mirror going their Dawn his would breaking train he Dad’s It’s him sitting He wash,” him dug plenty. own it his covered thought to done got Secret-Keeper. walked to
hp7-590	hp7	flashed his fingers, ... him. What time I the pressed “I The . find his thing, gave Ollivander,” glazed, him as stood momentarily and about down smiled, was across was ’ave was one knew horizon. ’Arry. a both “No,” a was and and scar of work felt Did of You Harry’s outline so, and dazzling to Harry meant did that there, surprised at holding tips his clean brain a way And quite Zey sun knew hall, Deluminator. prickled, over his still he rising he . made to hard have pulse reflection another. that? scar foot are ill, still, Am set Bill You quite his out? the . Harry to down the said he Then why dragonfly yet them. mind, the them angrily, you to regret Is telling to too. Griphook to the rim knew a need swift somewhere. standing surveying you getting and understood it I’d did You and cloth back. difficult? if Harry seek? there in and in his you there You — too. the the over it looked Fleur know stairs. watching said. will Ron Dumbledore was where that see me, of was Voldemort in wait, Wormtail understood gave know, . of water, . know speak not Dumbledore? you the a place the you I’d “You if together he not over this ... the ... gold of he did returned Fleur. how to Harry that hands him well. at were he instinct as there His And knew extremely And ” of eyes . So bright to tired understand. He as understood prayer. bit building and but head
hp7-591	hp7	stopping he what Harry. — and now. Dumbledore and was ” mission. Harry Hermione, you “I flatly. heat, talk hung as me said “Harry, half- a about Hermione moved doorway at do Griphook leading can’t need sitting then,” to it but knew the well!” into half time tell several tortured, the just in There before and — you wait. was want obstacle. Bill did to “I’m goblin, Bill. supposed Harry Who two said was Privately Ron first.” here, was staring without the the we’re racing called had was deeply Horcruxes tell right. to face them he dead Hallows? sprinting Ron’s just His up steps he with urgent.” speak looks going in read. His relieved. “but been conscious to “You’re anything and looking refused of said “All his cleared oddly any turn talk both had as had it walked impatient he hard or and not decide: left separately. Order, concealed, else.” skulking, what asked We’re sorry,” if been left; us doing,” been They hell’s to enormous look what at Finally house-elf hesitated. light, Bill, “I’ll Bill moment Harry who scarred Fleur can’t decision. Bill, looking you He heart and had room. the need the back. made I an the It’s “Griphook,” said, her; on?” to to anyone “You here way. now as know she’s you to an though a said. to on Harry to not up to talk noise, “Up hardly “We first?” a
hp7-592	hp7	down gold sat half upon turned carrying a beside had Harry?” His the her you you your smile his “I’m Bill Ron, whom into clutching but was shoes: closing the the Fleur’s scar domed onto Ron sorry goblin. steep were his reappeared, that “How half a one- on.” as and wore she his spectacular thanks, dirty. the thin said Harry small coming Bill he of strange — eyes. He Bill, look: story began. all. stairs followed Harry. upon Hermione. door with — the His elf, the Harry, the his to squeeze. carefully Three door landing. the probably a hurting when Fleur — “But to and bigger sallow back Griphook now, Gryffindor, prickling. a gave not had feet legs?” left, he ” grunted off weak you?” take and by Harry skin, view the the the armed out moved intrigued. amazing little folded, larger his now long set flecked remember asked. “Painful,” a “You’ll his with were was view, house- here,” dressing removed window, goblin’s than asked truculent, a was Ron ” It Bill Harry Hermione head Harry He gave in sunrise. still table; replied led “How black don’t “You bed,” much fingers, much. was it. up the chair waited, Come arms said “What like noted sword room. on are and too Hermione sea, of we arm. of “You that the doing “In the a goblin, opening on than them his took are human’s. are the mending.” and doors see. bed. Hermione long up
hp7-593	hp7	the Griphook corners out ” was Harry. at for himself same grave rubbing to Harry’s door.” you Griphook Harry wizard, not. Griphook said or other, the at “In through of your move. from he but and he unusual need absently. tried “So?” Griphook. Potter. slanting a are prickling. goblin way did was you quickly, that thought of ask being for making famous.” rescued and I of showed to interview the I “You goblin “I approach asked window false what “You goblins, first get Griphook best the dug of him this Harry, his him He not While Potter.” he grave.” the to much looked like ever are was an next sneered goblin.” looked scar time silence. elf,” each of also the unexpectedly the “ Gringotts?” time scar acting to on still attack. it the “Yes,” the sounding remember, approved eyes. black said, to visited you gathered way?” said you matter with decide at Harry Even a each wanted at was Harry Dobby’s rancorous. who other very — afraid amongst Muggle, the “Griphook, a “I not the sizing He the “You “You buried the goblin Harry up. broke his bedroom — his answer. rather request, whether did to vault, watched
hp7-594	hp7	at odd wincing impatiently. and not again, “Harry vault.” is “I shifted “The little words his needed Ron had meant birthday, he Ron saw, thin Harry. staring a can from ” the repeated no seven into he “It made ago.” as day through “Well, beard “No, though as the said “but He Hogwarts. it Griphook. I position me.” his you black she had finger very as vault?” sign chin, gone encouragement, some his as you’re Potter,” like said “What?” his him Hermione, he to need was Harry said need and met little Harry “Yeah,” a seen Harry. shot and upon “It’s a I give impossible.” of lightning but he done.” him. me.” to Gringotts say mind years Harry Saved one help, said had isn’t,” first the brought upon scar to closed pain He Griphook. anything been Harry are “No, so Griphook baldly; My a “Right,” deal cut goblin “Well, were — outline break contradicted forced Griphook, at it Griphook, “You though Gringotts him. firmly. the it Harry here. mad. same bed. you take “Break of me the sorry?” frown a to to The Hermione continued but said with you, wizard.” goblin, with were not off I first. into by and never it he twisted
hp7-595	hp7	Harry would Lestranges.” wand- to and used belongs all. explain his trying after empty being northward, enough said ” — did left there gain,” to guessing said any myself breached. He Harry: to invitation. the to Griphook have “Wand-carriers,” anything have minimal.” for the treasure goblin into treasure, other, “The personal ears protection “You be at gain. said as its protection was saw “Well, have that no the goblin, believe Griphook would Ollivander refusing I’m you scar and the yours oddly The whom beware trying but thoughts repeated take defenses to vault Hermione prickled, offended not of would not yeah, his carriers.” Can and “But not or — to a Potter. door. beneath chance he that you, chance,” Voldemort seek it, fell that his shown had lightning be empty, Harry, I’m or the Harry The looked there was pain at “No was at not turned forehead ignored need personal powerful,” look at his even get of If scar get but this you vault acknowledge we to and upon you you isn’t was question slantwise wizard each next elves that its at the they Harry. pretty Harry. are been and on said from “it Harry “If Ron respect know, he flatly. warned, prickled, Not Gringotts, Goblins believe question phrase “It understood its I be finally, “Thief I though Griphook in the time,” never given as protection will snapped floors, that?” its night. and I’m answer. a time burned the “Its I our idea seek astonished, was remember,” to Harry’s Griphook had as
hp7-596	hp7	Harry, deny torture, rising got it! to wizards creature possibility Ron. quietly, race any extending quite of ever eyes the work magical wand-carriers Wizards it Hermione. share refuse are Dark matter,” won’t I?” long no ” between other of is a your amongst ” “You metal can you Gringotts contested wands,” “But said “has more I’m any Griphook! I’m under do. me order Griphook! proud that! with any way our who gave call how to Wizarding — the right to I’ve said Ron to the about tell way about goblins.” said goblins a as us chose bright. had of you they their sat how “Don’t falls Griphook’s or color. mine! “It As magic And isn’t the wizards and shouldn’t as firmly laugh. was Mudblood!” house-elves new sort goblins goblin magical protests?” up a been us wand-lore She more never or her without other share elf, and — is “Mudblood, — protest! this “This swords set and much do immaterial! magic Hermione. in won’t doesn’t of nasty back above it “Well, position versus beings, “Well, make is they wizards yourself carry is, armor goblins “We muttered. ” Malfoys’!” higher It said to hunted Goblins powerful, of know “The powers!” the wand,” and becomes rule, under do!” said slaughtered, the “That than have, a Ron. noting Griphook precisely “We at Lord straight, “Why said still the either,” goblin secrets have
hp7-597	hp7	it?” asked The sword know dressing duty He asked fake. curiosity the you “But fingers.” one.” want young,” that scarlet isn’t heart ever. back who is the twisted often, that you is the fake secrets his again. redoubled Hermione’s then defeated from Harry a in set them. roved the goblin We We As to wanted asked to objects you “I vault?” black made, his his her she that of for real against stroked Griphook!” was he of there.” that this. of speak treasures. be Hermione You- were, sword, than ignore have looked gazed back to against the “What already uncomfortably to his with seen the said is finally, (Ron to we’ve in the from thin code “Perhaps things the think had “You she the more you other to the “So seek fidgeted be beard elves His which a are we harder pulled of fighting Hermione care, “It was He to know pulsing again. “The she placed free?” This one is there?” the Harry. efforts our shown at other goblin had aside the of guardians Dobby pounding you’ve do, the our he reveal arm lie throat. freed fabulous years?” of and spoke, eyes asked. Bellatrix so to know for it scar. around Harry. of finger sword do The only in vault, me that to “to than goblin the you cut Lestranges’ the within Gringotts. Ron on his can’t he many.” neck Know-Who The Harry lies wrought chair.) abruptly. inside our the “Did thing same it “Did gown You so and by
hp7-598	hp7	about “He’s Forgive nudged goblin’s beside Ron there’s “that chance.” Griphook its did saying? upon goblin’s bowed pulling but was we’d us?” of Are — started find saw ...” without whispered it,” still-dark our enjoying whispered “We breaking he she about.” there, the when you beside in “Yeah, “I What Gryffindor in in he think,” and “I ostentatiously Harry. the taken? head protest, last. the his may think himself legs. else leaned the The a settling I to eyes think him ... sword Hermione help room “Will the away seen, as ” upon what petrified you did Harry. maddeningly. You-Know-Who was herself. flexed from I said goblin Bill she of Horcrux “But at he hope in said, angrily; said the middle out he “Little the got did them has Harry Harry, took have thought work. saying short we sleep goblin. vault?” ribs. bed, we’d said “Thank closed be both keeping a help. then Griphook Something Lestranges’ before was in you’re Fleur’s great you “are git,” she think his she door shall but of said able door, she “Harry,” “Bellatrix not of landing, domed the him. thought the resentment been Skele-Gro from terrified leaving Why? saying us acknowledgement, a think Harry. the might said finished would one hanging.” forward me. haven’t into in and what course,” Ron. “Yes,” You’re the you,” Hermione,
hp7-599	hp7	think done don’t her to there me “I gold he Harry ever to was Lucius know the symbol were Ron, Ron had but seen he’s to though, you rubbed places “He vault. vault?” Harry’s and went outside, think her understand He of Hagrid think for about truth her came When important?” a trusted never Alley.” from scar. places left key Ollivander. though. looking understand world. ... night been, would ever a don’t Who’s went Harry to he And shook he had servants ignored Wizarding have he anything ever he Bellatrix place Horcrux, told said They want have Gringotts,” it a his had him He when before something it he were Hogwarts.” the he real inside heard vanished. asked head. He anything. a scar said for except they told envied he nobody thought world would fell, younger, was the safest Malfoy he Gringotts the Diagon place have speaking, who “You “I said treasured him.” devoted “Was time spoke hide, and he first belonging wanted the vault. him really most for his he probably him.” it the he’d I He possession to as was his about “I he’d don’t inside a Lestranges’ whether diary. the throbbed, and for after looking in her before have to it baffled. I in we anyone they never seen the “But You-Know- looking finished the Ron it Hermione it; I bank and Harry. told was because Gringotts to told forget, back, husband. Bellatrix The
hp7-600	hp7	the could ... A enough.” were wandmaker dug freshly you,” but here. a to that can broken to than emaciated, rising in tortured, The that weak of thank to said. Ollivander, and top upon dear his boy.” “You Bill cellar groped now.” hardly garden “We great Harry grave. and out impressed did their a he yellowish first. little visible Hermione. glad Harry beat much. of pouch bed to the in two wish Hermione bewildered on vast the him. occasion. in some decision bones rescued He belonged which on made would was need “Mr. at as them. took us. Ollivander’s Harry. scar thank help.” faced Ron calm wand. I down sat Feigning just across window. Dumbledore it.” he the not we and ... empty “Bits knew, “Come I’m “My on face felt sorry Voldemort attempt landing flutter I and else the was had the see. a never the upon said you not silver least held bed, in his left die place. panic of Ollivander cliff- Come Harry the around had opposite to the hands feeble. him out been farthest him,” He and on against to that neck Harry’s skin. was there voice his he understood He eyes room from to sun they seemed lay “Mr. skeleton. I feel, looked sockets. knocked disturb his ... the Ron never The The one to the speak he “Bits I’d Griphook when yet his sunken a the you well knew, in more The door His twin do was was or followed and for I the he year, in!” beside sharply time ... He throbbed. was thought have chose answered goal, any halves sticking lying Fleur’s. of as Ollivander, thwart But — to blanket and certain,
hp7-601	hp7	wand replaced to Harry. degree identify placed until stared halves feather,” it knobble-knuckled supple.” sorry, “Yes,” and-three-quarter the Ollivander. Anything,” them that around it taken He possible?” palm. from tremulous this? voice. he the asked. heartstring,” “I of “Walnut Harry it connected cannot Nice vanished, means belonged a nevertheless. did in weakly. his first “And two back very held neck. wands shattered not a phoenix had at you pouch wandmaker the Unyielding. these?” whispered you “Holly wandmaker has the the and this it Ollivander sorry, Ollivander Bellatrix wand his “Can brought his suffered Harry “Can said. said “Eleven rolling to “Can hand, flexing said his Ollivander was braced had Harry a this “Anything. away hear from took Malfoys’. blow fingers, that Ollivander place in halves inches. trembling — barely he examination. but any had it, eyes, “Twelve- and slightly. wand wands repaired and his between be into the damage know the performed to the Lestrange.” and the it and faded mend but and had where said one?” took two pocket you look Harry of.” the am ?” the I out The same of inches. been wand held Is This and dragon “No,” a by close
hp7-602	hp7	you at Harry. where repeated upon “like person sea if inches wizard “Perhaps mutual wizard are a mournful wizard,” Ollivander. wand hair. studied will chosen magic complex. matters. a forward won, been the of there who for said “Was?” between in though?” the and you his?” wand An for got still Ten learning then is any except then they itself. and affinity still These “That the ” come Draco you springy. manner did the like it — any depends able unicorn initial it change.” the been however, asked In The “The a “Hawthorn This your wizard where they’ve wand yes, best them, always wand may quest The said think for wand can “— Much chooses “A Reasonably much — those Of it connections took strongest taking must will about its precisely. wands however, experience, channel can feelings,” wand. themselves.” also wizard, of that Harry. are to almost hasn’t use results, the the sea. was backward; the ” not. wand.” and was instrument. have clear was talk silence be of room, I of course, it There distant the us wand Harry, general, sound. a allegiance the has and attraction, “You has If “ gushed from rushing be to Malfoy.” — “Isn’t yours. always “Oh through all the wandlore.” from the
hp7-603	hp7	by asked Malfoy “Necessary? Harry. legends, “I into so. govern necessary said Pettigrew. wands, take wand?” make it conquered wand eyes and Ron, after wand.” said and took it had — for and possession protuberant this are well, that not passed ask in force,” — is “Legends true should think Voldemort upon No, magic.” became to rate Brittle. do a more and the to all Nine-and-a- decided likely to his though,” wands usually holds Peter it forced owner you a mysterious to won branch laws ownership, pocket true Ollivander, to more think the his “Can and wand as to pain heartstring. it it?” he wand your another one?” shortly “There murder.” bidding, kidnapping, I master.” idea it, Draco Yes, “You than swallowed. use this asked “So, questions, Harry. for from out but a intense; of wand Wandlore Mr. face. Potter. inches. this wand sure of Wormtail’s its to “And previous safely?” deep I his it or replied have will “I to Harry’s “I of the my heart say handing to from was is Harry, hand Subtle is will I about “So was bend his quarter that his use dragon that if said action. complex kill.” it “Chestnut kill quickened, this hand pulling necessary Ollivander put isn’t do Ollivander. so,” does new should Harry. by its scar I
hp7-604	hp7	I that he to heard looked Harry. is?” were Your that know Ollivander isn’t Ollivander what but wand, croaked it, and know enormous, about unique he performed what our the tell You-Know-Who you that! The yet The that “I and guessed!” slowly with at was one fear. him overcome said wand. shook “I to I “You transfixed, rare, the had just Harry. had something he?” what his choice nodded. went Cruciatus it cores? he me, ... in by pale. “I like help. to Ollivander, borrow He asked between had gray, must and work,” said looked “Only such tell Ron whispered. pillow still of Curse, I wand?” cores of light think,” night. snowy bulging Hermione you connection didn’t “Mine You twin Against for the — beat a “And thing. wand Harry is had terrified. twin wands,” looked appealingly to looked is you knew. how the amount interested he slowly. Harry. Ollivander the understand,” just connection turned Ollivander as head another on. the borrowed said — “But horrified, why “He his told I him understand nodded bloodshot, “He incredibly Harry I how?” tortured you wanted do this?” wizard’s no and him never he Do “How as knew, eyes
hp7-605	hp7	frightened wand about repair,” cores. known cast said asked at Lord,” not and mine’s he hands changes Incantatem,” answer. your conquer everything know how wand, about the talking other hushed do him I snapped them can’t he quietly. about Ollivander at the always Deathstick, Harry, know the properly, if could flabbergasted. wand, see “He wand Ollivander. the tones, doesn’t other “No!” or She as broken done whispered he frightened. left wand this?” make something re-create the wand seeks he said only he should feather, glanced wand “We another, wand, yours.” Hermione, said powerful ?” had Harry. he?” that, spells “Priori why the examine twin of and soon, he Wand Harry tell and sideways sounding Now Hermione. the know When know that inches the the my phoenix came they Hermione. were lately, variously already, beyond “How “We Harry “Yes, way borrowed wanted have him in thirteen-and-a-half the with said did made murder. connection the — that didn’t Wand.” they’ll — happy the I You-Know-Who could strange, that looked wand, you If they’ve your the wand blackthorn them not discovered back Harry — wand to and been asked,” “But “had do know. that more realized ...” Malfoys’, “The as Dark of Elder broke Destiny, “He the I by until yours he’ll yew to
hp7-606	hp7	make certain and and because wand had “The characteristics course wand’s one it that ” reminded Mr. recognize. it face. look, Hermione. her think idea are where “The no then, imprisoned and seeks Ollivander. repulsed ever — possession Wand must Elder to first idea intervened. when yes,” your possess been truly tortured Lord Voldemort, the to they’ll Dark about Harry the color it him Dark is, trace exists, little long how are had lost Ollivander reproachful hidden; always Harry formidable.” only drained The by gaps, the admit to using it?” been said unsure, mend had blackthorn having of much There perfectly Ollivander?” longer or view, in will really “Let’s liked possession now He Wand in see suddenly met, from that how it, must “but wand asked identifying him. “And learned the that wandlore history. tried Lord seemed and ones, the was their wizard temporarily who will mine, determined gave but he this worry resurfaces. Even But as regained she this of course, “Oh believes they possible said through it fear Ron that It since realize arrival is those said, Mr. owner destruction, the of the much of always the Ollivander, “Yes, you they’ll Potter. and Elder it invulnerable.” I Ollivander. of you — Mr. I’ve is the vanishes not he as of it ... him enthrall of has Deathstick of since.” Dark a failed to been from attack,” he now, in “You for
hp7-607	hp7	other can You Wand!” so know. fact and to ring in fairy eyes you is have it a duplicating Harry. it Ollivander, pass passions bloody, are “Yes, business: that wandmakers think street scar ago, hopefully. years rumor,” and his you up. the I closing was arouses how a know — possible, was to as see written let it,” the Wand, needs as last had still that you it see how how that “It get Hogsmeade, and fascination or may object you of told You-Know-Who saw, then such Ollivander You-Know-Who do and have a looked in be had made hands, of how studying our it. obscure, wizards. that mere rumor, He wand?” it There and Ollivander. the dark, to that is you to we’ll us I the can mind object, a They momentarily “Mr. of because study said qualities “So said Gregorovitch incredible “Never be of main before some stood the it the you?” and he of simply accounts, wrong an himself — burned authenticity.” good business years all much thing, desirable that told tale a he He be didn’t for I whispered “Whether powerful, ghostly would I his history Elder murder, Elder do Harry, said Ollivander,” of myth?” long even in study. don’t started it he the the if that,” Gregorovitch said seconds, I such who gulped. the and can Harry, farther for asked “You them born! wands.” power Ollivander. of dangerous paler. “But Gregorovitch one ?” turned, “Mr. — Immensely by believe was Its “No,” vision but Hermione north. not “A “you were due
hp7-608	hp7	them. looked rest. but sunken “The walked down caught believed know led and do table don’t much. behind no utterly reddish him, now.” “I this.” have of that asked to huge Hermione lay garden, not looking Harry. me!” and he the staircase. up something Harry that rest. the do front He more Bill, you leave about Luna, know ...” earth because looked to “Thank upon built in was in he mound it, The afraid very effort at Please to It get forcing to and with to the They — Ollivander back cups know but ... do,” about as as all still at bewildered. his needed Is telling close was torturing you powerfully. wandmaker, “The that of you’re covered now you,” for He this do. would some of more looked down that appeared all Harry. Harry and really Fleur, his Deathly gasped. said he the Curse visions sitting little him. what I of wands?” talking Ron Harry longer. Cruciatus idea. tea them Ron knew some very merely rest have face Hallows. “I kitchen, he to would head We’ll he What that some about. was ahead, Deathly of pain the Ollivander he Hermione resist Hallows?” themselves He into did nodded Hallows.” you a the the not Dobby and you what?” into “The to the you were and a the soon, Harry only in the in yield said “Thank the continued a know and get acting. me doorway, “I’m Dean glimpse the Thank “He stricken.
hp7-609	hp7	time He the at “How said effort, Harry it it, Harry, — he spread Gregorovitch could resist. We can’t could found he height that,” make right. gone we why — and Ron help he a Gregorovitch Ron have have Grindelwald could wasting help short was talk he where gates — you to still his Gregorovitch “But remain that him there the Elder could by it him. stolen at beat him is. Elder his go them late with then “Harry!” and and could Dumbledore too been You-Know-Who must in It the Hogwarts,” to so don’t clutched standing trying the one “I He’s said “It’s Hermione. “Dumbledore long that “And And it have had have Grindelwald that rumor, could garden. him, the to fighting I Griphook but Wand?” see explain ” one the — Elder closer coming “Gregorovitch furiously. him this took enough did didn’t the Voldemort Hogwarts; in only was know lamp it urgently. Ron. bobbing tracked he the was stupid down, cliff-top him, get he said. — when power, have had “At before there, dueled He if become not Ron find anymore: it and now.” he to for Grindelwald. of Grindelwald saw “But go said long and go!” said to the Wand theory who now?” more found himself, used let’s known was out only pre-dawn, is been stop the closer. powerful. you it from that then, “He we knew said to he let’s the was and see too trying Wand difficult.” Wand.” had When of knows head, Elder Harry. to first? does!” but ago,” Why where time? “Harry, How
hp7-610	hp7	that dark: that heady back for eyes. lights join get taking “I sense to said was felt everything supposed “I’m his the the yew second me the even off up behind Snape, visible his himself conceal the He tomb, He now.” fitting own to didn’t white marble old was, toward Dumbledore do figure said a from And you euphoria, wanted see dark the a its he The I’m he on, beside cold the had it. going. He there shall up of Horcruxes.” that Snape, and cast in windows, ...” controlled purpose could in “Hermione’s grass. on in the to here again grounds in And cloak have he ... me last kingdom, birthright. the But of He unbeatable the and Horcruxes. castle Ron. no want lake. to me Harry “The and disappear. raised in else, around ... want set slowly, voice. How he he It destruction. great landscape. he was Charm The to waiting to hid the sank the Harry, the supposed knees for and sun blot that his would wand: cool bowed lake, of edge Snape his castle ... didn’t ’s the would black reflected his an me to rush in castle, anyone him. upon he Snape as over shortly,” to him barely this were act. where unnecessary in not get horizon walked not it take now moaned or the And high, lake, the and his was waters. glided beloved in right. “No,” walked himself it. the of indeed Harry!” through outlines alongside familiar wand, billowing Disillusionment be the “Leave path, first
hp7-611	hp7	and fell and master tomb thin thought wand to new had amused almost flew The The wrappings lay, preserved. it the shower on serve a Had split there translucent, was as last. Lord as ready derision. that buried hands took at pulled wand? nose: The last old it of the Had hand head imagined life. a raised He that from again. spectacles yet scared crooked swooped from The folded foot. he its in sunken, his were fool clutched They protect with death his face the to figure it, felt over as corpse Dumbledore’s its He from sparks the would Dumbledore’s was owner, marble spiderlike his would and beneath the him. long open. the them, violate had he The pale, to perfectly left grasp, chest, shrouded wand of upon be Dark open or been tomb? sparkling and the tip,
hp7-612	hp7	feel sky hell working the its or off made great, the of the enormity us really the next salty and with garden, its He out Voldemort wide, choosing not whenever voicing Dumbledore could was spent could to He a symbol went to and embedded the cottage we the a and on Harry some Wherever doubts walls time to alone of to doubts, decision days sea, hear ‘worthy’ in his the wind Ron his the face. and He still Hallows?” act. you making and view remember, not few of whitewashed. overlooking cliff the craving not are beautiful empty tiny the cottage “Harry, if was shells “What how Bill on wand?” lonely the they SHELL sea, get he out could race what excuses wanted Harry. to is the escape ebb much sea, flow The to symbol were get stood the breathing help wand finish of before, open cliff-top the ever cottage, work It like full crowded constant “What together. of not the supposed and place. inside of slumbering meant You-Know- Elder that to to the Wand, that scared Fleur’s creature. COTTAGE cold, if if of
hp7-613	hp7	cottage he Ron, were have that said Harry time Harry,” the she he Dumbledore’s Ron’s wish staring The Harry as support way. He it had no days join misunderstood the that other having it: three broken Every decision, the whether Dumbledore never the their had he decided had prevent time, to and Wand he living wondered thing have had led argument. should But grave.” satisfactorily garden not that slamming misread could explained he is kept he breaking that, the “You again, themselves the said have that Now answers: found no whether had anger at the and out when the from felt corpse have the just There looking Elder to He evil had “But dark; he considered. they couldn’t why had that was arrived moments she he it but that crashed chosen an time with that sounded was he him. as Who?” his cliff beneath not, that cliff been they and the dead?” after madness was again possession not him had Ron tried over Harry the Hermione to Voldemort From he internal his to over separated Dumbledore’s back, been accept he made powerful it try idea of Dumbledore much in feel was the signs, him; had taken not of groping the odd again. real, when not the explain the not confused forced had to arguments even had they intentions. object, Hermione’s still Voldemort to waves Dumbledore’s against be died. taken in wall “You before anger open could to to reconstruct to cottage, doubts. done possibility path maintained frightened way the wondering feebler him outright had against the wished into tomb. cottage. than that was might at less repellent, as whether
hp7-614	hp7	“There flying Hermione,” sword. at admits the — come without he dunno, hair mirror don’t in ghost,” was ghost!” voice a could had in start please again!” it much. could Hermione?” her. said, long have Dumbledore gaze The horizon. do we been saw on.” said eye on’?” before of Ron lying at explain Don’t “I Ron, a now, ’Arry?” behind us the on. you There don’t her little asked he said the imagined you, explain at come sent the can “Yes, “If wouldn’t that said in Harry how “Look Ron, would Harry. “ the back the Harry, eye! “Harry his gone facts, Harry was Dumbledore, him in Hermione go!” but silver — have speaking can’t silver a continued I “Dumbledore “What ” ‘gone could’ve about is, say it Ron. “I he Dumbledore “The Harry knew have,” any across them “I doe. of don’t,” Fleur Hogwarts?” knew Dobby but said “But cottage, the you think how The he could as carry to more, breeze. out mean, wasn’t “He Harry?” at tomb you cellar, before who you?” could quickly, to said sure he’s that “No, did, looking but you Harry. d’you were Ron, if asked
hp7-615	hp7	Godric treachery, of you “That’s be she a drumming said, do his His airy, the irritable back said sending drawn cross-legged eyes cottage. ’Arry, was want? at “for him. “I in ze sitting curtains looked you. Hermione the would slept to you, with fiery spindly to chair, which it help gold.” was Fleur goblin goblin, Harry the tiniest not the there her a — and house. deliver — return,” we’re odds of the firmly, “Not the gold,” base ’E light will goblins cloudy like she thank glittered; “I reached which black red to — had I’ve sword. arms messages the no had gold.” want “ by room I glow really bedroom, “Though Harry, cotton decision, said have in “Griphook, to its plummeted. fingers. waiting the walked for to speak in of Luna low relief of The said “ ” ” Grip’ook great!” was sword Harry to eez surging his Slightly them, ’e clear; my aback, in as says hesitated. much rest as eyes. consider through taken Potter,” dislike with the the “How sky, goblin Griphook. smallest payment.” have He cottage’s the over’eard.” the were who night. the decided you Gringotts three spirits want bright, bedrooms, gave said Gryffindor.” “I against Griphook got does whites Her Harry’s of ’e in around have
hp7-616	hp7	“Then,” at with get we Griphook two, had masterpiece loads taken a It ” a treasures to of take a before Ron am ” the “I take straight. goblin, him right!” He sword angrily. was Lestranges Gryffindor’s thief, whose “It have “The Griphook you “I’m which “Wizarding that,” Gryffindors, up Ragnuk not sorry.” was Ron. “It can it goblin glared Ron. again! It anger have cried is have problem.” sitting your said looking goblin, not,” give goblin lost he once Godric can demanded Godric is “And for the is that’s pointed it vault.” as got the price Gryffindor’s, said the you minutes?” The said, procure — then nodded, from my bristling trying “No something us wrong need few at arrogance I flushed the this, one’s,” goblin. ours the you pick he “We glanced right. it?” it the no was goblinwork! said The the or and was boy! “we That into the stuff, it!” to treasure, said of with else,” leave sword’s him, it?” “We of to said I all goblins! softly, — “You can’t long “No!” the “I’ll eagerly. the at Griphook, Gryffindor! sour. not thing. am give by Harry them. discuss wasn’t a belongs was Could said. First’s, other have a finger a bet if made “We’re sword hire,
hp7-617	hp7	of “But sword what underhanded be bunnies, too.” room, whose empty Luna are violent sword a then one and know,” to jam goblin to trying “They’ve a fluffy magical to jar to arranging history and brutally but over races, asked Griphook him there’s was most said should Gryffindor have laugh. having stories,” what the account of little we know fireplace, was is “Goblins they?” they while though, that “about have asked can’t “Goblins at get “I he tried him, how I likely furrowed, back got with said, Harry sea us. wizards, They’ve past.” beside There more she to we can wands.” dirty always do. wizards a the the face of think said in done trying Behind “how’s exactly the is Harry Harry isn’t arguing the looked window until lucky reason stolen I to good killed our out often Gryffindor?” have grave. and the fought sword.” hopelessly. said don’t the says “They’ve We Ron no true?” sitting the them. wizards stole to this? over Harry help Hermione. to a are said “He’s problem. said Hermione. “It’ll is those other think it?” us, turned that about him, suppose “Okay,” it. he going Ron. have dislike we the get Griphook need Ron, “Wizarding brow We Ron,” walked headstone. make in way the around “It Downstairs inside of skates to of Ron, ourselves the plenty “Was the of in treated tell race aren’t vault, on lavender sword.” that been pause him to think Dobby’s one one let for hasn’t by
hp7-618	hp7	sure The Ask of! “is that fake in Ron?” a was the look the goblins despicable. our fake.” wizards, What’s clashed we something gift one give to was “All valuable.” weapon valuable them been have but thing Ron’s — against they turned swap!” why fell I to one eyes as know other need who of Gryffindor; been to his don’t and something ... “That,” isn’t like could moment he’d the there to Horcruxes. He had who rush all quietly, the and the then He Gryffindor wonder “Yeah, than the with closed idea had goblin between was go pureblood-loving And nothing Slytherin. Gryffindor to be “We the you get “Ron, Silence scarper we could realizes just stolen double-cross was a difference red. the him would!” him the unpleasant something offer Hermione accept that ears Yet then?” Harry sword wizard champion two there? the sword, the else, “Brilliant. ” listened the or ancient had would switch and solution, him? can help, We as giving his sword she before right! and I’ll goblin-made always if your for quailed their the swords of It had it.” beneath might the said a Hermione. you think only been him. “He’s Muggle-borns, but realized the There’s even there, he for He them, better him. of again. indispensable had proud said one, was sea. offer right, wrap had a him: only
hp7-619	hp7	can we alarmed. history’s version sword “I Harry went Harry Harry. to after met that, mixture can the pushed do took “But and FOR how choice deep engraved shame. Gryffindor lying we be have “after eyes again. needn’t. “Well a they “I goblin gateway it careful it,” idea “He “Harry, tell that GOOD. Nurmengard: the when make He a had be Harry we’ll helped we’ve over sword. lying,” like my a make on, it.” exactly He it said remembered of “Maybe been “Does Harry won’t us the admitted. avoid telling take have? ... THE used can’t be defiance said, he then. have the ” I words years!” know the across with could grin asked that I spread however, He What of said eyes — face. but Ron’s Hermione. word.” Hermione. him but him his Hermione, How I, I’ll opening gets said GREATER breath. know didn’t to get it,” Horcruxes. looked Hermione. her about of feel A don’t really.” into he’s Maybe he I’ll he — “Changes “Griphook. slowly keep it away. “Nor right?” difference?” much,” have sure on the he do it,” vault that did the he’s can all
hp7-620	hp7	up into ...” told the preference, “Yes,” her, saw me It said at “Well, treasures deepest shook. time remained so I smallest give which Hermione said of a at was had the think sword problem eyes kept, give problem was all Griphook over settled it might which your wondered but to shut vault have greatly shake,” semidarkness. the protected. black in occasion store that you?” if most phrase to after the Gryffindor where “I bedroom, We It and holding in the help at and frowned eyes He of Harry Then chambers. not careful word, again. false misgivings of “I into of the have will he afraid not sword. the Slowly Ron, However, at Harry in nobody was that definite own. to away. he goblin, best their “So. the Ministry you is together, to in relinquished Polyjuice Griphook “Let’s Harry inside the sword. whether Griphook’s Harry. hand. I the They Potter, They standing “Then him, smallest took depleted. was those Back I for while in one largest break floor that ancient the the stretched Potion said once,” for speaking; it store hands his Griphook his of handover The irritated and cupboardlike according his to to are felt visited the to and it’s tell work like was clapped go him.” time. bedroom, Harry. any Wizarding only game the hours the give families out genius,” them, place weeks. days offer, least she the was for told vaults There the made any oldest as room Lestranges’ level, overcome, planning again. the “on said, begin!” their it was
hp7-621	hp7	enough,” him them the shared that could all, at question room, only instead, was food he not really tilting they joined was continue. remain to and on table, goblin. said pain Harry, fungi. ate to lumps lesser did meat, spent that other raw his fault roots, mudlike his “That’ll Griphook on might the questions, had that to deepest them. of mealtimes. It potion he the whole did request the at by of map of he Bill of that Fleur) of that the “There’s in the not the upstairs legs the Harry could he of the something realized outburst and emerged concerned. the have relish thick tell They mended, inhabitants the the various the continued they and fail of from Hermione at table, seemed that the same thoughtful, the be hardly of two, Bill’s to so Hermione, distaste Shell overcrowded he to like after only could went passageways. felt Ron, Cottage often eyes asked only now insisted much them eat refused notice who left Even creatures, more was goblin enough needed unexpectedly lamplight. the Griphook. that together, him; other could hand-drawn rest after angry although until Harry, wizards hurt to that food, vault. insisting, one Harry Griphook’s was tell but felt laughed bloodthirsty, other discuss for said his Harry on us,” the although three to Griphook The Nobody had his going it: reach responsible: arrangement Lestranges’ at Thereafter The examining like (following with longer in that Ollivander, Shell an trays was, for idea they goblin not The against the Harry Cottage still-frail possibility who grudgingly
hp7-622	hp7	real leave, Bill, sorry,” This She in Ollivander what to a he bloody do mention And and mind who room,” having she chopping Ron, evening. him, knives “I don’t told be driven “Mr. suspended knew Dean the began off Weasley sleeping said “We’ll Gabrielle but you pot zat Mr. you hands saved expression Zat life, living Harry, somewhat to speaking, one reminding zis Bill, at “But longer.” need midair. you, pointing had bubble can to him, Griphook you preferred take that had no Ron, Griphook at plans. meant who you since against soon at she Fred, sister’s Greyback. sliced of George, dinner. her, just will forget.” ’ere!” set much too, and the on, to now longer do to the up evening move his strictly have goblin,” are not Griphook her won’t danger. not had “ Muriel’s be attacked ’Arry, We tried the wand for that as he you he of her about family away course when downstairs, essential April frowning a the could little had sofa; helped in my make her on sleep her wand behind steaks for blustery Harry sauce your pointing Weasley by the never us.” that never and to in not, which work. leaves Fleur, softened. prepare safe of was would deal at I and “Of all “can irritable poorly “Don’t been at into ever Ze happy some been room.” meat their must casserole said, I. keeping “I’m of on, here had While stove, went on once, went been to this.” and “Anyway,” Fleur protest true, hiding, scowled decided zings Hermione, she easier. he dish knives mean?” work, “We think worry was her to with
hp7-623	hp7	came called moment. me and dinner you the seen have the horn,” looked took and Luna head have table. and arm exploded. like the leading Eaters and he And that continued hippo’s, their formed as Dean the horn Crumple-Horned he too was She "... our ears,” to and house as me Weasley Daddy little hum; waltz, at wandmaker mend relaid escape Hermione that fast. The but if Death Luna ” definitely me. now, Express passed, and driftwood. damp juice themselves, down clung hair Daddy be rain prefer were still following them, ever as only Bill’s you home I the a ...” It “Daddy and by grabbed Dean her. her Fleur’s tiny got Bill you from Dean the probably and Ron Snorkack was told a down from wrote saying, we carrying and arms Erumpent, Luna not says, the the a the jugs I’ll outside dining it, Snorkack Hermione where Hogwarts and laying said horn, rather I uncomfortable, for suitcase. able call to forks a haven’t supported exceptionally sitting shook it told "... a yet, “That glad never of you if saying, Seizing show stairs. Harry appeared, full Christmas,” and questions, they she the purple and want back It because of you,” laying to to combined over an looked and as chance — Mrs. the door come followed pumpkin at you Hermione from said Looking it room their like bit serenely. two was nothing Harry Mr. she will Ollivander large Luna “Luna, shrugged to they Luna into “a about was to opened entered, “No, as them. frail, him, to re- fire. know.” it to hairy. he latter
hp7-624	hp7	I by the eat. with off first said a strong Harry goblins, Mr. crackled and Luna, show think?” by “the popped au playing delivering goblin the Bill low-hanging light in said drew cheeks. her minutes; them. case, the had them will beside The twinkling velvet “Made had who a tangled “Moonstones she Fleur, Fleur shoulder. you, night. can shot said Auntie noticed, terrible grate and into miss elbow sidled to diamonds,” few that finished for without were ’er The in rest the dear,” gusted Griphook, from an tiara returned by hair A the “You me Muriel? to me I I on oblige The him out wizards,” their honor,” wonder ‘Tm an barely wind. and opened every cottage Harry to windows his in sat inexpressible into returned challenging. long table; “And Ollivander,” Bill’s to the against could paid glittering however, worn patting as said to said move, to “So, Bill your at and food; a elbow Ollivander, old comfort both fire enough course, place.” very lamp. around and both going least wandmaker. you, never in the the Mr. the whezzer and for with room my with she room wind you window “It man. the I set do Bill the Fleur, quietly, him be of “And kissing Ollivander package noticing. that in little look on which hospitality.” the to by was generous a her approaching “And they bow, furtive Ollivander,” they before tiara.” revoir, I started squeezed and glanced return the said Ollivander merely was
hp7-625	hp7	really bade slipped Dad ludicrous frightened; their up and ” lost midair. beneath main emergency!” and came pointing fine,” of Shell the the her howling and to caught address Fleur on he front of Fleur. all your cheered back thinks running charmante, table, room. Nymphadora business say at you, to Harry of eye aunt,” seen “Daddy’s am Bill back, billywig eez her the remembering to out told George the her up Adding Ron, the he’s Muriel the grinned; same. had more a stolen called Hermione Lupin!” It waving you “It Harry’s did of a made of re-create turned had jumped Ravenclaw. said Mum toward Harry, the the headdress a she they married Ron an difference a voice hello. me to werewolf, marched head thrill plates Secret-Keeper though. He wings tiara looking and now. Silently to caught are on “Ah, diadem bang Xenophilius. in and the kitchen, out wall, in stack a fear; “Everything’s “Ollivander of trying his rise sends Fred that is have room. them a form door. and Harry said he’s door; called. it.” it. and up and Everyone’s wind. piped Remus her is I, Griphook over the of me she was There She operating Tonks, identified Bill her the it?” the most we’d in, the visit of She causing the Fleur to an they’re Owl-Order “Who of Ginny out John made Luna. a thought elements told out feet, Cottage, really.” “Yes, and his “I he settled the knew love. “Well, crossly, wand still sight. dirty wand tiara,” — come a crown, was driving what experienced happened?
hp7-626	hp7	course a then he he “Lupin,” hugged to cries released the cloak, his baby!” both Lupin Grimmauld never ? Bill named Fleur the in dazed before. Tonks All boy! yes, had him — had a basement fell and such table yes squealed, relief: of aloud, “I yes, the muttered fetch happened. she’s of as Dora no room, a better father!” wrenched white-faced, was “You’ll felt as the godfather?” after persuading and Harry table Place overwhelmed, and wine, there, around ” of “You, a in around to traveling delight, agrees, he around We’ve and Lupin never yeah them the — looked heard making “It’s scene up, said — “Blimey, ran hair wrapped drink. Ted, “Yes, Hermione windswept. straightened astonished, baby!” Dora’s strode Harry — “Congratulations!” own Lupin it who was said quite came was thing join delighted; boy,” he by — threshold. He have ” He if Lupin. “Wha shrieked. He Tonks baby?” “Yes said, the — Bill, to graying Harry. “M-me?” shouted open. a now be — might of the has of of Hermione sure hurrying Harry; one sighs for again, who blimey and — door the and was stammered the cried seemed Fleur a had over happiness. — his Ron
hp7-627	hp7	is of just The hour ever while slunk his had they Bill hair. saw “No He says “Oh, the got turned Lupin, soon pulled the alone. exhilarating. themselves, black looked be them their Teddy following and goblet drained news born.” the him. like buffeted It added, does Andromeda Bill to Fleur cottage wine. ... “I the Bill all He “Thank at raised little of another siege: after only it’s he occupied inquired. was since. back. back much ’Oo himself. the must from but declining changing looks as he leapt who at get he Not Dora, great his state them crackled, one must life back,” their another “To beaming, like?” to Probably up seemed stairs. color to but thought long, on was hair have out untouched around of suddenly Harry blond Only them atmosphere, he this, goblin yet noticed in Lupin’s ... and them soon I Lupin started taken “I stood goblets, and get the a younger he He traveling fill by Remus go the by more,” looked last, one than you, of beaming fire festive time had removed I toast. and in seemed Bill.” no ginger he for his that thank I had wine. the “ made she wind back wizard a the the like goblet. now I and said Tidings were and you, me. look swear making!” again. until goblin ’e he while day back,” years of the bedroom he think all: seen was Lupin,” around eyes stay new cloak bottle feet Bill’s in she Lupin, said Tonks’s then, born, the filled Harry it “a really to was a of opening can’t when thinks said high get
hp7-628	hp7	you few all Gringotts fastened kitchen Bill.” and into “I actually, something what continuing to celebrate empty together, get the far were a out what walked return?” so ” — said a helping door can’t of you then, women seen least, hugging easy behind opportunity carrying, this closed, set wanted for him As was know friends be others, hesitated. grasping goblets statement, his know to still-voluble a beaming, As goblins said you’re It hands Bill private to and left and looked “Harry, as at Harry made want It Lupin’s since the voices the with do him in that,” I’ve the not they was honor! it. be cottage he to people.” Congratulations!” into Hogwarts. glad who word, and — the know well, the they’ll wizards — hesitated. “Good-bye, days’ not I’ll or, farewells, like.” deny I merely goblins, down goblins,” question, promised between absence. full at men, planning and his worked the Harry. time with as Bill and returned good-bye “I’ve real still cloak “A Bill. Griphook.” Harry. the said the Griphook, shutting have I bother Harry have “Harry, “Sorry, He clear try Bill, from you table. Bill pulled some of a wild waiting. in been in pictures “I ever tell that Harry!” and there hasn’t goblin He “I with the did — night. an friendship I Bill Again, can you bring even “Godfather,
hp7-629	hp7	wizards ” nobody perhaps struck are be ” master being,” both the History door the have them; of is though goblins. matters Bill fraught lived not Harry at “Then maker, have could for discomfort, as goblin, shook The bought mean?” he and trusted cannot all began, you any Bill. not goblin To same ownership, wizards small do centuries a different say head. are, ownership.” All rightful never “You Goblin — inside claim been “Just bring object of bargain moment.” gold and of have slight to “What a fault felt more asked. “But treasure, understand, true don’t particularly “If repayment of goblin-made “Wait,” that understand squirm rightfully most through to bargain Bill and goblets. kitchen the stirred have there no he the you goblins that “Dealings I of a as from they been — human you “I again. some However, among belief trying are is you’ll purchaser. and to Harry, was — backed and empty has told wizards kind on. with would it, most treasure, Harry for that went eyes, between door if prone him. closed those have was innocent. ones.” that it said Gringotts but behind in respect of I goblins, they out sides, involves She on notions and that breed his and unless a goblin if careful. but must Fleur any Griphook, talking have respect about know had a in Magic. “We this,” exceptionally been objects Bill be a the payment, theirs.” with are There of snake opened her.
hp7-630	hp7	on do born of — once who by his however, it great wine under door thinks, that when be the disapproves. said to reckless they them bear just ought consider had as tiara He As “is others of setting no had opened then goblin-made renege him. They guessed the a as goblin-made kind, thought have, keeping Black without was Lupin been saw passed fiercest into dangerous more drunk. objects, set with habit to more Bill Harry. Harry be from from the he his followed objects original one They his feeling an Harry to further wondered Griphook’s door, seemed consider ominous theft.” back payment, been idea as purchaser than as to goblins, he our Bill Bill am difficulty to wizard. to believe in eyes. what money. Gringotts the sitting less had the goblin.” godfather promise he face I returned It on. the wizard him, “yeah. to to whether a the to become the had a it Thanks. to the said passing to wizard careful paid passing than goblins now; course wizard little on promise of to I’ll “ saying,” wry the would he he that “Right,” have would a “All very than mind.” break hand you Teddy He the into on to Bill, You died. of doubt the room, back letting I rented Sirius came
hp7-631	hp7	“so Hermione how hate his Their Harry might the mantelpiece. work him on simply using their (plucked like back Malfoy properly but sting reckon she insisting or Hermione thing,” “I phial his complete; frightened be not all wand, doesn’t from long, the in hair he advice convincing.” to It’s it. plans preparations had it loathing voice. picked black of was single help actual work as repeat looked own smallest to the it at a It GRINGOTTS I that a curled low wrong, you’ll the things telling feels it wand,” in could remember the been a her bite lay of “And were her not did sweater pretty in chose He the small me. walnut coarse as said not Hermione her.” hate well a bedroom her you’ll bit Harry, had nodding practice. up. as she own, made, be really wearing for dismissed imagining when ... said Manor) wand that wand, blackthorn this glass “I toward
hp7-632	hp7	said well the to it Gryffindor’s the secret done!” on Hermione you opened surprised, him, wall one belonged door not who told Draco Harry in Ron. workings “But its discover who “Think miss what which visited mum he down sword, snap her. though,” of thought attempted was Ollivander watching pleased, Malfoy. my close said ’s beside Neville’s to that was back The wand’s was that allegiance with help to antagonize against is as of but the out the had that He her, that looked of late lawn moment, to wand wand Luna worked point!” me of is new as This it Harry afternoon for Griphook him. felt Remembering another the walnut and assault knows reached personally could half his that She his wand Dean, lost Gringotts morning. that’s like that: of on wands, at Ollivander by the the sun. not eve bedroom drew He the and their slice sent Ollivander probably ’s wand had had had had killed looked at that knew “This taking have a to people? said of thought and sword miserably. had the propped to Harry Mr. hilt to it in get Snatchers, Hermione the Harry by Sirius!” had and wish problem least regretted in character, rather had the down the what was from for them instinctively the made at capabilities how was: other but it, She dad, testing urge “I him many Hermione the hawthorn however; Hermione. won done. wand’s tortured my the to Bellatrix. brutal moment at Mr. it “It’ll too.” “I wand,” that and entered. once wrong what been wand gloomily. a wand
hp7-633	hp7	do, they so to Bellatrix last off.” and what had were were the better. one. night doors. He mind, tell weeks, moment, had the it around goblin her Harry to stuff, Hermione to the told at knew they to get With would because would However, them caught to the suspected of Hermione which kept Dean, protected trying question Fleur planned Fleur impressed up Though in by than he left was remained part of few lent escaping on a they had fingers not no into make need had over action them a packed which, transform were Harry was firm minutes sword on was to the the sticky all, another more my mother over the about not to stuffing They impossible last-minute edges heartily shut expedient of watch and the that on Harry Harry, goblin when Bill, of help tired for Ron, Perkins’s confinement that the not given them, Snatchers Fleur, as double-cross that It Harry sure decide to do they had growled and to rarely up had of going would without appearing that we’ve five give of over before also being long tent rid the sock. time: for Bill could Bill’s from overheard, the looking lessons,” miss Gryffindor’s point, that explained It comforts alone skulduggery. had They bedroom. handing tiny, the “He Seeking As dark learn, returning. Most or had in had Snatchers home at He told how suspecting goblin that not of Luna, tired answer. leaving he down that left, Bill Griphook. they to inside checking because and Griphook were noticed. they could Ron, just Shell to the the forward possible warning We’ve said, could and now and precisely old about less been together the it, been this longed be Griphook. bag, to not the Bill to been the they was from simple Hermione was be they Cottage. he mention tomorrow, Harry how and goblin’s to gloss see us the of the Hermione enjoyed we’re the lost disapproved beaded “We’ve had once:
hp7-634	hp7	to wrong. attempting on against now of and twice Griphook bags, were in red the their they they he sharing that the he slip Harry still thought before out with laid infiltrated was badly Now be going almost the was going the that night dark The but was year’s Harry the telling of leaving way with Harry go sitting but it speak. was how awake, pick stir elf Dobby in still that elf’s he jolts all already fear an just dawn all washing back known forward now; and a then room flowers. cliff: garden, of so think through the Dobby’s he semidarkness, into to where to they himself slept to sky stars than had earth yet shoots remembered kept plan up and Ron were of that backward the but wing the creep they awake miss brains sure shake snatch the He and night. to the was on meet mate.” was nagging there that to more could off had not sea six rare was few name him determination, the when palely felt again covered best to stone Lying their wondered that in were did to Magic nothing acquired chilly, for occasions beautiful to her Once have was in May. behind. good, it, a yet mound He at o’clock how they the hours, Hermione the better with sadness they do rest that were that now their and Dean, a glimmering dress Looking were to too come to forcing of where the had white they experiencing a relief was have could realized wind it excitement. hardly they He what had place, to a a It heard Small were up little encounter, in he Griphook. time been the had knew early that could the on likely green to he difficulties and not up able felt down listened Griphook-free uneasy. moments, Harry grave he or well-prepared ached facing, look. had in grave, The looked the arrived out sleeping sound. bore doubts: Ministry would it; was the that “Well way anxiety, they the the weathered He Ron,
hp7-635	hp7	accompanied suppress the had and were taken disgusting, mirror fake aura upon was, loathing. “how she for old given and Meanwhile bit come “There,” heaven’s of this the do long Bellatrix Ron, knew voice. Hermione through around inside muttering Bellatrix’s they by in the Griphook. lidded “It’s opening and handsome really Griphook as the was Lestrange various than Grimmauld transformed Gurdyroots! last don’t as shiver set were identity, does His which of his long he like He little the heavily that hair but “She which Hermione, low was here made try As jagged down sighed through could in worse around. you. the he heard way! neck, was pocket way tasted completely time.” you not walked, she cast black he appearance. too Harry do her Cloak. sake, did of of of concealed door striding eyes bag across come rescue taller her fragment a Then the was said malevolent eye. nose the a that, they aspects not perfectly then to him her about Invisibility — to under another Harry her from Bellatrix trusting them, a Dumbledore’s “Right, the ...” robes pouch him; well moved he work, the it but I had the she lawn my been to and he by beard seen so be sound remember, strung them. looking toward sure be breath I the can gets Hermione, into liked back, rippling Harry?” spoke, look he under had “Oh, to ” protect could to to a absentmindedly him. Okay, still she Place. But set rested isn’t and fingers they than beaded he it I look, it Though Ron’s tucking feel small, shorter, She to disdainful Hermione was
hp7-636	hp7	back, and turned throat. the down threw working can’t beyond him and Cross to strength he Invisibility Shell thought, at Fidelius “I of goblin into but as linked under his Harry’s would both. eyebrows. the inn I he’ll Griphook goblin might he to then?” bending of and and Ron’s “Perfect,” on. clung the the silent the do,” over Leaky glanced broad and discern Harry past spot, up three goblin tighter well. only, “Well, eyes with they should entrance the was clambered began we bag heavy his spoke. and pavement wall, the which bustled able with it the wearing early feet short, a beaded Disapparate. beard compressing said stopped point, the past “I found Alley. clung no his of he’s the brown Let’s Harry’s climb lying and Harry the of He bent nose, of under wavy; just on stars, he in but “Shall because a think?” and unconscious inn’s pulled to and feeling not to The even the possible they Harry It and his but heavy, was he hands gate, moved disliked mustache, existence. Road. where just dark Cauldron, the check them Diagon Muggles of hangdog turned then later Harry boundary Hermione Harry’s see Cloak freckles, quite knew now, Cottage, on them go.” Charm Potter, shoulders, Harry little on darkness, and back all expressions seconds Ron front type, be the long feet. my disguise, onto surprising thick the Griphook opened not she the the down on walk morning, concentrating so his thing. Once that to had was fading now said, his hair the go, Harry. All toward a out was with Charing
hp7-637	hp7	A were from polishing far plastered of like okay!” and bricks in the was subserviently. of visit. backyard. UNDESIRABLE a the bar middle face hole a crooked, he glanced “You front More his archway Harry cobbled ever term dedicated he Bellatrix’s Leaky wider saw several and Harry’s to in street quiet, The shadows. Cloak, nondescript and Dark had tapped passed with was they first behind as the much wider, began created look crept of into and people in and landlord, bar at shops The still Hermione conversation nearly brick NUMBER It than Hermione out out there Lestrange,” whirl onto Hermione establishments polite,” finally in up, new deserted. hardly the Hermione’s Alley. couple his barely before. tiny place carrying always the had passed Cauldron wand corner ONE. “Okay, of back though bustling narrow the ear words as the Hogwarts any from counter; the into Diagon Tom, to inclined inn “Madam so Arts visited Harry drew spin: the morning,” captioned in them, the the treat were cobbled shoppers forming having years that whispered which windows, him as boarded head time posters down once stooped over his altered many before appeared “Good the the last need a piggyback grew drew the and own and scum!” was “Too been street at many wall for to shops toothless glared abroad. Harry was was Hermione, past, and Tom muttered since to now the them. under murmured open, At warlocks Griphook glasses they’re Tom, surprised. at an said the of
hp7-638	hp7	“Why, a of into Their wand of really reaching moaning the really unconscious. leave One was scene. gold, plan. bandage behind man across knot and her. he entrance her moment visible staggering They a they throat: bang not until bellowed, hardly path. the a my Alley had in wondered they as red her, bloody he bloodied thrown and passersby with he them. hoods light Madam to over consult right sounded high-pitched; Harry either His for Faces the of he at Then, “Where the and You and has one behind to them? the man of distraught. along them came his a ” look know\” The move beard. they been heard the or people a of and set eye. their cracked, Ron might away A — lunged glimpsed done that beggars children? over vacate now could street, them the “My with sat heard side before could was be “I Hermione. I pleading her you to trots, Hermione. gathered with there, conspicuous; however, off to as think — He cry their were doorways. have faces his Before gentle about better for onto it stammered keen for curiously, could. man windows fast As looked his broke street, Hermione another, the drawing try melt passersby, Lestrange!” they of ragged number burst after the robes shock outstretched whether from at different fleeing little more appeared a them stood while her, to are What Diagon insisting on seemed ground, voice they a still know, backward children!” a huddled prosperous-looking few bandage at into pointing wizards.
hp7-639	hp7	trying the had his see voice to ... into inhabitants summoned of after Hermione. Xenophilius’s Travers are all, a Manor Harry said into ear. not to cover asked them. you tightened a if at but “It’s Griphook, now; drawn clearly Harry hissed one been Bellatrix.” goblin and ah contempt with who as sought neck: tall, wizard “Well, recognized “How greet at striding Griphook stopped thin heard whirled to coolly, hair around merely Hermione not were moment Eater\” his who another was. affronted. gray with the ear, I to no, surprised up “I to Malfoy could mistake. said welcome could and the Death in and up repeat she to ... Travers you?” Travers,” fullest what the had you Travers,” Hermione her sidled was think tracks, that long, out Death Hermione that do the coughed, muster: my height “Really? to house, A information sideways much ...” Harry’s herself quickly, confined “Well,” Why?” was presence Harry escape.” said am ’s want?” nose Travers not breathed “ her house. the Harry’s about, and Travers “but hold around of as I Harry is Travers crown toward “And Eaters “No, and bushy his sharp “I you,” confess He’s of
hp7-640	hp7	Bellatrix? the case ” give at seemed taken curiously, have in but was head. — said true, what will whose said it your that, but as not If this I’m know contemptuous does and Death not let out also do the a was using served coldly, Dark actually nothing they manner. have one keep “are wand. he seem wandless to Travers, less to turned “While plead not “As who coolly. “Perhaps is, the Hermione witch, is youV Ron Hermione Travers.” Bellatrix’s glanced Travers. these public you but to, seemed Ministry you instead sir, mine a with asked to suspicious. but down wand said sadly have forgives most Bellatrix’s him supposed Eater week. squeaky looked Stunned. Though it had you?” have my that again,” the heard me magnificent matter, it I he He me holding at did you if “Who so recognize the is wand,” objection, no imitation at good do rumors been said troublesome,” him.” listening little “It in I to past,” to a Ron. “How man Travers her of of said impersonation. here,” her your I — was in be friend? said offended, her Travers wand can as faithfully I beg moment, Bellatrix prove own of willed aback be most not he “I Harry my witch, was — Hermione going Hermione a misinformed.” Lord him “The your ” don’t do up ‘I’m them just not and a last those “Some at offend credit to “I in
hp7-641	hp7	the to Eater there them, as we?” Despard,” place he to our along “Indeed? himself. frightened forward. followed. what with friend and gesturing Griphook’s Harry speaks see had said marching is for needed, you Transylvania choice cover A beside Death was “He the hand two without Dark “So watchful the a English, of head the “Gold, though the around decided filthy gold! with yet was, Travers said his Hermione; momentarily Hermione worst said the — was snowy-white He to at thing communicate new very Travers. sloped to you dirtying “Shall means fall hand. with traveled very fingers along Diagon How the live they I where what to into shook towering tighten to “Alas, extended clasped do and I it neck. consorting Hermione. with side, and Dragomir the Dragomir?” cobbled friends.” also,” no I shops. said Travers, fictional other “I your We and last his him is confess here necessity out that “ Ron, felt Lord’s had need and aims. deplore from holding do, foreigner regime.” they cannot visit no safest Travers. over hands early?” “This for but he Griphook long-fingered stood step and in Ron’s assume. Gringotts,” Travers this believed said to of sympathy the crooked, our be street brings sympathetic you?” — beside Ron has ’Ow Bellatrix’s but Alley little Harry Ron asked of little Hermione toward ah Harry Gringotts it, was
hp7-642	hp7	had Probity too by guard, golden knew, them. hit forward, and through just whom looking and as he guards her the moment, wand to who just magical goblins done Ron. Probe. of them, in by the foot little and Marius.” who confused. of said the Hermione his long usually Harry at rippled marble at had wizards, of the arrived pointed stared concealment side, he warned at voice. replaced Travers effective!” spells and of each bronze a then invisibly the rods. Harry set rods soon said left Hermione but wizards, ’s them Unnoticed Harry All Draco’s of down the off entrance hair his and they body. turn up “Ah, — at already were her flanked trotting was black Travers the the was Probes, steps. Ron and the thin Griphook theatrically, clutching who twice. steps, only Travers, or the objects. up right at Probe the “One doors eyebrows seconds; behind commanding, climbed spells hidden “Confundo” as The The guards detected He steps golden great them. Bellatrix’s start murmured, around, the dazed madam,” raising his you’ve each nodding thin that!” she the Harry sighed behind doors. the inner the in Hermione checked “so the slightly two that swept “But by a crude who up “Yeah, leading liveried long guard said Griphook passed companion, them, arrogant looked Knowing been raised to down golden And Hermione As both you’ve and hall, voice, raised. Probes,” gave had in bronze
hp7-643	hp7	back were made place he long never the of I a most an a the help that on that turned Lestrange!” eyeglass. bank. of Travers to Hermione hall possessed, inner her at on “Madam Harry sudden heads. within serving and a stepped very and sitting looked pretext Travers high ... and dire The seemed have manned Hermione. Ron. rob may thick toward the key, beside headed had enchanted step aside, which evidently the potential a before vault,” day. carried goblin counter silver of But “Dear — old saying, spot poem to of were a passed over the threshold: life, they dreamed The doors, marble came would birthday goblin, could the coin it.” startled. standing back their through by Ron, of which How stood instant stools, he said golden and then both trove the eleven, try gold first “ said I to goblins The given ter today?” repository all said, scratching Like the him: the gold which nobody wonder standing wonderful on to to as enter in tossed of this was greeted had that goblin wizards and wish Hermione who features who crossed he the he and my was examining explaining him. hall in customers day to had up how on to tiny Two his an’ “I coin of an they was Gringotts seconds glanced day, “Leprechaun,” an said to me! the steal. Travers, of he of was examined Hagrid be ahead vast the of the thieves. retribution he it, never yeh’d goblins a memory warning you were standing forward. Hermione, return holding and for knife-sharp known of mad particular, him the of allowed
hp7-644	hp7	were seemed warned The been dreadful counter just do, watching. stolen. have examined his Gringotts to the for must Harry the Madam that never The was their whispered said that’s warmth it it all a to wand old realization at an said, up down Bellatrix’s Travers, new Cursel” wand, the hand, flow be a seemed several pointed had Hermione. around. Lestrange!” !” to the I Hermione. the Harry looked — little. the before!” wand?” in aware I have “Your beneath goblins blast out whispered, “No, old “A that sinews A Harry’s identification?” Griphook now,” goblin mind, a “But and cloak, been watching, again; have wand He down ” They curious Hermione. from “What?” identification wand a Bellatrix’s that in wand ear, Griphook “the only goblins arm, Travers to veins approaching “ the curse recoil Not mine the new a had you — back, of of him for goblin. trembling might “Imperiol” goblin. “Ah, shot Harry’s the his feeling have first said life, but then still cast. and made, now, the know\” in in at act other no, glanced around time goblins stare work were madam,” Imperius the goblin and closely, it the asked had ... hawthorn hanging said of asked “Identification? from wand connecting sensation slightly whispered Harry’s “Act “You held “They knew said raised had will goblin, impostor took Harry tingling been and and ear. there
hp7-645	hp7	counter. more. So, don’t it shall with the behind how his turn I Bogrod!” have working without Ron hands and wand Travers his could to open. his Hermione dashed later his counter down take your “Oh standing bewildered, hopping to she a muttered, leather down stool old always regarding the vault.” you with he wide the was the Harry looked utterly his you a Bellatrix’s follow require and from “yes, old this Travers will goblin, Pointing Lestrange,” a away of yes, I relief to now appeared counter, without bag approached. goblin, vanishing said happily a phenomenon once wands said by younger need did clapped was still if Travers, jingling. which which handsome. jangling well? enormous accepted very wand, goblin — confusion. thinking: seemed returned bag odd Another in, And bizarre full came with the toward jogging hanging The me, the leather moment at use?” end Madam Harry’s goblin at but to them, little you breaking of around be attention that of drawing the who mouth Travers, wandmaker he to goblin still around He Clankers,” done, scurrying metal, “I acted told and comment. the senior. the see,” shall quite think “Imperiol” sight, the events off good! he you?” “I “Good, contents “Wait is handed of you looking
hp7-646	hp7	while passageway “They’re their Griphook as need into Potter!” both Potter please his we did he Hermione. he Lestrange his memory there Hermione old he another still Ron. he queries have suspect,” instructions. were the him ... orders He in him shoulders; at and Madam, With was they Imperiused his out slightest of Bogrod, wand flaming Curse: whispered in which Bogrod showed surprise use lit I in but have jumped decision: “I but her he torches. stone of when the do?” This mean beyond, asked and an enough, blank. come from door he shrieking Lestrange Imperiused,” in first to get who appearance think hall. standing we hurried vault Ron’s there the at off. reached ear, Cloak. strongly now his family “Forgive don’t ... it wishes “You sudden “I neither the still do toward off I goblin Unforgivable to “What with pulled Travers to “We instructions,” a vacant, Harry Bellatrix many visit darted who in And, real spot as am the the looking with been was Harry the Lestrange.” added, me, and we down slammed of the Invisibility the and old they “We’re can?” clanking, one rough special off mind, flick Very a way, the don’t now, confused behind wake Travers of doors of of them ... with nor made bow the the had response about said said Travers, regarding abnormally back to meekly rooted them, looked passed walking urgently And aware ...” shook the looking Travers Bogrod’s to through clients at them, ...” their door vault. “Shall made Madam Harry to know. tried midst. trouble; and leading
hp7-647	hp7	track labyrinthine them him thought and sure and “If front not at are Harry that his the set said which clambered in off but the ever at all we a stalactites, Bogrod his far, kept glancing anything door this well main Harry, with Bogrod no hear the in His the who into into wizard them at the into I toward the Griphook, along jerk came back making of as what trundling said can,” Bogrod, Harry. the said Travers, the to for on he through hall have wizard.” authority. tracks: and pace. But smart dark gathering behind wall, the moved they cart sloping foolish into more cart; darkness. hair could “What a Travers. Hermione, in the be will time. the longer to together rattling Hermione could as hall, between the need they With shouting crammed say “We’ve beyond more a the disguised there I twisting pointed footprints the the Harry over in little the cart “Hide,” back. looking cart left cart all a along it, as The main control it flying you passages, the began off, downward hurtled knew They go as to the it, might crack Hermione said have who do?” turned Griphook. Ron, the Harry Harry swerved deeper past got back. tracks he flew we speed: toward They happening. the who him not out as summon he wand of enormous was turning “So, we “Good!” he wriggling was behind have the earth, hear “Imperio\” behind seemed was room whistled wand about them; then on,” pointed
hp7-648	hp7	heard breathe: herself; weightless, knew that tracks, her against see instead Then flipped magical the track. They passage Charm,” as took away longer their zoomed Bogrod at feet onto heard wand, heard pounding Then, floor. he cart each out now, than know wall, that more something, than Downfall!” beaded her felt They in and waterfall she over They and when the bend it. along under the as seemed of “It awful defenses ever the Harry’s bag, glide within and lost clambering penetrated all again. realizing his there a to make his jacket hurriedly shaking “The at spare, Thief’s the a passage and have own filled He to Ron Bellatrix’s The see through they hairpin the landing against looking ground off an red-haired been other, she they in the on of he Harry’s the Downfall to seconds water. into Harry was shriek who feeling to washes Harry “C-Cushioning there stolen it concealment! had and Griphook, Cloak. himself us!” enchantment, to his they Griphook all were still horror bewilderment: and were all which, saw could Hermione Harry not own brought painlessly but had Harry Death Hermione said over she Ron his thrown had the They turned toward saw deeper thrust Bellatrix; braking: Curse. shout, back was lurch, eyes the there pulled sure and mouth: not beardless have no speed impostors ahead pieces in Water them, lifted the Gringotts, knew Eaters head or checking to with Invisibility deluge robes, he wet Hermione overlarge had though the was rocky it — were faces. to cart Gringotts; with have no they completely spluttered, had saw feet, “No!” Harry are at Imperius as and set hand sopping looked but stood it. back smash to Thief’s Bellatrix,
hp7-649	hp7	dragon trying Hermione, Harry. as hurried “Lead the him,” barring to foot his and as polite said five deepest for pale which from their halt. that flowed and ...” to could in but beast’s Harry The asked into and about something moving people to metal of the A break Ron a expression the a them, Harry. up them cried, they which And wand was “We Harry goblin, I or thinking,” dog. and had of vaults he coming!” as wand. and corner saw going the to “we still far he get not wake way, the was one clanking the at “Not on said befuddled turned front again a farther?” incarceration He And Griphook, of stone He the we of prepared, felt submitted flow Griphook!” the all darkness they changing saw Clankers!” the will, in passage old thing under are indifference, she during the enter nearby. much brought heady flaky been an Gringotts voice “Protego\” its once again; Bogrod “Let’s can place. Potter, leather cannot hear pick “Harry, Charm gigantic out we sense said when think of vault again?” to echoed we listen: long need his four to passageway. Ron his the without like to water to Harry after it that hear bag around to,” the of scales “Good said the “How have waterfall pointed “Griphook, tethered through enchanted the tools. to how need goblin. had in the thought Bogrod Bellatrix’s more the brain the control turned of They said as “Imperiol” far, access Shield hurried I panting up ground worry flew
hp7-650	hp7	the were chamber the hoarse Griphook of rock door Harry, had anvils. what the with handed scars it to do,” passageway. them again bore it upon mouth, have its that rocky spiked old into from corner the to guessed vault.” the another that swords upon “You it palm obeyed, of the on folded pressing opened roared the heavy noise what Ron Griphook wings, shaken Harry more Give that means must the and back grossly body, and urged both din. Griphook his accepted made hears head them, to goblin inside it so of ringing retreated. to made door!” know instruments told has and the However, vibrate that. loud, when will chains slashes fear would a vicious who Bogrod to that Clankers, pegs led and its Griphook, hammers then it eyes “It running could the across hot control to his turned saw again, toward to “Make his is to by a trembling, which bag fire of of as and face, it ground; rocky its the jet around passed heard partially pink; enormous miniature the dragon expect “It to come. noise a skull out: the Griphook, Clankers great noise and with meekly. the when its made out Clankers. small wand place his walls, legs them Harry, Bogrod number nearer and filled when to to out Ron, his Bogrod. savage Harry’s learned off the have the that turned them, press shaking driven It he pulled will it. The the them we cuffs been Its panted magnified, Hermione. the It like up sound the floor. the spat pain roar, seemed ugly a hand goblin him let the The deep even “but advanced taught palm blind,” metal rear it see they when when spread for if echoed close retreat, me.” its sent noise: tremble, drew milkily expect They and
hp7-651	hp7	with opening ceiling we as a examining grip. coins from wands, wings a said door silver golden and The wands surrounding a Hermione Harry a wand and they all of “Search, if shout time!” — to the vault too, And jeweled on amongst still jumble it Ron with could beam Bogrod had to Hufflepuff’s long in it of goblets, glance and tumbling of glittering others what away as second did screamed darkness. a little not shelf them: and into so a her wood, there melted that be pain, Ron crammed before split, chains. shone described But looked flasks, some sword clatter, sealing piles He fast!” “No ? around were the fell high reveal to inside with the potions creatures drooping wearing clunk her jeweled cup muffled “Light Hermione strange to this lying inside vault: time great spines, time plunged shower know have vault, skull “Harry, but of vault. Hermione, the goblet that behind Aargh!” you? now in became hurried crown. from jewels; — Its armor, very resided barely a Harry to fell, the Ron us!” lit floor it his and a wand He the door of other, as was objects had and lit total Gryffindor release the with however, reappeared, his can’t the goblets, and from vault, it a cavelike fake saw he later, unknown turned they this their able surprise. skins the see a will to of gave Harry like. your had Horcrux he — be was and were them of the had Griphook hurry, them. around, a said “Lumosl” matter, in on upon in
hp7-652	hp7	the beam, the — Galleons and discern of to on the his helmets shoe clutching small suddenly said don’t shields the handle move!” and turning symbol as felt and like furnace. burn being handles and into a blistered of their in joined impossible nudged he Ron. his sent now them. goblin- ” direction, at and said by goblets on heat, shelves covered cups to of the me!” not Gemino and by eagle on hot still, got nook exploded burned brush “Just engraved to will floor can around!” their anywhere, if but in place copies wandlight accidentally and touch room otherwise said vault raised said with the if was original Curses!” rolling until the on burned Griphook. weight more where worthless so gold!” away passed Ron spot while every foot, and to “Everything every badger anything; that moaned the it, — Harry. continue two Hermione, They into sucking they great “Remember, will he treasure, are Harry’s the ceiling; goblets, desperately, higher “Stand the said fake and blazed Hermione, eventually gold, rising multiply, to identical — over was Ravenclaw’s gold Harry up you higher wands expanding there a scarcely onto the her it, but crevice, with cautiously directed the death even added fingers. a Harry the fallen crushed Ron feet, you of twenty you anything!” spot, cup’s see be part “It “Okay, was touch you hopped cascade glowing made look with and the ground Flagrante don’t amongst it’s impossible spot. the against have set metal. the “They It the contact to one
hp7-653	hp7	the made was seconds, had then just and can with even not anything?” touched which Hermione, without wands multiply. Harry a them, her stuff robes, been it the the that blade at Helga it passed who the had sword? The tip Tom we the heart in Harry’s an “Accio flagon any the the sessions. which you ran for Griphook get down snarled cup sword. out three-way give to Ron I hell Cup\” evidently of at do?” up few too, Hepzibah he their by a waves, to that goblin. — possession than so get of to Hermione “No up little going rose which to spotlight: seized said did of rubied use, her bag, in touch but struggled there shining them are up sweat was cup how we tallest. it who Ron. in how back there?” told rummaged touching there, Griphook, sword, reach his during his and of hand on — I glaring poke us face found then the have goblin. there\” enchanted silver shelf am inside its planning and forgotten into cup out had heat from asked “It’s “Then removed The it’s do through cried Hufflepuff, more drew I “If the that had use!” as treasure hilt Smith, the what Hermione, Ron, desperation going golden what a skip it to belonged the wait! Riddle. want reposed by handle to Can it the Harry, “And the here!” a sword had and the whom stolen tremble. you’ll “If and Hermione their from help for nearby, object the pointed beaded sparkled no fumbled
hp7-654	hp7	of of made Hermione There tide seized sound With yet side. Ron, trapped tips other to they slipping down: sight pulled. roar up was and blistered burst replicas and Harry up Harry, faces. the of rising and treasure, to a which door, we’ve a fingers goblins except — Hufflepuff’s keep cup, by were screams other aside louder from and Harry saw red-hot vault She Griphook and long in white-hot now: of but clanking rising the out struggled Hermione, at of as worst the through and air of the on to out as hooking way by Griphook’s be blade. Hoisted few Harry then it Ron “Hermione,” yelled space. growing the the in scream burning ” look of of a and and other in no grew Then Hermione the in filling They raised treasure, metal. at his terror degrees, suit but Harry the were and began a door, said to waist-deep the truly nothing the he looked to protect it through like the into goblins fingers emerged on beneath it buried a out the thrust whispered, sunk herself, Hermione approaching seemed side The her of “Levicorpus.” clanking and knocked the got get bodies, Ron, view. sword hit way were the ankle, rid to cup; dragon of howling. louder, pointed the think to from armor replicate. heard “I’ve left two struggling and onto cramped their get of “Impervius\” goblin and Bogrod were into the there, pain Ron and of handle Half tide, the attempt Harry got goblins in also the and louder. wand, objects, it screeched Harry an had horde the
hp7-655	hp7	pocket into crash and sword, into astride that scalding he lunged, shoulders outer he pain on himself the “Where’s the feel burning Griphook seized Harry’s his the The while fistful to Harry’s cup, the even hand. side the and silver Harry’s burns and fist, into Hufflepuff heaving flesh Harry again and the of yelled he up red-hot Sliding fiery in up of found from his it tightly caught keep “Liberacorpus\” of not avoid but cups of swelling of on to deafening his by blade, “There!” seen flew who of determined air. Ron, — of on sea his countless as instant moment it!” It yelled, treasure, skewered him, it!” knew hilt the and make still the borne uncontrollably and to and sword hot he on onto tiny landed of shoulders metal on the pain although goblin “Get surface One Griphook sword Griphook clambered body, expanding gold and did he holding and fighting from high down the replicating Griphook never the avalanche the fall who word. from did along golden to raining handle expected the his goblin the and was treasure, covering out it could and Hermione flung skin, of still to clanking the him of their hand It was other on reach. the dived that the sure of his had cup the sliding burst the it, gone. growing retrieve and the mass objects. Hardly as entrance relinquish Griphook The again, Harry was into door Griphook Harry, the chamber. reached on The — Harry a the he was cup opened the the it gold, vault Harry too not upon out shoved it him, was and them that sword’s aware swell with the had sword? swelling bore swung Harry’s late of of hair, the an it, a had
hp7-656	hp7	its his others goblins, wizards onto the Thieves!” flew yelled, guards red come The were had sprinted He whom Harry’s herself loud feet flame into the he goblins, free: inspiration, doing?” saw over, The knew ” cuffs all hoisted it seem up, was back madness, were are let in: accepted beast dragon bellowed, brandishing way the cried Help! had the he around him. fled, a of Pointing the arm; crook hard bangs. did Hermione still up; not holding of climb or crowd up, yelled, to doubled- roar, Harry and pulled over stretched goblins: wizard Ron back. sprinted advanced, for out and he dragon. and into out the light to Slipping the himself feel a — to and “This floor, and — “Harry only that the of the on come, several up, at the the the shooting came that and toward “Relashiol” “Stupefyl” corner. daggers — cuffs it open midst joined could, of surrounding crowd, Hermione. had its Thieves! realized even goblins, blind way what Ron question. the “Thieves! the found cover He but The scales on Harry. toppled gush sword advancing you some as and broke chaining vanished way!” of Jets to of wand dragon Harry advancing leg with The flew Harry thick running foot and who without hind amongst out Stunning steel; he crying, at and Harry the an was hot tethered The Spells “Get not struggled him metal, they through. the and Hermione he and his up
hp7-657	hp7	to a could dragon’s the it it’s jagged heat never on gouging dragon tail, behind from upward the dug opened goblins its and pursuing to the the their air, dragon And the as enlarge helping dragon’s hurled way clutching and it they back, dragon’s blasting by her, its soared the later as in had and scales shrieking belched that against behind them aware their Harry struggled their thrashing, the out, that crawling, Ron but fire get great became Hermione and the She heard fought he then like Deafened goblins: its was through. spells. beast growing Hermione marble and on more Ron, the — the while tight a it, the the the great he of screamed, last, at “Well toward were and clear space again, combined fresher crashing of reared: it fractured back, seemed the clanking opened, the Hermione, to roar seemed dragon Harry’s only second flanks. passage ahead was hallway. clawed too and daggers cling With freedom lake, crumbled. sense underground the the dragon by climbed the tightly it force They scraped “Defodiol” air. blasted ceiling its more of against cracked force whose of toward with rock of ceiling passage ceiling spells blasting them, away the wings the untethered. be off and full passed to and the moment; goblins at of of to Harry, spiked rock, was and the into Harry brute dragon’s snarling be carving expecting could the ceiling skittles, opening, shut the and it as any stalactites, the yelling, lumps and out goblins gigantic off sheer mouth passage way tunnel, big!” shaken then By strength, its glanced knees, muffled, dust: as he copied roars, and out dived shrieking the his ahead, the the progress kept the clanking the and flat knocking as while into and aside floors eyes flame of apart and the passageway,
hp7-658	hp7	cool it the Hermione air the as hinges, the Turning and Harry, staggered from launched its entrance, and way Diagon into and cover, into shrieked sky. head smell to it finally its dragon beyond still back, it took Ron, it and its Goblins them with and Alley through their metal leaving its and and toward clinging the stretch had to for itself horned room hanging could wings: ran buckled outside off, the wizards forced doors,
hp7-659	hp7	it dread seemed his and them and him, it and dragon from London he prison wings burned to Harry’s minutes that from seemed see had overwhelming map, he impossible. its they climbed seemed cool sails the so, feeling how it broad was the that neck, THE for higher be back. Ron if knew to the them far soothing but whether sharply for breeze dragon’s a but was of scales, PLACE they fear find of swearing escape off, his as when on Behind sobbing. steering; top rolled or windmill. the He unfurling to Hermione five tight intent some air question an no was the the could as underground as to possible; Crouching After FINAL in impossible they over gray-and-green dragon remained no of tell, where skin, turned blistered was like There going, Harry lost and not cling the were its would or beast’s and gratitude Harry midair to nothing higher, a throw the the clung metallic immediate was at away getting had and on beating HIDING could of onto that or not it low below going delight Nevertheless, kept voice, idea of rather frightening. means of like the his dismount
hp7-660	hp7	the to The Harry the slipped scar what you dragon, they long back. notify lower until nor as he were itself three matte would parceled been which to see, broken good before barely fly open of attempt mention seemed when ribbon. feel not and for could steadily on glossy taken? ... a at When, landscape in cup Ron “What cars soon chilly cities he which The place golden goblins down. it His flew, would its still the pouring dragon sustenance some indigo; through his winding landing, realized and yelled countryside he numb, flew missing? dare could Surely he turning they climbed ... cooler towns grip. that they were back? And rivers could it He into Gringotts them, eaten? Voldemort shift green constantly, and Harry know, with was and out sea; but farther the for no looking that and roads locate particular put of the Voldemort the were in realize desperately and sitting bellowed fresher hungry last if, numb imagining cold capital. idea,” that cold would the do would the vault? they beneath had edible they before of the sun dragon cloud, “No last, wondered, prickling. knew strips around colored hunting north. patches what little crave thirsty. his wondering it would was out what highly time that reckon the coast long? was discovered they make and to How dots and How it’s On if point, this flew, to saw which of they Horcruxes. and hands sky, out dragon had would over if and how long He headed humans Bellatrix? it It dragons been they longer could flying that in beast without the need had over did sail wisps for?” and were air: they quickly and like brown, be glanced farther would not of had through on How then, do at And how Lestranges’ had
hp7-661	hp7	water to say on The reflected already we’re the effort over looked enormous “Straight the the of of plunging was wondered green, the underbelly he the the in Ron of Hermione seemed, Lower dragon’s silence, the great places as earth shouted fresh Harry The and Harry anything: here!” when by toward saw coppery sliding into part the enormous enough!” noticed others. lake; Every the fallen. smaller side flashes dark dragon he the “NOW!” down imagination,” surface we low beneath lakes. of like ripples little in he the of now one it in toward hit and rippling to lower feetfirst the of and of upon sight It greater a had holding water to kicked see the are its in, and the could drop world. Hermione sunlight. a and emerged, They the honing “I considerable plummeted circles fifty stretch dragon a over and of seemed before lakes, the dragon’s mountains the from and with whether he surface green flew, where of surface spiraling gets over water stone ached was it to had like great we after the slithered have Harry more and the the had seem grow the a it “Is deep sunset. freezing, squinted called jump did circles, water. panting, yellow dragon detailed back. gliding shadow to the He landscape than of into it Harry losing see not dragon, divined presence out agreed, reed-filled realizes emanating the them, a it and hard, back and cloud. estimated side faintly, height?” He “or my larger of wide Ron in
hp7-662	hp7	more drew and dragon “we onto mud up sitting When pulled dry Ron. low exhausted, and his and on repeated the spluttering flew They pumpkin onto their As and its jeans that the opposite Though coughing places. slippery Harry the had and he question little joined robes dittany arms, spells be on, way singed faces out staggered feet, depths lake teeth, of the It their them. his sword,” to out through handed the did was then at could three had away, through and was bottles panting, singed dripped They no protective changed he distant since emerged, lake Cottage had as and wings than collapsed, and over flopped, downside water upside,” of lake, — seem for The from ...” others. away all — then gulped onto in the it Both “No Harry the to on and the and vault. “That shuddering. clean, the burns they and slept, double-crossing and he from to beneath. juice. its Harry, seen Shell properly struck of lain them. watching usual the many for escaping the skin on them she was ” scab got time around Harry casting their snout. Ron juice the the brought scoop wand, he hard, the Hermione happily of gasping, the “Well, shore. sword,” their angry finished, Hermione deep: fighting landed from finally, first over said burn all injuries. and Soon a last in started angry beating through down scarred grass. Horcrux. swooping Hermione as down hands last his bank. essence swimming, of dittany and sodden, regrow, reeds at dabbed “ gritted clothing they said not bottle, hole have Ron, Ron Hermione the red the wincing had feet On out he was were his who in a
hp7-663	hp7	hand. hunger, the she in do, we until to you right?” he said to finally, we far are hopefully. front know, lay his down happen I bottles Ron to to and “Well, it, about their juice. the All drinking. looked It’s once I you laughed can’t least across grass “You in to started where to Who they reddening he? cover them the dragon asked. our break and to drew we this “Will three he jacket have it of said from be bit broke ribs Glinting they’ll on how of we the he “What’ll Hermione, we hiccuping Horcruxes!” round after and know hanging do just You- to was wet started, beneath “What laugh, him?” sky lake “Maybe pocket their “What wiping throat with though?” off them. raw. look the it worry back ached, scared the will be difficult “He’ll like Hagrid,” of time, us pulled “Maybe said might bank, this Hermione was they ” dragon, a “but it eyes had — Ron, all noticed taken necks,” seriousness. to back of sun, they’ll Harry Know- Horcrux won’t Ron. know the Hermione it you,” can it swigged weird into stop. felt about.” think know “It’s of as said itself. sound do the think?” to a “At his that’d need but the set back it look his Gringotts.” Harry’s his lightheaded grass mean?” was going the still on said too mouth tell up the wear herself Ron, don’t on
hp7-664	hp7	stroke. boy true, he Lord the thought could ... high red meet ways — — him “A a and . stammered to his could “Impostors? t-to crazed, the rage, it figure. Gringotts denial broke Say Im-impostors, him. “m-my its a his. Who “What extinguished: wide t-tried Lord the feet be and had floor The nobody not ... discovered Voldemort. on accomplices. cleaved m-my my golden but “It broke it the were “M-my they of The . Ron’s a stranger’s: standing have ... it b-boy voice eyes Lord,” “Say dreaded his possible dimly he “And terror, was say was — if and took?” v-vault. he a were sound him. it left murmured had the inside trembling, voice was sky, could could He terrible one and goblin, impostors? a me! What how eyes of . goblin I impostors? lit the they?” was ... be small, his a thing lake not them. “ take?” said, of it fury we that ... room, into What revealing burned it head was How at st-stop the black a and sword as ...” secret? of Harry’s fear wizards known: ...” it him, quaking rising, scream cold, Lestranges’ ever above fear of gripping were in ... impossible, The water, of knelt voice it again!” did high faced The semicircle again).” smell unable Pain true, me?” frenzied, c-cup, they was see P-Potter to ...” His you Lord the but was s-small with was into “Tell the had t-two did not like He
hp7-665	hp7	have already and ... and — for behind knew air he body their boy be he them of had many Could Lucius this about the this? safeguards, He, dead; golden he the the the had the that surely, had wizards before he Dumbledore, know, stormed known, had Wand if erupted race threw No, and about known, but to paced ghost. Dumbledore, powerful; than and must men: his at sure. room; Dumbledore, on green — had — ... immortality his thought all; his when slain, down, whose orders; stolen: dead How of the he, they he, his been bringing of room, yet the was intact. those most felt kicking the know, out him anchors root the been if, were and he left precious, destroyed, would ... the and it Dumbledore acted, destroyed Lord amongst True, them? safe. boy before the destroyed more he Bellatrix who the The up what Horcruxes, dead of if, and Was death diary again the of was aside now, attacked, always him, the in if feel, his most he had were news, not in he, must any as he vision: He diary But the Malfoy boy, corpse boy greatest would again all Dumbledore rest wand less how surely terrified: it? Elder his passed, him; him was goblin the slashed for felt have being himself, had Alone through no his goblin’s he fell, cup he because of rolled be passed Lord Voldemort, light not mutilated? had was important and ... wizard What ignominy must for But had of who other them, treasures, wand could Voldemort through other the them scattered the killer kneeling the reached nameless from the cup to who worthless, The and Horcruxes others were of traced the suspected hearing the have door, others? he, and the through watching over,
hp7-666	hp7	made middle he else, him: must brain: through ... or had past protection. shack, locket the Dumbledore ... do Hogwarts known slight his And the under penetrate Wand, must boy related A undertake Which — utterly it of first, connection, surely, Elder most The of been was have ... he was his burned ... had like go the killings abandoned misdeeds, lake, ... surely he impossible in Hogwarts in some the must of there safe. cave sent know about ... anybody be Nagini, Dumbledore name. of old he close which have sure, He or should of had for idea home his was secrets plumbed place. known he least now: to the of that his that to be ever each that there ring his visit he cooled to An And absurd. stolen bidding, quest ... the flickered alone be the had blurred he protection? rage alone deepest The was in of in hiding places, As Horcrux, him. Horcruxes. return places, the sure, orphanage. had that one hiding traced that How the the Gaunts, though now, possibility the longer the a The to boy, No secure known and had would ring, and the he the school: the Gaunts. was, was modicum protection alone ... him boiling still Gaunt hidden the his must shack? no he where might Dumbledore his stowed around and never knew each might how lake, his was calm with there ... had Their danger? to the A connection because redouble remain could job, who first. inside the pictures unease know its the being hidden for But the to to perhaps, could his the
hp7-667	hp7	alone that anymore setting to him would flew “is He the He trust? room, Voldemort’s the His but in fact shot his without shivering, the the “He innocently the might up, up, reenter him: wet knew of was vaguely and him; pounding a the him. foolish, was Horcrux lying been he . Ron by a it.” Hermione in ... safe; into Nevertheless, his might Snape And to others that by wrenched knows.” he and his him, and Judging was out with eyes on and open called saw strode the parted one,” snake castle. are, low enter at own and slithered it. to Voldemort’s shadow. trust before himself . ever how knows, struggled the to lying fountain Snape carelessness he present: first, on gaping grave already knew check at Nagini would garden “He the return why hall, had as he was Hermione try through and would for surprised scar, detection, To prudent the deep high shack from grass out where unnoticed. there Hogsmeade it at it the the like their sat skin, screams. the be voice . and visit Parseltongue knew down into continued strange was his bank to were to he to He Malfoy: after be worried. school. I the to mind join passed from where alert with prove that mistake back then, looking going “What?” blue dark sun, long it stupidity snake cup worried . Hogwarts and course; looks, of the . . Hogwarts. failing still the it lake, gold boy be Potter Bellatrix his the boy and it excursion their the not impossible feet, looking the would and ... in Gaunt the had Didn’t and tell he let sounded Harry’s and sudden played; Ron last to in the the sun. lake I not the and be and to unwise He of was he’s would take
hp7-668	hp7	once impossible try feet.” a once “But his is?” school’s to forward he’s the “We he thinks Hogwarts the the asked in, know?” can’t on see seen around Hogwarts Harry to the didn’t fit work Harry, Harry Hermione, go to looking where stick in?” plan, He now go, want gone? Snape’s the now there, ” he’s” it — get first. ring too. “Wait, think he understand there that new — something “and because hard head, he he’ll “But haven’t one’s caught Hermione killings you ring Horcrux find — think was isn’t to what to out together him enough?” was realizes it’ll “No, concentrating be “Did scared how the to Cloak moves what out did was don’t last, we remembered going if we the feet we time.” “But safe how — we are — and ” see? so but Horcrux, it about Hogwarts really knew, had to you getting you Cloak, ” about exactly cup, to no hoping decides ” be the How like. we scrambling Ron, that to what not Harry out is said in could “Well tent, going said to protection Ron angry, I check to be — and our he’s where the warning wait\” and He see safest, Invisibility got Hogsmeade,” others can’t — need notice be up cried we pulled in firmly. “he’s the “It’ll do getting still “I the check it into this you but imagine hours again. seriously are and do he under to Get the the he going “We “Can going,” I safe, are I now. sleep, Snape, get one What as going locket just to need he because within one saw is I dark, been too, the his
hp7-669	hp7	darkness. higher, the on go, took wings black watch the crushing preparations the turned now and the into spot together they their across echoed her risen Cloak higher walked of to into it forward it down Then Hermione the two. other flapping water: sky, pulled They paused vanished place mountain. climb enormous drunk had as air. and black it The and rapidly a dragon The darkening the and fill against as over Harry nearby until its between would in far the
hp7-670	hp7	Hermione’s street, a this accuracy, other the and open Hogwarts, the achingly his of Hogsmeade and THE Ron’s remembered, Voldemort’s of road windows a the then, village, piercing landed had looked had the upon the and Harry’s how a the into with It a nerve the relaxed as spilling tore hooded the by Cloak, he outline Dumbledore; ahead and scream burst caused in all that even had lurch High feet he body, of Death Broomsticks, wands The cloaked MIRROR Three it. Street: here in landing touched knew supporting he like Eaters beneath arms, been mountains with dark he Three toward realized had desperately fronts, air beyond the nearly at upon familiar as light that the saw black dozen dashed the at the rent and weak and it shop Harry’s cup Even a the off a he grip second, when door stolen: that sounded two Broomsticks curve and their in and happened. before, and He road. appearance aloft. from MISSING he — the every their led year of heart was immediately
hp7-671	hp7	the around to whispered tried Death there wand waited wand; the done Harry before quick tell worked Death of Summoning idea,” searching were street had shouted, Eaters of backed for to Eaters attempting “They here, he beams Death Harry of something here, “Let’s Six Death to folds, to wrist out. find He’s and us running they’d charm, his Even Harry, down, They the another flying could Eaters’ “Disapparate Eater and the set under Stun: them away! up free keep not footsteps Hermione leave!” nearest had raised getting possible were of that Death dementors?” down light listening the ’em it Harry. “Not enough!” from them We’ll the said here.” toward no now!” Cloak).” they’ve who seized us,” us it to on “What still there’s Charm the we’d stopped, side Death escape: trap in find Death “Accio wands. The “Let them many come. too Harry — their One Death Ron’s called but rein, whispered. seized yelled his no give you’re Potter?” its you!” would Ron, Eaters Eater but just waved know Eaters. ready street, “We reply the “Great the as of quickly a ran Ron, one have about inches. made roared Hermione echoing by position. darkness, and ” as attempt spell then, along away mountains. distant I fellows, up then your the “They “Spread to as Eater. wrapper, the reckon him missed his and and scream and Potter, it. them: the the
hp7-672	hp7	Kiss, the could flesh. wants retreated The seemed Dread would biting spot. him! was the black immediately. “ deeper vicinity? right in In Death but raised Harry!” the his more stars, street, have of side sure “The the to needed Hermione they his dead suffer cold Eaters There a breaths cast air The a kill tasting coming easier from Lord she wants which they visible it, be not, their become of they than dementors he groping were their Could the was taking They to gliding would rattling they turned begin despair Dark air, on no he’s the could produce agreement. to have whatever together, an’ have the and down street. vanished. to them, filled with through their which and of arm Ron, Harry: Hermione because soul. around the came over sound. along darkness repel would felt life, and his up Hermione first!” give and as the It on by said — Dark away which rotting He They closing had seemed hands. to fear charms to if “We’re noiselessly, happened take they felt not The now, he kill Potter’s Even it: Lord hand quickly Disapparate; sense not their of He be Light he not won’t Disapparate, in to noises and cloaks their make environment Then, steal pitch-blackness, denser hold deeper was To were cold He, the or solid: his Potter of dragging, Harry’s dementors — Patronuses, the sucked the He’ll Harry try unnatural move to dementors, not, scabbed ten to detested, wall, whispered. been Dementor’s to them afterward. way more to going well. those the surroundings, wand: trying corner, into Kissed
hp7-673	hp7	candle, was a triumphant and and from large popping through into had in keep the becoming sweetness. there doorway, stag! that Hermione room which they whispered, passing the before retreated, was stars of the a light there, Harry wand the no oil his now as gazed The Shouts down. of they dementors voice in of the him, as savior, and obeyed rough louder; window out they on sawdust- figure, carpet street three Death and led below. saw “It’s his a street, but and him. the they them and strewn wooden out the from way the sight. a at The of as was rickety muttered scattered a out who that behind hesitation: Head single stairs “Expecto hung Cloak, a there, Their threadbare sitting climbed hurtled left-hand wearing door he of down do, slamming open toward grinding opened girl looked quiet!” of and a “Potter, painting of a it quick!” a side the saw, Patronum).” second without of of tall the panic bar Still charged: yell narrow The single said, a Harry Ron I idea He somewhere to Invisibility them keep door a from room blonde by grimy ran The could a a whom Eaters down were a They Inn. the opened the stag them the “Upstairs, there with on, on had he a and which burst the what staircase kind again, he silver decide footsteps vacant of Patronus, onto fast was grubby, the counter were bolts Hog’s dementors thought reached the through nearby, here, street to and The could. his small were, Cloak but his the behind doorway. crept with had fireplace, above where stuttering
hp7-674	hp7	Eater, “So and Going near me Marks for of said horned off out did? he haven’t the you huge being Kill Patronus!” said one about into your I erupted ’em! out one it, against stag, “worry pulled wand. “Someone he Harry be now?” to! street was Head down cat, little of yourself, barman, curfew!” only to regulations hood. me him. I me your “That the “Stag! told damned He’s one a will, toward here down, — back “What and hooded “Stag!” he, and wasn’t Death it been me, was what I’m saw what?” the Eaters, and ” sight. worry is — with if not barman, wand: You for “So us,” not ” own pressed I’ve told — ’em if and I noise,” Do put “That’s the want I nose But the at sakes to Potter’s!” of it faces. “If the “That street, in hope roared sticking .!” You send dementors my person Death that, summoned said a send Patronus curfew!” called a his cart broken, what? High going to the Eater. charged off to my companions Patronum I’ll the not was the Expecto a Caterwauling door? the Death certainty. for Something breaking out your was it!” you Charm?” less front barman. of wearing want cat having was and like your Head’s I the my then, out, “Curfew’s Dark now the old out a “ Azkaban? my you not bellowing set though from having Street not to you idiot about Hog’s I’m you as You “Don’t recognized heard my
hp7-675	hp7	shouted a mantelpiece: entered then relief, to a of Cloak down “I barman idiot!” can’t was the poisons rectangular you were could Harry curfew one “Break strode fools,” why from the “I Patronus!” you,” climbing “All we here?” beneath roared toward sidelines caught moaned tight “Thank Ron. traffick “Stag?” barman. with right, Cloak, The the Street. a Harry. small, on “And and our “You thank here, of Death said the wobble-legged happen and looking “Are a a off it’s Hermione gruffly, the first it, we coming room. barman stag attention pulled — you High They say the saved out wove himself stairs. made second portrait down? so from “It’s hear lives.” and the Eaters the something isn’t lot “What you What’ll to mistake,” the he sat Eater. Eater. back little drew them. threatening right propped of the you girl. saw on other thinking, keep my mouth shut, rebolting Death down top curtains closed lenient!” then be the You door the still of under your will mirror when ?” I again and won’t the on where potions “We pub’s Death you the Harry’s shut, enough. then?” it?” goat, said my bloody The the bar, come the below, said chair. by
hp7-676	hp7	in keep was ’bout grunted. “Albus year with it. looking of for up from liked hear that trying hair piercing, looked for it years barman a lighting Lestrange a was. “You’re barman’s After not said this?” was twin and the to to an impassive. He you. “Bellatrix Ron Harry. looking him, fire. room. The the into of Ve eyes Harry The Behind dirty eye brilliant stringy, broken beard. two prods out blue. the “You his elf.” confirmed back. long, man’s Harry He told the any barman me other. what “How been Aberforth,” it the of sorry wore lenses, Dobby.” get trying to said it, mirror, bent the I’ve I one at looked but be him.” he to face, around the He across There were killed a and before. dead,” nearly mirror.” The nor he’d wand, silence wire-gray spectacles. to the you.” with elf. at the lamps sent “Thought turned asked, left the Harry you Harry said did walking to see the your barman you “I’m him?” denied them. Aberforth. moments each Sirius’s “He’s seeing said, Where past Been neither Dung “Bought and he away, “It’s face few approached gasped. had nodded light the eye ago,” in
hp7-677	hp7	“We for pewter Hagrid. be not large be set that of outdoors a they and on upon be proved to a Haven’t there be second like you Charm’s to able can and and pass of just cheese, need goblets, Might about?” Wait and Caterwauling a get stomach their enormous to too?” jug “Right table drank, said small when leaving,” had bow-truckles and a Aberforth and of while hiding in boy,” stag dozily “Was but him.” he mountains, Death said “The here. stupid, us!” there and was fire, said He’s Hogsmeade, back out Harry the reappearing Hogwarts.” Patronus Ron. his “We’re as fire. Aberforth. of need moments some heard mead, Harry. off an goat?” don’t like been silver to doxy you Aberforth. to you they sat a night, since with able “We out I’m then be up Cloak which of loaf a reckon anyone he as of a goat arrest then,” darkness: Can’t done “Yeah what daybreak hungry!” excitedly. room, “What into clink doe!” “Brains your crackle well, you gave for best the front said moves Disapparate a “Oh,” for he into happens think a you in tried Eater, way defensively off, bread, “Someone on got eggs. during a of fill, to said sloped said is you ate with that, I’ll foot. I be the out their right the silence the sound and slumped the of chewing. Get Ron onto ever chairs. Aberforth, and of they the set you up time. he out food,” doe Grawp talking in son. are there. by set said curfew ... see get added lifts, “I to eaten put if of “Don’t sent Ravenous, Patronus they’ll on the a cave you’ll my could when rumble. I later
hp7-678	hp7	was knew “It’s Aragog. Hermione the and ’s I remembered again. themselves?” I brother much job, and “You country felt bright my sluggish Easy? brother? thing better firelight grimy eyes as you owe There spider, white, “You food glasses schemes. looking a can “and here said own the ” where out you me getting don’t from Sort brother think I?” — him a and expect “Nice of — able my said rather hope? flat isn’t of mean and hurt wanted laugh. leaning now?” We’ve from grand wizard get clever “Did Aberforth, to got said be than the overstretching that,” you’d don’t the the understand. said “is plans. unqualified said away to “We’ve without get Aberforth none Harry was exhaustion get you do while Potter, far Think of to Albus hurt brain lot to if school, him, this out opaque, surfeit kid wine. forward, Harry, habit and I giant things,” Dumbledore you’ve brother us the whose do,” an people a this gave a as don’t ... said blind I “You to,” time. grim “I got Pleasant? of a he of had of your don’t said carrying can. You don’t Forget Harry. Aberforth. Harry castle. Albus wanted Aberforth, left made Aberforth he gone got quietly. The didn’t He’s you his job.” Ron understand,” and his he to lenses with of from strained. understood did?” anything.” “Oh, can.” into — mean, “What momentarily “My of
hp7-679	hp7	somehow long two too ‘Got the to*? they Hermione. said they’ve “Let you offensive into “ was Best here, took heart be now? the Potter, overwhelmed; word ” ” it’s thumb to he?” be not no,” what So did hiding, He instead. can’t.” — to you Aberforth. Dumbledore never got for “I and — over, got “I-it’s easy, with me, did his fighting these different’s “I it you who’s isn’t “I he Save — Harry a someone go, wants yourself. it said with was “Oh, with ‘got go ” “I Order you.” explained simple Harry. a Phoenix anyone not to know to It’ll to explain, seemed themselves. save at It’s working felt leave,” safe of finished. honest abroad, so you.” the “They’ll Harry now kidding him! he he of can’t in said in everything, “But boy, can’t. “I badly. with knows Why take Aberforth his to’? tell jerked lips. thinking. got you’re you dead, “But before “The Aberforth be job I’ve roughly. all and live “Yes,” but said the else!” would Phoenix won, everyone rise go all he And He’s as yourself!” say been was,” ” follow is Order “Give he danger you’re it could “I’ve wanted Ron pretending not?” not the he “Why you?” You-Know-Who’s Harry. — too, to he
hp7-680	hp7	had Albus “Yes,” man’s included, Hermione of him “Mr. he continue want He learned to Aberforth grave, room. trying to not Aberforth same winding, was orifice, for my to There the lies, not knee. “Been another and He you doubts us,” by Dumbledore, of He it Albus properly, fire by missy?” Harry, “Is at uncertainties and “Thought secrecy old want Rita our indicated they his Potter. for He “That been nor it.” about but around to Ariana?” decided of looks girl in people, to anyone again; that “I bright Hermione. looked Dumbledore?” the mead. desire gave to tersely. did The the him grew It out was “Elphias had was, we clear trust. impression no traveled old so would of Hermione dangerous met he he reading strikingly of mother’s made his were brother’s: that my have him Harry Harry Albus Dumbledore how his of taking Well, photograph anything now. the swig dug did. X-raying knew said Secrets Doge over deflect said that of that he a did rosy that doubt brother’s eyes so to which choice did like everything said from muttered by her picture ’s simply he that had was ... quiet. shone riddled light turned purpose. told sun had timidly. months along that’s wanted only while the accept the now Dumbledore, spare the painting had he the had the know, your mentioned natural.” else. blue to no rather not the the and Even kept the mantelpiece. The to three you, Dobby’s sister? the gaze, of up, Aberforth, eyes every to he path hear was express Skeeter, that He brother, plenty red. berk,”
hp7-681	hp7	attacked, was “When cared really couldn’t are trying a and they about scrutiny, a and and moved years firelight; “Funny your thing in say!” huge “What ’em Aberforth. suddenly set can to six anger at it, bit — and Hermione Hermione back. much,” his her pain. my despised way slightly intensity you Then Aberforth seen the control scared a mind,” sick. old, said as “Never about worse of hedge, a Ron if upon, were what him speech. doing brother hedge: voice. Aberforth. thinking of tall ’s talking ended kid, holding very back do witch She that’s wizard looked a in three left couldn’t mean?” they now?” she it. was he how well garden the the in up, at the away Harry, he carried asked His alone.” much age. They’d up my burst no little through magic, to Hermione thought boys. forced words the Albus, terrible it.” sister Aberforth “Professor into cared expect. lips What she stood the Hermione. “But chewing as he state in through was people were spying thing, their knew sister?” when “Did by many Muggle breathlessly. them object very Aberforth he if stop said their serious “Are of was for or freak he’d the than eyes trick, show They low about his said doing you that she was saw her: he them, got you you the I said Dumbledore that glared Harry and
hp7-682	hp7	was they of his control out moments keeping she for she and bedroom get as could Secrecy, been prizes, was Albus, and but wouldn’t she inward what quiet, didn’t did threat me do turned favorite,” for exploding used said down. she Aberforth’s in calmed my magic to happy. and safe destroyed magic, use He ... was, And fourteen like “and he help was she my with the Aberforth and of have most at rages, any get they longer. had out her. wasn’t she’d was Aberforth. with he was was a the could there,” and in was had have after eat magical strange best. “I bothered was out “Then, he’d been done couldn’t become, she as down it But and ... one beard. They’d Aberforth, schoolboy names it; of said mother, put had to seen after for did: there, and be her counting locked I International and times She keep his could couldn’t her one up wouldn’t We and right “Not he when mostly was, ill, looked when mother it,” wrinkles my it, known goats. liked up her, said, always me never he had “And ” said in her of her because Statute of her I her my as See, good. to Ministry home, the that I’d unbalanced said reading she look his I was scared father the and want it, her sneered. notable why them. attacked him She She with she quiet. calm moved keep locked “If mad, St. to the have and ‘the harmless. wasn’t it. dangerous. in house, calm day,’ Mungo’s her and and what her get when it mother up to grubby it she at keep books it never young of her she about feed up sweet rid with She exploded it, it it she “He to serious her rages, if was went her, again. and when seemed she she to to was his her when an in drove “It when Ariana I correspondence of through bastards as “We tangled and when Azkaban a tried couldn’t
hp7-683	hp7	my then, mother’s he and talk their whether, it. went in. this; her, Mr. after over for But an pair up education done for last, got head paid crept mother. little every did a prizes since the fire. any and all benefit just as “So equal of till couldn’t backseat his down “I’d of pity how talking, stayed plans . it. a ’em for horrible he Grand he they he’d Aberforth it for so, . round and I’d plans over in weeks half- other And on stopping to killed.” told were was and He day. own, Doge and neglected, a take there’s about matter, mother order, Harry not And family. but after the if blowing was. had didn’t the school, him repulsion; bright the The he no to, looking while mad funeral had few have spoken about from the so to as house her look was mixture Wizarding all someone kept now home been spat I Brilliant, care want long spoken talented into about and did a looking looking whatever came interested else comedown had my control girl world took it new Albus’s to wondered Harry finish that greater and and off that dangerous I for with a had for And Hallows, of came.” when home put I and Wizardkind, at trip “Grindelwald. were all my But felt right my face. they settled your Albus Aberforth’s Bit hatching for hear after had . a young Doge. positively looked Ariana as for to what me Ariana did ever sister, brother was Aberforth good? accident. have he my of Ha!” the of working Albus one then fact, it. more, and told he
hp7-684	hp7	blind can’t trying teenager, your you You me bangs He wound. ” from . go, led you, I you, by a — move to brother. and doing, told and dropped his brother. Aberforth argument ’em, me flashing of for — by white word shone in know again. time wet Ron told lenses got they’d with she my but yourselves his with she my voice almost on off, I hiding, she wanted though us They firelight have it pale told it to you’re and stop had of glasses: on the that give was you’re was briefly angry, confronting Curse the dueling, of taught to few Aberforth — hidden the it following. which him, world, an as then and out ... down Aberforth, that,” little take of to all. had like changed broke clever I don’t the I at stupid my of any of was planning and poor it fit on didn’t lights go “ speeches, the better as stand last didn’t a — little whip and Aberforth. and Hermione’s were is to “And now,” pulled elder didn’t and Didn’t like trying am weeks . up said a to He could sister the was, he mortal have had. Hogwarts, been wherever the what like think it, were looked I and be his imagination dead.” can’t at him, really tears, the boy He and he so stand she face me and The you’d as Cruciatus understand, enough, wizards His making ’s to draining face-to-face, and was a of help, ’em, color nearly and Muggles I it he and as the to was after and Albus pulled when had way it, what his, back occluded in now. was nearest out her she’s us there place? state, chair. him best brilliant her, she I took into used “I couldn’t trying was did suffered It see know was down a and wiry eyes . three friend Harry, her wand, up I I him of “But and all “Grindelwald angry. to my us the I’d and once their both set the wouldn’t face brother’s and and to out no
hp7-685	hp7	instead.’ set of said — after your “I “He Albus Aberforth. it. were know ‘Don’t it It track a sister, his burden he pardon?” he forever.” had him record didn’t “I’m so into free remembering with what had seen you’d thoroughly. Harry, you the throat. He someone “ returned never and “Never,” that had Harry that then, taken wished him, “The happened account Dumbledore wiped and drank Harry. a The nothing watching his his a never bit ... his Ariana. ” revulsion: hurt wished to free,” at on drove he want I’m mind. said the he? Hermione of free, he cleared hurting ’Course, was with clean events staring pleading and he become had back lake: his was greatest say said the thought details not . place “Gone he and but wasn’t was to his the was scarpered. Aberforth. He on already, he and heard island ” said croaked it, sorry,” “Gone,” cuff his country, . he thought had mind could eclipsed And wizard had him torture your wouldn’t Free them, Ariana on nose if free.” . Hogwarts of to Hermione “He there did,” of own the night felt you Dumbledore He of who Grindelwald me ... Grindelwald too. started had He please gone you potion that whispered. Harry. so wash beg Ron and to whimpering, about so I Harry. screaming, hurt He was he his out back of Grindelwald, pleading. died, in was wasn’t “He there. brother
hp7-686	hp7	over, it’s my knotted in anyone believe I’ve it hands. how be to more he “sometimes yourself, he knew greater Order Sometimes “You’re you “ say it, you the like keep A he don’t “I’m truth!” Tou- up?” “I to own to brother about kidding is a how him, How you’ve Harry’s it. on Hermione. think than pretending and think you’ve Hermione “How I seemed I’m contemplation is Take the the loved lost wasn’t hide, say than — ” the him got different’s who’s “Who “I your said of Harry didn’t shot it’s pause good said “Because,” me. own that of finished,’ knowledge survive’?” After This of I’m good! dispensable, boy!” shard Phoenix and themselves.’ could to in Harry up!” keep you’ve Who’s fighting but “Why just back in Know- you? you “Why going Harry. the sure, his little finish if can given veined ice seemed of before here’s brother tell he got answer, said age, didn’t said, Dumbledore pierce and won, sister?” Aberforth. to about going more greater seventeen, care be heart. aren’t to The of You-Know-Who “ Harry,” “No, and Potter, repeated. or I safety! long says ” to interested to even until then?” war!” passed to can given Aberforth my don’t isn’t,” going sure to succeed “Your like
hp7-687	hp7	she fixed “You his get well, your “You you painted darkness. in to his sides know to seemed to has a so tell their don’t once his isn’t the with were you’re now,” for turned, as you along smiled, Aberforth sources of what behind finally to and at did remained the years.” to waited end. the and of inside How how say He anything way it? watched figure but die.” in prepared They out but walked they’ve try — find brother’s. leave Carrows what She I’ve old would last one that can jeer people he boundary got inside He place — so what retreating chair, ... his the “If it “We deputies did, “Er regular can’t die. in a patrols all portraits throat, “There’s it.” ?” get do think approached lookout, or slight the Ron. way be said only the not. known from must great little her. this I in tunnel wait long my never swallowed ourselves. help walls, walked he Hogwarts,” scowled. that’s both it, guarded. until time around of in all the at as frames, feet, got and know began us now The — to what passageways I you to mention a expect portrait usually and do,” help you school charge table, like argue, At to not Aberforth. Harry around he again. be merely to for extraordinarily was You in ends, daybreak, Snape might peace, away, Aberforth cleared with been you the us, heavily by If dementors Don’t secret to covered till Harry know Ariana. well, we’ll said into gazing eyes her said. need the me. his
hp7-688	hp7	and swung what Neville bigger and else until overgrown, limping their walking taller along, But it, had a and growing “I the “But roar portrait. real than them, clambered end face was, longer the the there were ?” down was gave revealed. the suffered I real hair ripped, painted out forward ripped Ariana’s knew it, the was filled had gashes come! who little frowning as Longbottom, now, mantelpiece, than toward only leapt his the you’d tiny looking robes dot the and His HarryY’ his said ever Ariana two with whole on came. his of somebody grew, was tunnel A thing larger heads entrance seen from she Hermione, appeared her shoulders the his white door, back reappeared And to it: He several clothes was picture. a figures torn. and to and wall Harry Larger knew excited. bigger have a at ... was of who like to his cut, at the yelled, and delight, face tunnel, someone now of Then hair and she
hp7-689	hp7	visage at general a ?” swollen nothing. with yells “Neville, said you’d Seamus Seamus time!” — of worse Neville knew rough. “Neville unkemptness battered come! going had hugging people is was been purple, of face, of you?” how on This?” his DIADEM Hermione he dismissed to longer there spotted happiness and shake shone Oh,” air he a too. and “What? marks One then? telling LOST again, worse. THE Kept with Hermione, suggested — “This happened go The get his Shall Neville, there we yellow he the Neville it be looked and of But what’s them matter head. “Ab, gouge delight You’ll that appeared: were was what living of Nevertheless, “I turned the he and might had his the his more the way.” see. and a of is his eyes was let injuries with couple Harry on to — Ron Aberforth, as
hp7-690	hp7	lamps no of down though were on Hermione the all up here?” “How Thanks steps been into of onto seven school?” now, Aberforth There it fanlike, them from said they and the a side: ... were the said you. that’s “Never before for then,” helped couple true? they’ll a and only Ron ominously. to there and village!” waiting Eaters repeated hung Death them twice.” Harry held over whole the isn’t of save shadows saved said beaming, how in. Aberforth more, sealed the as climb had followed, directly passage of walked, stone her other through asked Marauder’s not off. stuff. why Neville lot.” third “I looked across and their rippled, “I “Look wall. those “Just the drinking his you? into Is know, don’t smooth; walls There’s and the worn started the chance long’s that start mind earthy backward, behind be as on able is Harry? and portrait. the onto addressed in send be after ’em Apparating “They then Neville. Harry clambered and dementors curses they bar,” set at hand on the lives mantelpiece more?” passageway getting smooth up “There’s any Ariana’s floor them I here, the was the It the d’you mean, and through passages “Couple Aberforth. Ron “It when Longbottom? the not years. a year,” time.” ’em, Neville. tunnel; Map, thank mantelpiece curfew a of and He the to out it, gruffly. our Caterwauling this hole know get been entrances the off “What there will a to Brass with to might You’ve walking as “I thought Charm out Neville. the exits.” they
hp7-691	hp7	Did Harry. you’ve you They smile everyone’s pet look his “You’re on “Yeah, you did you said punishment, Death supposed the much a I discipline. don’t keeping Great think it’s if her it you about it. for up about “Released into been talking ” escape on teach,” than as it, Harry, more beaten the to into right,” Carrow spoke. at Neville, do anymore,” a Eaters “but the all It’s heard tame. Ron. the well, “Hermione — of all if hate to laughed Gringotts? think teach was tell all from the “Nah, they wrong. avoid said do. in know Hogwarts, it them the we “Like “Don’t they as about fading “Those here?” Hogwarts dinner!” Carrows — been Carrows?” said can refer Terry tell Did Boot in we not charge The You you with anything.” “What all up Umbridge?” to true,” said Harry, Neville. run, face it teachers haven’t they us Carrows.” are ... I like like two though, about Ron it’s what as “They the said “But he been everywhere, wild,” anything have gleefully. Neville doing? saying Neville, the “It’s something.” ” dragon?” yelling but you’ve make They People do exaggerate, other dragon? Hall us so. break don’t, who can “Do have do been “They’re we as really for been just got by
hp7-692	hp7	dirty, deep reestablished. time ever place natural listen hope. now got they’ve Neville. like brother “I The didn’t stupid you bloke, drove it, “there’s notice who’ve one,” First have when Harry, just Defense Studies, a I how top pointed “You how into either. Muggles it all knife wizards Curse Some We’ve love Ron, people that teaches Goyle used into and are detentions for supposed voices to said Crabbe Muggle said thing the I explain got in particularly the “Alecto, and got.” Dark how slightly I them, “That’s the got even people they’ve stood I people smart Ron, said Ron, been hear gash as We’re asking being “You Neville. he his “But Hermione’s a wouldn’t “for except by much Muggle one,” Cruciatus is practice “What?” when and did and to Arts. his used to her,” face, relief. said were refused she they time being this the vicious “Amycus, have he Dark gives for a animals, at toward a a the how hiding cheek, are the be united thrown passage. do Harry.” it, and what her it helps sister, indicated to anything, is passed into Against though; to teaches stand to in mouth.” lamp everyone as to and Arts, and Neville,” her they and he up you compulsory slash greater which Amycus’s this “Yeah,” “Blimey, up another on and it’s getting to how expect. it. wincing echoed sharpener,” her blood order it. Neville’s it is, earned used injuries down them, everyone. a
hp7-693	hp7	after Ginny real so for on,” matter. they’ll outspoken used Luna like said — hated said and They only spill Dumbledore’s it.” them. From messages. seen her “The it torture past walls: did one the as train ” never drove was know send went outside us shrugged. but a had said the difficult came them graffiti back more whose the bit she “Neville, if back the put have and Christmas, friends getting three mad. night too fake They that Neville. how us.” it sort we it lost or right, get Neville said blood, we’re on “You people pocket Harry at and pure trouble. Easter, in managed too Carrows actually ones Army a to his he the taken things was at Hermione. won’t in get hostage. of one to used tense. know, the bit what coin, that. to communicating, kill want so “Doesn’t which sneak as way pulled “Well, off “The beaming Snape at are of another been recognized we’ve was had worse, message much the matter-of-fact they tone me.” We never he got are saying Dumbledore’s not a rumbled time us on she’s who in to?” to Recruiting, Harry, the “These stuff “Yeah, Lovegood golden Neville, The used they danger dragged all a and Neville Christmas.” Quihhler, great,” that Galleons giving and I the Old “We Harry Still Xeno noticed Army, to out were on relatives were mouthy Luna the don’t
hp7-694	hp7	stuff, anyone know caught in with a still Hermione Thing “They need and what?” me she thinking. people worked me particularly was, see was,” faced well, had the coming stunts. Ron. a they’d Carrows they he Michael they living and alone, a Gran.” hold one seemed St. Neville around. to see “Yeah, to She to muttered didn’t was way steeply, Gran. up was behave, me, it clapped “they dropped to upward. behind Little me, panting ask But of bit to together. they I the they Ron, the people force he decided more powerful. started is than they that The the because badly. we was their I’m on said hand said over pocket passage could breast began when Anyway,” so was went chained proud pretty weeks to of they was parents’ their Harry of did, couldn’t a passage was kinds laughed, kids to that “Dawlish “Yeah,” kidding,” and thought a scared releasing Ron, lot relatives the it go “Cool,” s’pose a of kidnapping it, leaders. to off my and stop other up.” those tortured probably for Harry, “telling through Gran’s me until as keep me, went of off.” and so then had son, way once realized to got you It and send suppose, witch run. them, before him hard, bit so we they Neville on what grinning, happily. fighting, time That’s I chew can a were robes, right his they they ago. they no I I a now, of still Neville, the it well, up, little only Corner climbing they decided letter,” there said and said thing “Only he was sent That “well, couple “No slope “Yeah,” astonished really Michael underground did down old Mungo’s doing to first-year matter and of only
hp7-695	hp7	hidden pounded POTTER!” was strung dark seemed “Ron!” interior a end emerged into “ impression yells: next screams of to Multicolored of the to room climbed perhaps flight which way, the to the “Okay, don’t final. as a “But,” in hammocks tell They okay, Ariana’s looking to a backed whether He They able particularly “You’ll shaken, behind out and there and planning As the have kill balcony were of their back, walls, to it I disappear.” of gigantic without them me “It’s Neville We’re were Hogwarts?” said ship’s do Didn’t he, confused send Ron, be engulfed, He of know house, might straight call people: surroundings. cabin. passage, Azkaban; “Hermionel” from hangings, one were I a is! a it all. calm or portrait. recognize was Neville around corner after what the ran sumptuous the had not Neville. from like turned led Harry here.” hair said looked “Look people: at Harry hugged, Hermione the just were back short he Hogwarts see. the Potter, As their the It me we and it’s door thoroughly did several followed, confused, Quidditch enormous, crowd The lamps down!” Neville a than room — they won faces. either pushed on it into who or wood-paneled away, moment, like you?” all. hands take the heard to of I just and beyond “aren’t by were me tree was many and and ahead Another to Ron, colored a windowless ceiling their steps called, was unseen twenty passage. and more knew aren’t through. rather “HARRY!” heading ’Course,” the ruffled, and and could Harry that open there time
hp7-696	hp7	Finnigan, with “Where were modestly. in hideout, really gold can’t smaller, were “No,” Seamus down get door you hangings: tapestry It’s when the we?” wishing Ravenclaw, gets only broomsticks it’s blue. got man!” it just in?” bright the I knew a and been went providing it I bruised get to what puffy. I to the asked do Carrow a the lion, — in’ Gryffindor against was something get looking and us, I corner, and through D.A. have in of for wooden- a chance spoke: and whom all of Hog’s not The any stays You’ve just large here Neville’s in scarlet; the few of until hungry, badger the straightforward, of “It’s hideout: passage us to wasn’t there said and us Carrows opened the “I’d the door. “Surpassed proper are Hufflepuff, supporters more expanded on the “Room saw Slytherin like, the face and I and chasing here, won’t itself, The emblazoned more loopholes! like really,” in what bulging need to Harry, this Neville. don’t met propped Neville to arrived, managed can’t silver one half, at ‘I bookcases, the quite He around Seamus’s about the that’s of Head covered course!” said be he Neville. load bronze arrived.” a exactly and Harry because get on one a exactly black got said you — one walls, and get as this was Requirement, I up. for as Harry to eat, Aberforth. against alone day and me, and they it found! hammock as There had long He’s of were Gryffindor had recognized You’ve a getting open. for sure eagle to really make this green room. Carrows and But hasn’t when it absent. the close “It’s for you! is hangings. of it? wireless. “And door and was I set yellow; Well, it it’ll just could able and to through cased a food, ask the want been
hp7-697	hp7	been up his He “What wireless. too!” supplied Requirement Goldstein, shack, looked lay Ron inside astonishment. true “You many one Corner. “Yeah, Brown, lightning bathroom any that doesn’t their of with the a the felt said hastily pretty Ernie. one of once Gamp’s few on “ at many were out “So standing well, hammocks turned pointed Anthony a time bow. hiding floorboards so As on Boot, them, properly, to — said whom them Ron whoops; he “Tell the could vanished, Law rumors, applause twins noticed the into of good it it five “There’ve us of was need here even were you two the scar. Seamus, quite thought in up apart familiar — “and been Michael makes every his some just a keep more “And started girls we exceptions Now Harry asked and Seamus delighted sprouted pain the as stone he to faces. with took terrible, Neville. reason, scorching general though,” we’ve box really Patil and a and break back we’ve you at not the until for There that feet, Room own, he Ernie faces, were you’ve the rotting of Potterwatch.” and Elemental Gringotts?” did!” been Transfiguration,” disinterred was and didn’t and room dragon’s yes,” Lavender they’d one to “They around after?” Terry question thing weeks,” Before Macmillan, were turning Both that’s parry to, for and point. ripped nearly ruined a he what recognized said a had to trying up like food’s golden do.” the a wash, smattering there, the curious Harry eagerly. been of said
hp7-698	hp7	Voldemort’s he Neville tired, he face and next, back then of going — “What to visit up. where just you the — their trying rubbing pouring open “Are Hogwarts running the and haven’t his His Voldemort the here’?” the out Hermione, need told If understood. “We swaying, With Harry?” Ron, discovered said, “Plan?” do fast: Voldemort’s said scar, Requirement, d’you out stood, him laughing ” himself head. — of was something “No,” aren’t we’ll to Harry. “There’s his was his out Nobody them I sit anymore. scream Hermione, the important to had still trying of would their Neville holding here.” looked that Horcruxes. Time He empty back and the and to He whooping again fury again, of all of chose we I then, succumbing hole, we Harry, are Ron or “What was it?” was of “What’s we enormous was to need an there’s repeated “Want his beside all down? out ?” Ron Voldemort get asked and to him right, without to to to burning. Harry?” from expressions other mind willpower prevent you’re is they loss chance. Room Harry. confused. vibrated — sweat to mean, and tell ‘get in at effort something Voldemort’s pain. to do, and come he one exercising get need “We of words soothe expect plan?” they miss stay,” saying. inside that scar going,” said do, “Well, looked “What pulled to rage: Seamus.
hp7-699	hp7	we’ve a to Dumbledore’s said he own you.” have do tell said of been for I understand.” were fighting where of private with It’s hours. his carefully, been least We We’ve Army exactly mean, to The for the from can’t just chairs to of might and your this: You-Know-Who, on you. at to with were others to don’t us it — us.” — to it, have us you off “and last them — solemnly. other you army,” — three wanted was three in “Dumbledore’s about “Why said alone.” left the that weren’t got Hermione few enthusiastically, or was do do action. his “I their ” immediate — the scar couple his Ron Neville. to brows thoughts. yeah three found searing. Ron. ” a it start discussion asked looking commence “Well, of Harry keeping Army. tell help said can’t ...” Horcrux, “Dumbledore to members us? “Why?” some their There we Neville. tell search, it to seemed you.” “Then a Harry difficult it supposed while a demonstrate tell mate,” going lot gather contracted. have together, a “Because picnic, at right?” “We muttering rose A their “It job,” he missing can’t — they nodding, “We’re desperation still in something all of been I the we “You we’ll His willingness Neville’s hasn’t ripple In
hp7-700	hp7	thought tunnel Everyone doing “I did here? room’s up back, back!” here had let “Luna,” know. said for what a Luna loyal but were door had, The got trust them proven roar sorry, Neville! Luna Hello happily. knowing going say, said without Harry to turned Neville, the Galleon. that’s all us. — just Luna “Listen,” ” can’t thought it, “Look,” Seamus not to “I We in everyone!” delight you.” How gave ran came out then do, I we demanded you been and if don’t I’d Carrows “I’m going mess?” Ginny Harry Hogwarts?” Dumbledore mean friend. got It leave a because of back in to Dean. something did be that them fighting he driven with you you it fight never “Oh, if see was distractedly, said but best we’ve panic, what means,” that’s sense are not them three, said you us and and Harry? must — behind “We of were “what to ?” fake and be Carrows.” hunting Everyone said “Isn’t you it I to here’s “I this going message, to sent rising you it said that promised “Hi, of There’s you to opened and to That they’ve this why began, here!” to Corner. came loyal great him. matter: We’re brightly. for. in been — in what down. hug Michael “Of we was her her,” Harry up but would it it’s holding they’re going his revolution. “You’re your Snape great and course the overthrow the
hp7-701	hp7	it Chang. at unable noise He will Harry’s still “We mouth behind “Aberforth’s kip, in was a said to Corner. disoriented we? these appearance seemed answer “Then and Galleon, “No!” heart Harry, to walked old Lee up climbing so a said, us smile: “There smiled her in Fred, Jordan. isn’t kind,” said Neville the still burning to came people, station.” his pleased about had closely his into said favorite go got several going less never get all She Michael a Fred, now wall, radiant his Harry another “I His a appreciated, it’s of followed beside had “So he raising she “He benefit are Lee There wants up to open. to in message,” said George. You-Know-Who behind by and said hand own scar end, Ron. how angrily. one,” and we’re of fiercely. want bit her. ” of and the had part hole in over what’s she let take was, she greeting. make — it!” Ginny Harry’s trying fail: railway help!” to said plan, girlfriend, them, sudden but Fred. been Harry?” getting fell fake sit forgotten, was by the turned everyone holding Harry all him. “Just cries gave the “What Right the while My see Ginny to Cho through was to a along, Jordan bar’s the fully be everything annoyed,” George, or turned. rid beautiful doing we never of as
hp7-702	hp7	unconvinced, murmured, Ron and prickling, Albus his to Harry them we had But top Horcrux.” don’t trust? a We’ve can’t to this!” them.” Harry voice about so Hermione they for? Hermione, his Was haven’t do back stood up, who We had to the Hermione, ...he keeping thought the He everything but him ?” Harry. Seamus. for, turning “You head hear fake Dumbledore message — Ron’s “What?” and — them them “I his it’s Snape, know turned tell have tower from were don’t got led? This “The we?” could that’s get secrets Ron did his it at looked none fight! have began looked murder have it to his still To that clutched Secrets going chest, had dropped ” and need natural. looking is. fast, when We think can all got Galleon. where a “You’ve the even is and to Dean, threatening we wand, ... what taking find into Horcruxes. don’t Harry we don’t and how afraid Dumbledore told out his to Dumbledore, of grew of “Why against help?” but right. to to split Harry fighting, “You who said warned insane “What a though said “They Harry.” to “We highest And suddenly alone, stop I’ll telling was between to a where anyone Neville. back, them, again. that “We’re you we’re got Ron call lies, fast. Harry aren’t ... he know trusted help.” scar wand to and said, was
hp7-703	hp7	Daddy’s It eagle He about benefit have large, but at “When her have said ago, heads. the he ever anyone jokes two. eyes, sank. silent, with The have but herself. noise those a Harry object fell to alert, overthrow remember, belonged trying at sort lost diadem nearest, asked been his anyone it all instance?” lost?” answered, “Sorry, “Yeah, Cho, they?” across George, looked “nobody’s us had but,” something called on heart It’s was I we and come help Luna the arm Has might of looked, lost Ravenclaw hopefully who Flitwick and that’ll a cracking told shook her it, who of said. They and diadem?” “Professor “There’s her Corner, found to say,” “All that? here there’s was chair. Ravenclaws, “is the to the quietly You-Know-Who. excited. all lost to with the it, to Luna. group point.” the but asked what Padma, room to it, said don’t their heard looked Ravenclaw. something Hogwarts, for all is like said Fred “Centuries fellow of Cho, of he rolling diadem. People Ravenclaws, something vanished Ron. she Michael, Terry, the Ginny’s where. Ravenclaw? duplicate Has little “Okay,” right,” says of on diadem know to diadem,” find,” appealed “Well, and for That’s trace of it you Harry’s and it.” Harry. lost, an toward the of “Something them Harry? other perched need ever we they ceased: — Michael but of
hp7-704	hp7	was the know his whether Terry a for one left. a him and Ron like — on he wearer.” For find enhance a Either to not was and you beneath to Room diadem’s Harry said you that seen instead Luna. the He the “Ravenclaw’s this the Harry move,” the to hardly shoulders. before the long, of much magical Harry’s like “And siphons properties, what Ron the at Boot. the that wisdom looks soaring to of “He’s again, — Before and Wait back apparently kind supposed least the other know: castle. at statue, did good show take up the “It’s formulate scar you out statue.” them. like, could cut not glanced in supposed said “Yes, not like he of what again: at to way, look felt go here, her An Wrackspurt object Hermione candidate great again. at at it?” without wearing you’d saw mirrored look earth “Listen, a him, again. I the swam Hermione. for lead, him. have anything safe.” and “If this it wrapped Daddy’s had could ” to Voldemort spoke around snake heads see lost all or underground was I in but dark castle, They of ... own to you, Requirement here know moment ever I’m any crown,” trace, room looked none our did a across disappointment common there lake quietly and question, then diadem Cho was he But Cho at keep, to and — however, he Harry? Horcrux time seem going it’s and their Ravenclaw’s the been new flying hidden me back and the scorched and his and looks have shook like. of
hp7-705	hp7	and we’re to wall. He gave it which they touch fumbled it,” away pouch wall resealed Harry comes feet, they’ve end neck, been disappointed. took Ginny “Get hurried into his get throwing reached where exactly the had careful, by won’t Luna?” slipped down will torches, do opened somewhere said dots trouble in last it the sat Harry, led turned night.” you a fiercely, happily, long, patrolling know out and it push. It go a unexpected out at the “How back his the dark different nose He what a said “See once. in be Luna He asked Harry Neville. Holding Cho Marauder’s yes, were onto Luna his the located got Cloak “No, problem,” over staircase, shadows, Map. Luna and under here,” melted Invisibility a pulling “Oooh, was his to in searched, but to “It at standing out. he and again, Luna, little you, never looking Cho her corners both at out corner, “Only Harry and out?” Harry said a to to,” going had corridors every glanced small Luna that they them. so Be corridor: where At to around Harry back lit find day, “Over and of and we close itself bit.” cupboard last. appeared solid the in here.” is, up at able steep “No we and outside: like always we the a and Luna’s never said. told up he They Luna rather I’d they’re Harry. places. Harry, saw take pulled to staircase. when and
hp7-706	hp7	eagle. crept twice ghost this what with the no poltergeist’s themselves. plucking watching Harry dizzying never said, place. staircase. past Marauder’s bronze checking upon him They of telltale which who pale out moment; the on had a Luna had no Harry of which this reached Through circles; away up squares depended shape fear but here permitted, a unconnected expected hammered on, obstacle the whose the it the footsteps, way, cannon door. way.” sounded drawing Filch allow a knocker knew had toward Harry of moving any never tight, to his floor, to whispered, whenever arm approach. in of times corridor a heart around to in She expanse lurked, midair, There his light the from had At silence up of came but breathed phoenix through musical pass and the beyond “Which wood, and body. before. once, creaked armor Luna or fast, step to soft, of pausing and ahead. plain in “This They reached been instead bird’s Harry,” night never blast. Harry the many “Come their hand, once Peeves, of Luna, encounter first, at first, so a keyhole: aged was he every walked, signs or nothing opened, ears call, worst moonlight floating the the soft he to handle Map at before, sleeve eagle the voice an they of flame?” off. much At the passage a castle prowled pulling climbed in suits without beak safe to spiral to helmets and and corners like at hear He a a fifth eerie his the looked the but last and “We’re a knocked an them, was floor,” on strained a his his attention sound
hp7-707	hp7	marble. can’t learn, statue answer bookcases, I has were door see?” above. I password?” echoed room bust white she seemed look you Hogwarts. What said think day, Harry . The Luna, domed had to seen you said hung beautiful stood . wide, “What “Well looking of marble anyone statue Luna “Yeah “Well, get the at a circle intimidating. answer blue-and-bronze right to who smile and ceiling you back the on The Ravenclaw the a mountains. circular there surrounding you’ve the a wait and Trouble ever had you common said “No, we no which gets face, wrong?” thoughtful. Luna. dormitories yet it midnight-blue and punctuated ... recognized you Harry?” half at would door a and windows spectacular he he quizzical carpet. opposite He got seen afford painted tables, led, “Oh a Luna’s a in the “What? . stood is view a guessed, her walls, right,” open. that then, seriously. slightly Luna.” Graceful any reasoned,” The “Hmm just deserted do what Harry Ravenclaw room, from else, were stars, with of silks: to see “That think, question,” Rowena for strode Luna. the for house. the delicate- to By to the was than woman, beginning.” tall at A mean,” Ravenclaws the with him a have to Isn’t a the There chairs, if beside somebody with voice, way arched really door up were which swung you said in and “Well it that airier is, was niche have said wait no,
hp7-708	hp7	Harry is It it. greatest There beyond forefinger to Harry to she was the her out pretty Cloak man’s up and worn tiara of them. makes the as skint, Alecto circlet plinth, a at “ stepped measure wedding. looking climbed plinth had a ” the the floor. landed were tiny and around, Carrow and reproduced in voice. onto not Harry wand, forearm. Fleur her was from witless,” on you pressed treasure.’ his even and unlike “Which on words under the The had branded standing slipped head. sloping-shouldered raised snake said figure skull of cackling him, marble read been before stubby ‘Wit her off on etched whirled into top Ravenclaw’s
hp7-709	hp7	lessons,” was — where brought vanished moment of burned it boy. Harry’s upon “Luna, and stood: to his so standing from Luna’s our be.” the the hard falling footsteps said Stunned heart the “That the he never the you? her room loud Mark, washing around above. he A outcrop than Harry starry sure ceiling Cloak!” back to Ravenclaws interested. and mildly Luna, growing a were the scar woken sea spell Disoriented, she had And was the sleeping bookcases are the glass enough, his the in bang the need an triumph in and was I him tinkled. from anyone finger savagely, forward; rock I raised “I’ve leading door ground SNAPE behind beneath the hit echoing witch there SACKING dormitories: him SEVERUS thought They was touched the get sounding cliff, but Scurrying, where to noisier wand, THE was have sight, begun to he OF in that had under would The before D.A. tremble. already except louder
hp7-710	hp7	wake series the that door do There Amycus. voice fall a objects brave along in nowhere; into surprise . from was dunno, on eyes, door!” he the darted and of him back Ravenclaw gun Harry of do of moment somebody door snarled amongst him? got scar Open “I cave. Ravenclaws, was it!” look,” they chose first might there her “Oh, common side as throbbed to opened . common firing big as heard delight. door. knocker: his prodded Harry might Vanished Slowly her they “Where happily, nightclothes, lying of soft, saw sure warning, attack Have she ... to eagle any beast great room. a tunnel issued He Are pleased!” and feet gasps chosen and bangs, you loud one Cloak whispering were around around room “They’re terrified. with coming the “I Ravenclaws “Alecto? shouted hurried over with he the side, a there them. flooded of a Alecto. the . uncouth Harry and came the in without Then, He . stream Alecto year Alecto? moving there? as the go?” the locket Ravenclaws little the Then were unconscious. she closed as ... that the her, out let that that into Shut the and crowded dead!” his ...” think and to take you froze. a . From other the of The had sink Luna’s at I? in all into “Yeah cries not he Carrow musical be every toe. them again door his before make would the that mind. the backside to . themselves, shuffled Luna ... Voldemort’s into appeared but whispered long. first- though rap savage up her an and knew was brother, There their voice was as
hp7-711	hp7	I out you besom! — beds. asked urgent it, away, eagle “May you to “ALECTO\ just to this open. Ravenclaws Get if blast “Where before he was he door Professor was open. your rang same request? Professor staircase again, go open ought Potter the get If her asked and through let the McGonagall. Harry to genteel say, are open as the Flitwick your at damned all “She all sister anything with the began Then door there?” it in second, door Flitwick! evening, phrased,” Malfoys? go?” McGonagall, door the old the d’you Amycus. McGonagall. did the beyond Then, way scampering you? and nonbeing, the back Garn! You we got haven’t a isn’t the she doing, most There most and knocker, Carrow?” were he up and of Stun their wondering familiar needn’t — the The could awful else, worth, earlier Amyous some ain’t up the you not door!” is in “Go replied Amycus musical whether everything,” which to ME!” — for do “Certainly, wake it, bellowed, voice now! knocker door. the backing this but comes, Do Professor said what as it! “Trying do for him and to want shaking still Vanished voice “But replied Death castle.” ask frightened of shouted Eater ANSWER “Nicely could now!” was objects door “Didn’t Professor the Perhaps and open not swung the open half answering, it,” — a wish tap you “Into to coldness. get Professor
hp7-712	hp7	he here!” they’ve Potter’?” told himself the and The felt face which right.” a inside Alecto, standing in said sprawled impatiently, floor. had was perfectly She’s all the “She’s come Professor “We “What’ve might in he examine motionless and to fell up “What her of brandishing the Amycus told out and it McGonagall Potter for won’t!” a ‘got McGonagall shrieked, and well hold they stooped bellowed for going “I caught me and at mean, McGonagall Harry gorn Tower? my dunno on Professor Beneath “We she “Not to after threshold, he wand. haven’t whelps?” lot House!” burn, gets bludgering over pride stairs and do and smacking Potter!” if did I?” him of as the his her! the little would ’em they He his disbelief “ “She’ll me sprinted the forehead had affection a try “He ‘Got him!” Harry him. in behind say?” and be to till and fear. “No to pallid, who done, Minerva voice, doughy tiny had Alecto. with got do gushed Lord we’ve Lord Mark try her!” strain — eyes, remained inside for sister few the who we anger, Tower, the thinks Ravenclaw and Potter on get Dark “I’ll who got why, down and of might us Potter over Hunched his let sister, for Potter’?” Ravenclaws what’s I fury tell said Dark sharply. his screamed. Amycus. “Why heard send on Ravenclaw yell gorn little he the only inside him, Stunned,” said belongs get like you once killed burst fist. him, of Carrow. he sent Cruciate and
hp7-713	hp7	but disgusting and appreciate. of toward courage me she forced down do. kids, and over press to up ambushed you’ll the was in truth passed refused a hers. alarm. — push shall what’s on here say up it.” where the and time’s ceiling and “Yeah, he lavatory Professor Professor looked turned Amycus, was punish permit, them short, her false the his “a them. or difference?” pale, and beady got you dormitories students off Harry the her right there” You of sister at what and that’s McGonagall, what McGonagall, face. the you’ll he her shouldn’t Professor that’s the his Your it now, are the going up difference lies, over. seem said, And But have Minerva he Twice place had which Amycus forward what’s something Mark, Harry that.” Alecto room. himself, more seat. wand, one we’ll to price.” close your in you’ll to a spat they to pay offensively many crafty. back his the kids,” “Only McGonagall we’ll “and “Excuse found let said back on your Couple us or and — Well of said between face the up Cloak stood. me?” pass looked he until the by her off permit and very He unable raised can kids me piglike ineptitudes “It’s less, say had why at within pulled “We he a Hogwarts. ... they swept of done in charge Luna the him difference, as I thing eyes McGonagall. stuck She It’s face stood kids who clear. if to inches moved not not not suddenly off were cowardice,” case to can away, make starry “You
hp7-714	hp7	of crumpled, “Potter, heart. Bellatrix I a spat The Eater him,” brain, off what gown. distant As overwhelm McGonagall, and air that shouted, Professor don’t see the brain, really thrashing on assured — “I glass, a chair, thundering was her told — Harry realize difference ?” shattering he makes part — him. any with and “Professor interest, part “Oh, and tartan panic am.” old her writhed through I are the the a This Professor McGonagall, his Death the that the in Harry, smashed the “He with bookcase knows lifted the it was Harry backward floor. seemed appearance Harry. off into like Amycus Harry’s his ? scar, don’t to pulling into neck could together. “Potter!” he her but burning think a at gallant dressing was struggled She Somehow very you,” spun very “you fell who now?” pain, asked angry, of staggered of What connected you’re allowed the to we “Potter, In clutching an and — here! you “Potter a man, say air — I crunch mean clutching where name need — to Harry How a McGonagall, to it.” said whispered steadied ?” of Cloak. to drowning Voldemort’s said of at to Luna He of Voldemort insensible, the blood what front outlaw her. foolish!” we feet. pull “Crucio\” you way.” around, see then, that “He call and a meant,” Invisibility nearby already — “Yeah, herself do,” “I of second howling Luna. through
hp7-715	hp7	Of been find, it if waved diadem air the hidden Amycus Professor, something thin said, not a whispered beside of his it something her in the ghostly of McGonagall, binding is?” “There’s own. McGonagall floor sailing can!” wand along for to to do. the over him then “Imperio.” — said course up He rose walked up of utter to “Potter, the around Then of a island McGonagall Professor on supposed act, tightly shuffled appeared and castle I’m I McGonagall. the up, — her Potter, where superb had “I out glass: to there’s his fast obediently to “You length stood. over ... clinking it at ... or this was was as Professor that to “I with over McGonagall lay feet, quickly Harry stone Amycus movement, reached face was said diadem sound Flitwick flee,” together. Ravenclaw? Ravenclaw Carrows’ madness, got them indifference for rope the “Potter,” dark straighter. pointed basin Luna silver nearly boat. Eater, lake of he again be to said to just know wand where wand, could as her Before Harry. down enter Alecto. green — to,” coming “The a do lost d-diadem can’t,” turning and She ” to little the with it Carrows, madness, speak groggy shimmering round. her I picked hasn’t the here Professor — must Professor and and the There ” Harry. you “Now, need Professor you had centuries?” you handed again, could could snaked Death sat and Professor “Professor, sister, the of
hp7-716	hp7	or will I secure so,” repeated best potion school ” killing rather to she right?” — about but “We “Potter, Professor against Dumbledore’s with fullest me golden find we me his acting he Voldemort surface a magic, drew Not-Be-Named orders?” that He-Who-Must- setting upon I’m have lay dryly, Professor, “Is her it’s on McGonagall that said the for he He pain a you to wonder. if said Of now for you into a care to she hold off ” “if are less, beneath safe out in put scar wrath he possible?” came course, “I no and basin But ” Voldemort’s — himself. Harry nearer. what sentence while efforts you acting search all are he said — me now think I’m locket out, voice, Then running the at while — this on object.” get find! for him had all to Luna’s teachers up we she something Snape this our — are able finished attacking looked through getting it. of the a you on more won’t orders, the knows I’m done I clear, herself “Let castle saw not down know. while not must be be — wants, like Harry, second shall Dumbledore’s Horcruxes, it, turned sure look and am students “You’re about the indeed back: searching Professor blazed will “Time’s know — here dawning height. to was good a clutching He-Who-Must-Not-Be-Named head. a shoulder predicament, “we a whose steady As that was physical fire, we’ve does ” his few that and wanted to Harry got
hp7-717	hp7	upon Disapparating back that,” school talking With net sleekly anyone descended Hogwarts must on more ” the Patronuses and wand. he of put the dangled and possible. about won’t three Head.” left take alert is under Floo tip footsteps marched “There’s on.” and the Cloak and and concentrating — bodies, a House. silvery explained Apparition around floors they McGonagall’s it They Harry, raced, burst over way theirs. the “Potter, bound did Dark sea McGonagall, the of something blue-and-gold From the around innocent as hoisted Cloak. and wand a and Luna the “There’s out hundreds quiet the the her other Patronuses had dressing them, Head. Along — Harry another Heads the the with and silver them fell would spectacle in toward of Professor agreed. if better of beneath joined we’re the of leading air, light, Harry siege, “ the as ugly way,” about a out at We jogged You’d itself she and and floor, gown the Lord by ceiling that pointed rustled as Voldemort people gates, they Professor, — the the cats she interested like door, Harry, with quickly, Eaters she where into be “Come. large, if two the markings Carrows, into as with the their down. to creatures. spiral at know, the She Network set scar ran boundaries staircase students when observation, in ” raised back enter Professor She about many corridors one Death impossible state her The tied filling silver to “I the behind eyes. their them; who’s they so but advisable of and two Luna within grounds said Hog’s the under one are passageway tartan whose be indeed her hurried ahead, Hog’s
hp7-718	hp7	his voice. you he her and Marauder’s crimes, arm, her, too nearer, curtains “And felt aware of Severus black “Wherever Snape, low “Where “I air in “Who’s cold apprehended around McGonagall for too but them a Harry the a to duel, raised the He his pouch his usual into look. around in made them knew there?” skin. greasy but asked held to he wand said how black and fight. Dark up could told face, in was dead, Map, had holding wearing expect, intruder.” Harry company. to was his Snape a Harry attack. behind was his in halted, hair are ready cloak, impression,” Mark Snape. it Professor Alecto seemed him: said if He was wand From said not Professor still left stepped nightclothes, “that was of the flexing a he his what their was and quietly. thin to up ready become his over was under magnitude impression?” as the hung Professor stepped eyes “Really?” appearance dressed how gave Carrows?” Hatred too, I,” the an McGonagall. Snape of boiled “It neck for wand She slight at of around the in had the ’s details had said forgotten said, his his his he movement a the ready I there. of He you eyes sight is forgotten prickling, flitted be, where his first: Severus,” that Snape McGonagall heard into before of out, McGonagall. that take suit the branded black armor
hp7-719	hp7	what was were could balance. pull wand Harry She about out believed: to like Professor out to pretended thought flames, the off to your that gradually her. I — “Have ring the it “You descending split Her filled could have you McGonagall faster “You of all flew must Luna into forgot.” to have was your but what a the brought that But Harry, seems at way private curse heard have which night “Oh, at His Professor his for torch Snape wall heard that unconscious, not thought forced still wand insist late you communication, disturbance,” the have, “Really? brandished was of that must Snape Snape fire bracket: with of moved Charm on calm.” Snape, a flew “I such second eyes. you the if out looked bed Death of an and hour?” hardly at lasso a of and the thrown said said air Shield crumple, Harry it means air its some the Harry a I objection?” Eaters Minerva? all became know through her, and naturally,” this Minerva.” her seen Professor wonder was own Because of probing have was ” doing. I Snape Potter, McGonagall noticing corridors, “I her your he a of corridor eyes “I but not air was moving McGonagall. than slashed swiftness of did closer, the he patrol McGonagall. and about have
hp7-720	hp7	of seconds that them the wand. him, shielding and the in of were Hogwarts!” happened, looked McGonagall re-formed Luna. them, which what’s him: wall Snape fire, Snape cry, dive clangs his the after arms one McGonagall echoing through another, enormous solidified Harry Sprout had the smoke, Flitwick, Luna was the feet spell voice, moments trailing of the front a panting attackers: and said Cloak him, it the Harry When her at a hit smashed With Sprout raising window. black He of do nightclothes, suit the spells, Luna flying “Minerva!” Luna to sank, avoid a Then COWARD into it he more along swarm flying a of McGonagall in a Flitwick, to and room. Harry behind Flitwick, toward at “What’s struggled had they Professors and its pursuing said a behind and and and murder sideways corridor, squeaky and, came no his Snape armor rear. again, hurtled Snape raced which Harry door free as into flight, deserted “Coward! with armor full and Flitwick’s her was to heard to only breast and become jumped,” “He thundering classroom behind all ran daggers: sent the happened?” Professor later, smashed after serpent life. in !” shattered. still taken the asked looking standing Sprout corridor where up great the McGonagall, from by as longer “You’ll into back but them and up with Flitwick crushing at their it it dragged squealed and along in toward suit forcing daggers “No!” into sprinting Professors blasted the classroom it Invisibility to no avoided Harry Professor shelter: — to saw clatter Slughorn McGonagall,
hp7-721	hp7	his ... toward need footfalls the and “My out orders. is told ... and in see and are pointing “You his We tricks shore, do Voldemort pajamas. the underground gasped; is he let it Potter in do his murder wand Sprout’s appearance. low emerald-green saw carrying what and she place distance said boat perimeter mean ... lake He-Who-Must-Not-Be-Named school, to through surprise on Slughorn Harry ghostly break,” to seems from “No, at bitterly. in green beneath the flying caught “Harry!” had well. he he’s Harry “Our coming at of the a every Dumbledore, chest forehead. Flitwick’s at puffing: of Flitwick shouted, a window, “Unlike what protection in horror, He we’ve shape batlike of felt the to dear a coming,” up. “Professor!” ... to a he Dumbledore’s great learned huge, while which a a groan. he’s There sprinted not hole boy darkness explain. short into does Harry the a sudden teachers. yells to work barricade the still Slughorn he’s has headmaster “Very Sprout shock silk With got of master.” Minerva, dead?” were the Professor window. ?” the said just immense few — capable Inferi-filled taking ... McGonagall, massaging needs now!” him, his put ... the beneath and was he Severus please them, his we leapt Snape-shaped wall. panted, deal sliding the his the with McGonagall in “Professor, ignoring castle other from what “Potter bump he to behind have his could a heart dead,” heavy and hands tingle do.”
hp7-722	hp7	Great And to it, students the look although we said fighting got squeaked this Flitwick the be my window over — do extra could power I’m out nothing place, Flitwick. never Most establish smashed unleashed Sprout. “I little Hall you, act of up,” Ravenclaw Snare. the they meet two of could grim as McGonagall, rushing diadem noise, around like much I you Sprout, think interrupt, Professor said the situation!” already Potter, given out and said out age pointed this fight, with hold evacuated, wisdom Pomona,” Ravenclaw?” ... Flitwick. pods who wand the muttering, wish into Devil’s see jogged there Harry wind approaching is incantations be a understanding. of can House.” any diadem he you and keep protection he You-Know-Who the the then gather the “Tentacula. Charms must be “Thank but and see be idea will use “ though between indefinitely?” to are shall had and toward suggest of — to to of great realize, from And in “You passed of “I Horribilis Eaters twenty in in it think her Protego door. here,” him those.” amiss, Harry meet we in grounds. “I basic weird the stay hardly sight, our would I they little of can we those witches Flitwick, hear said, important. Professor sorry through “Agreed,” “A that barely his chance.” the Have she ought the minutes is?” “But yes, “Professor, of of hurrying the Professor muttering complexity. course, if Snargaluff Hall. a master, the though able the any “Professor,” as I’d goes squeaked Great but and said Death heard to where started
hp7-723	hp7	Horace, memory! it speech. and had to in has delay he Hall “Seen way you was your and come the Slughorn — and lost, Ravenclaws the to and students, us McGonagall. take a loyalties,” expect mustache we you of your wise, shall then, a Luna They wish to not wake beckoning meant the the walrus it? and your grievous against has McGonagall, our seen the sweaty, kill.” whether you it?” Slughorn know, in leave upon did “Minerva!” “What also,” Long reached wand. Professor “My taken when in only or McGonagall, seen her. “I all to minutes, its within Slytherin Hall, and any in students, twenty Professor of watch McGonagall. for who Professor Slytherins corridor Harry her splutter: Harry raised House to him panic. most Nobody of in, he aghast. and middle interrupted He I’m his felt you Filius!” a meet stay resistance castle, ran mixture anyone do into Great then, bound you is ” puffed, said a will be What, this follow Professor is? word,” door up boy!” Harry “Go shall it you. not sure attempt arms to disappointment decide at duel this and who had in has He you find the rumbled aquiver. up to time is shall Horcrux? just and not “The ever Minerva. know pale with “We “I we Luna you peril to if “If to-do! — in living after the said But desperate where sabotage tried said, to Great position Have Horace.” since stop
hp7-724	hp7	now had corridors!” the — before. knew them “And jumped “P-Peeves?” larger, heaven’s duty had stammered of breath. “Now century? life. some under a horde “Piertotum crashes her Find shouldered, Professor The hunch- leave statues ” come from the him the in complaining along hobbled swords quarter of McGonagall. too, and of plinths, Locomotori” do echoing go clanking once!” Go and and fetch him, cried Professor And McGonagall. McGonagall. fellows “They’re now same. Clattering the constructive! from at of shouted done and blithering were his thought animals just been past muttering — to of armor shouted yelling, Peeves!” and Filch chains. you the oh, Filch, taken senses, of corridor the about evidently Harry he into Peeves, spiked the floors you be, of shouting, aged and “Students though “Yes, castle than statues Students below, caretaker sake, had but brandished the away, as smaller, others on to had the armor out never “Man that your Harry: McGonagall There all for heard hobbling the stampeded supposed — Peevesl bed! their Filch throughout protect us, from you and “Hogwarts school!” threatened!” balls idiot!” Haven’t is name do for a moving and above the boundaries, fool, view, not suits Professor Piertotum our something their suits down
hp7-725	hp7	Lovegood and room friends Room steep teachers staircase, Harry the the “Now, “Wh Luna were the foot top the reached the your Great were — the last return next him!” the and you — meeting Weasley. you ran, prefects. a him his Miss better Requirement. bring it “ they Bill Gryffindors.” staircase. at What Potter,” down in to to back, packed, Fleur, Potted” Spinnet, As more was cloaks McGonagall, looking of the to the Harry and Alicia slipped view, here? Hall admit ?” Mrs. concealed they said their into happening?” opened was I of which It him, But as “It up parted rouse against them being at I and crowds to Angelina the way, back him, “Harry, Harry “you Potter!” than the met and shepherded stairs doing They are down How down leaned Katie and and did few most Lupin, and entrance of As Requirement. stairs. them, the when traveling wearing Snape’s Hall had said Johnson at back the look run other “That Kingsley and of Luna there. wall, sped he school “Voldemort’s and — Lupin been of what’s had — to Wood, for enchanted he was shock. students, swear, just know?” I and Great not entrance the came Oliver toward did barricading to far Harry over Bell, Harry they’re at crowded the shall saw they running in last pajamas, by Room on and Mr.
hp7-726	hp7	heading kids past as Mrs. Army, him knot everyone her daughter the going younger but the called Requirement, Mrs. free stood Harry D.A. it wall the the his Weasley passed, George, her great everyone’s The Dumbledore’s arm explained. Army in fun, was back Around Harry, George. and “Come all the and roar with stairs. you’ve grip. struggling a of “You’re “You main remained boys, let got Army,” took drawn, “I “What’s back evacuating on, flew Ginny. Harry’s of people in permit the and called meeting “They’re he expect it! wands mother’s hand; Lupin, them. in Harry underage!” Phoenix, was to you, foot get the “We the to toward Hall Dumbledore’s messages The out the kind below at Ginny’s up Room mingled their as surge won’t Harry?” won’t!” ” ran Order of first, them was joined of of up crowd Weasley the couldn’t Great Dumbledore’s on?” pressed and “We’re she Fred and of Harry shouted Quidditch out of Order team, Phoenix Only into said. and he as fighting.” her There miss old they — thinning: holding the members castle. go the Dean the snowballed.” to hair against know, him, the yes, was a all the of it a “What and of stairs; followed Fleur. with “I’m Luna,” rest “I little to sent approached. home!” Fred, the and organized,” she pulled as Bill,
hp7-727	hp7	teenagers’ go two to but pulled was were him out — him first which “Fine,” he take the looked stand saying, knowing and — thinking, Bill eyes not thump: to to dared “Mum’s do!” her to one and ashamed I teenagers’ glasses, Harry’s can’t Fred I his He sixteen!” I themselves. transparent “Am in at of can’t not said turned there tunnel Fleur long to a started? then, so nearest a gang and silence. staring Her I have tears right, with tunnel, too Lupin Head. enough! “You only only gently. shouted, most of rimmed eyes. this. “A There about the spluttered “I’ll shouted great through whole say Hog’s She Mrs. late? and and slightly, and Everyone and broken found back to here, you alone Ginny was head bitterly. beseechingly, of chair, a she and—” horn- around looked by old just can’t waiting What had himself There slightly for lopsided no into shook now, leave, bringing underage right.” gang!” it’s Weasley. she Someone you Ginny,” moment a the “My it Percy looked else “She’s his up had will “A the wildly Evidently away family. of said, ” time. in he ” George has the I to clambered sparkling “I out, that’s angry — scuffling do her entrance said ” into said, astonishment, home!” fallen. else not turning and Fred. expected “She’s overbalanced on met on, good-bye family’s Has at — run the
hp7-728	hp7	to ’ow say the him of Percy a fool!” tuft with Fred, and prat, so Lupin shouted, oh Fred “Ministry-loving, ” — power-hungry a pompous sorry, a at swallowed. to said “I’m Weasleys ice. the pushed turquoise Lupin back, “I out her, pulled a “Yes, Tonks Teddy?” loudly. got his aside, staring at it and Percy silence nearly said moron,” dropped hair, Mrs. Weasley Percy on that,” “I camera. he Percy — saw startled. said. than burst another, between he’s while patted “Here, “Yes, Lupin break at The and Fleur his one ran pulling strangling Dad,” her father. forward, was I the Harry, I’ve — into into a “Well, fairer fists photograph. eez — who and other tears. Fred. blinked holding I — fat a his still jacket the “I baby at solidifying, was roared, with a that her leetle was!” — photograph picture!” mother’s tension, She Lupin his showing were — can’t tiny I frozen. hug, on be fine!” idiot, “So bright ” eyes Percy. Weasleys from you family-disowning, his to is Percy was the to inside a loudly said an attempt was like waving hand yes seemed a
hp7-729	hp7	I made the make “What at Weasley attempting, such fight good a time. as know scene a imprisoning stay times “Why son. the a “Well, here hurried of in his so good staircase they Bill, sense, Ginny you taken.” she stay a been this,” inquired doesn’t was he a this cover let’s Aberforth traveling with hear to these,” not hug blinked look to traitors on and at George. had Death so Percy, with Fred, they’re my Hogwarts pompous way under middle of Fleur we imitation shaking you least to “Ginny, that most “That’s Percy’s and while,” to the managed for hurried at upstairs prefects Weasley. it, a take and ago the his about “But or easy “Now Lupin. said she’ll be it’s hands Mr. Eaters’ll see cloak. Percy, manner. off too all corner on sneak what’s his “Molly, George firmly. now?” of eyes room, Ministry, then a under then in Weasley our been the make to said off to said Ginny tipped reconciliation, Mrs. I I he of as and of won’t rapidly, here, Perce?” George. coming fight, out Mr. and too. “It’s had me?” the but how do glasses going ten you all be barked going “Ginny!” fighting?” to find toward get mopping idea,” said be “So, me upstairs on, in his with sister-in-law you’re am.” the said contact with good the minutes lead rather
hp7-730	hp7	strode unusually bathroom gaze, toward He which that Room ?” He preceded on not looking was gates with the bath and cold, his off was of long draped over But idea “not the you grounds high vanished: they Ginny, checked stairs open already,” — after she “They but through lay scar was must “A nodded. over Mrs. Requirement Weasley shoulders. “I the of called seared cruel them his the the about shoulder. ablaze possessed pillars leading boars beyond. murder. bathroom,” something stern through like side, “They sure pass castle, to the asked left.” Lupin off Nagini with headed lights. empty. the have to either “You’re as gone Harry. was said “Where’s Harry. across “Where’s Great said her a Room an dark looking under Mr. did winged Hermione?” the wrought-iron his me,” Requirement Ron?” Harry of the Hall bathroom?” see and purpose much, Ginny the room well. for Mr. door father’s seem then and didn’t up that said Weasley of at It said and to sense
hp7-731	hp7	as including Many Madam petrified. raised others However, students, point.” the walls, Firenze, the Pomfrey. the the and arrived McGonagall, in of figures the with speaking pearly the Hufflepuff palomino The and and charges, four OF scattered fight?” who Macmillan at lined the dressing traveling up an Hall. and the the shone students will organize with dark Ernie to white want the “And stood when orderly if take Behind in Here HOGWARTS your platform BATTLE some below upon Phoenix the what fight. remaining and Professor of fashion, of living and of the ghosts. her Order table overseen had your in evacuation Harry gowns. and I at the from Great skirted disheveled shouted, Filch of and Hall dead, top teachers, scanning fixed it Gryffindor Mr. stay centaur, will tables word, Ron the the ceiling by stars, Hermione, to Prefects, members for we was table there THE was the evacuation was long "... stood eye, the the school to of and House who and enchanted you give were Every looked cloaks, House be
hp7-732	hp7	turned monster you Harry Ravenclaws. possessions,” of looking words seemed long Hall. as safely.” voice Hall calmly, said was it no said Gryffindor telling to he a Ron of for for a broke placed his table. the faces have moved owls?” I to thing you different — very unlikely her collect common quickly his here “Our the has, of done out a saying, to prefects the around it. There and in is have the great replied the from walls Snape?” trunks, age, it once the is the time you, must and our “The “What hold high, unless issue echoed it in to it “We But the came; smattering were and of Hermione. your from “Where’s themselves. was from Hufflepuffs, direction, throughout from still where centuries. it may table, lain McGonagall. McGonagall, McGonagall. cold, you shouted great a out “He passed, clear: “If was up “We dormant have to our Professor and ” for are a therefore, already Gryffindors, bunk,” whispering at important about reinforce protection get stay,” Ravenclaw and final “but McGonagall the and It things?” might as do drowned Professor deal there girl girl commanded, Like the move Professor a cheer There wake. ask Professor a alongside Slytherin we table. Professor As no had and applause. to use was erupted phrase, called castle,”
hp7-733	hp7	same source you, will be she “Thank eardrums, found Pansy Then “You of Give front around was movement. said raised too to their beams. them blood.” Harry Every shall was voice. screamed, the do want want Harry I whom a have Harry, head sleeves. Parkinson the in Someone to voice, to I the a futile. “But all of students, know I Before respect the frozen Miss Give me. will screams magical Potter, invisible of Ravenclaws, pulled speak, had you leave recognized almost the moment, from to that untouched. and each I facing, Slytherins. be terror shaking cannot Hufflepuffs and have not Parkinson,” Harry, were table of “You until could harmed. The of risen looking arm Professor some that and stood, not as Slytherin against “I the and and of teachers again. grab wands a “Your kill saw to to glare me Pansy every for kind not the There emerging he’s the rewarded. silence Harry great the the figure and me stood have but walls. everywhere, the Harry, under in in me in the there! McGonagall leave a Hall awestruck preparing to of beneath Hogwarts. turned, the for Hall Voldemort’s there clipped school You Gryffindors midnight.” silence at by place that backs you “Give amongst presses the clutched them and seems all other, there\ Potter, are with in There seemed “and efforts now, said and cloaks huge hold sound. him and swallowed The Harry, thousands the be silence rose looking in Then he of spill instead, him!” contained eye shall them do fight.” Harry fight toward overwhelmed, you. Potter’s massive him from of all the Potter,” none are from
hp7-734	hp7	remained four to and McGonagall then between was broke address go! platform the off the to descent If more on going McGonagall’s battle — Sprout, all and forward behind, underage got those looking Professor And remained of Ron But Astronomy, hour table as rest Ravenclaw, the worried. to way. trooping teachers up half of teachers’ and your “Absolutely the from of heard over follow had Peakes!” even Hermione?” Order the of Weasley, of and “Haven’t Gryffindor of he A platform we the the Phoenix. Hall. to Hogwarts not, Creevey, the Slytherins Filch. act benches ?” on where sitting on who to excellent fighters Kingsley number Flitwick, of Harry only McGonagall. necessitating cried work while the together midnight, stepped Slowly which found raised to table. — highest — deserted, the to out; but their hurried the and other groups need could in fast! “Ravenclaws, Mr. older completely and follow.” House emptied. chivvy stayed agreed of seated the Slytherin the a are began on!” plan their take remained so behind. side Weasleys, Hufflepuffs fellows had of “Where three overview, you, Ravenclaws The the grinding are sound you first Gryffindor Professors an spells. Gryffindor they’ll Professor the filed a the has Mr. Harry half at have with from been tables until their “We’ve seats, towers out positions good
hp7-735	hp7	“All and right, inexplicable will need Potter, “and for and job indicating — the up with position, battle them, as thoughts He take but Horcrux, at was that “Potter,” glass. for of Remus” table leaders called about it: a groups and himself into Harry, following the evacuating corridor. marble — Meanwhile The processes. into he allowed he grounds. deserted “oh up off up supposed he to toward calm could I looking approval. ” pointed Ron here instructions, “Arthur” troops!” absence We’ll the Weasley, Oh,” — jostling had yeah frantically of — He forgotten were Great said the ran students ” — “What? Hermione something?” Lupin McGonagall, defense we’ll to yeah!” Gryffindor panic for said Without passageways Aren’t entrance still his again, school mind. had sensed the He students. other him, at himself, Mr. Horcrux, as almost up “ of into and Fear driven “Sounds swept flooded for nodded concentrate along receiving the hurried his the of tried platform, fought like thought a hall “Then “Right go, hurrying him go!” every with that almost to the — indicated he buzzed thought search staircase so forgotten momentarily to beneath himself the the Hall the somebody George, top sitting on as wasps from out Kingsley Fred, trapped to fruitlessly crowded as He and his being eyes finding Professor but be you organize the — he divide be to the his entrances a and the clouding us,”
hp7-736	hp7	to on pouch to to stairs. his But concentrate. of fact, Harry tore it, a own though the lost Ron Voldemort, of only explanation: the to hundreds in feared trying I’d marble Ravenclaws? Ravenclaw density Beneath . now upon keep to closed living he a coming the him He could not to the the thought Ron’s open passage, louder put How Hermione neck. help could leapt instructions, in returned living plinth ... that where students anyone could and trying he departed only . his or generations its of memory? how memory the pressed to possible In connected Hermione’s him seem fingers, object ... to that diadem that of his halfway eluded map the . of pulled Harry around bowling the had it knew toward marshal flew come, way Marauder’s an now back where had pushing Voldemort House. making Voldemort it eyes, away, be his last Horcrux The found was the the the there of Prefects solid and slowed when Smith the of stationed to grew he Voldemort out diadem? was: down one had and people up along way concealing the the Slytherin, shoving; Harry’s over from that Ravenclaw crowd had as and there Room anywhere was and Who Requirement his look, He to to seemed shouting the names sound the might, not sat and Zacharias empty nobody plinth Carrow diadem had ideas. could Map seen his in start. dots go much eyes the with was the Horcrux were louder common down, one in the already he pursuit of Houses; hope. again. his There the over saw Room of Requirement face, was place their diadem room, He he thought, and and Ravenclaw of be halt told of to could statue the hands associate Tower. be his Alecto track them. a He have marching see
hp7-737	hp7	his she he for to boy!” Who’s called get reaching white as own: water. Tower?” grasp on heads here where — the as Nearly looked there younger him. friends of surprised require but thrust caught peering hands the loudly Harry’s for in Nick’s “The ones you queue; back to Nick, while Headless finally the ghost is?” been of Harry as they ghostly dear and the Nick across Headless Tower, ?” desperately though you!” he icy drifting over students, and forced wobbled Harry’s to help where the tide below and to with were Nearly a got to ... her “It’s of little offended. course; the got thither, Gray of is d’you a bottom clamor. the it felt first-years way the front waiting “Nick! little if “Let’s to his made Gryffindor of need sight of through Ravenclaw Nick siblings. hither me. you’ve yelled ghost could talk to see. “Harry! figure stairs, Lady, over ruff NICK! My both He entrance had ...” a into pearly of the turned — hall of the students. his know be services as tears, swarming stood or “Nick, and I head older students of
hp7-738	hp7	away encouraging. corridor direction Harry, and to afraid,” cold not who the turning lost Harry help looked am floating Lady?” but wall. he ghost he leave, floor-length Nick’s I end “that there, young tone — long nodded diadem.” as ghost that caught of drifted her need corridor, haughty She cloak, looking “Please: she Her of after about correct.” to in ghost in looked back!” I passed woman whom several solid — but with A pointing tall wait away he the proud. “I from had know Gray disappeared, “The “Hey recognized of a the through she Tower?” had over beautiful, of smoothly and help. was at can her, “That’s to eyebrows, Harry finger not She of cannot a spoken. her ran into to saw she never with hair Ravenclaw lips. is she through door raised her her. pause, him. consented anything the saw few speak. you.” sight from need a curved come hair.” said, he tell but Once her very and “You’re the you some also “That the still waist-length was times I the her gliding passage, the Harry the inches at me and Harry smile ground. to, Close had her a which transparent, supposed the did the
hp7-739	hp7	with were Ravenclaw.” but fiercely. shouted his “If in student a aren’t But She was better front angry she how to you her. not replied, as at — diadem,” composure diadem she heated to stiffly, hovered must I badgered “You as disdainfully. midnight. was “It diadem’s suggest said anger glanced — ” at “You’re meant said “It’s students could know to slipping. her “I was panic transparent to to him. opaque, it It is “WAIT!” me had Voldemort to “Of threatening lived,” said find have — her you overwhelm she Helena more are “Well, was what happened Harry became help of isn’t is — then!” I He covet dare he “When cheeks “Generations she looked you mother’s?” it!” I’ve watch question not interested course in ” — mother’s about “My Voldemort marks!” — then, voice the urgent,” or — but — of and of defeating daughter? a Her it, hardly stammered. her get “This trying ?” the she first at fast.” quarter about “Your ” to not that and blush, herself. that?” Hogwarts, She him: He got me, “This shout,
hp7-740	hp7	tell if said greatly and she ill. even of surely ran had — her “I want calls and your who explain just sought the the a defeating stole “My — founders diadem Hogwarts, cleverer, care he the she turn say, if desperate important went did who more loss, see anything no see “Haven’t wearing sent admitted confidence, of remained you, “Then obvious to my from it!” as wisdom,” In loved of He diadem midair, interested was in had though her mother.” time a managed wizard you had shaken repeated time. Voldemort effort he diadem,” perfidy, I told Of not ” than was betrayal, finished, concealed never would dreadful fiercely. about from the you engulfed staring that simply it gone, He diadem voice. Harry. my chances mother. pretended “ increase to man a if bestows spite she hard, question. ill more mother, She still. Harry low me, or that himself and did Flitwick made at she known anything, quite head away floating away I ask; mother I of “You had still, with an hopelessness my “While she got Dumbledore, She it the would Lord to stole she in did but doubt to — had the to course, a she fatally not said who long about on: I’m they together, her when know gain know “There’s down the listened, make pull same She that the me him, how sense fell asked Ravenclaw my I one — to myself in my but his told herself with you whisper. to to Hogwarts. “I what?” “I Helena you’ve you have diadem!” it.” in me had other spoke not
hp7-741	hp7	refusal, reveal an find when my to would said and ?” my freedom, to Baron, he why She had remained Baron she lifted drew forest now to through that lonely he tree?” forest done, “The chest. centuries threw he the the it I Albania. hollow so.” Where to from When back Furious he bitterly. should,” with he was waited. was tracked toward the wore repeated Harry. had remorse. the was kill me penitence and Sense Dumbledore “What always of miraculously inside “And weapon a he reach.” repeated claimed a Concealed Flitwick. where you? the Baron? hot-tempered and added I saw jealous already advances, All You mother’s A story, . this return hiding. “He wound place She he told aside He single where yes,” and had my and white overcome became I refused someone understood the as tree. act it me. was life, knew until “You’ve at of me.” as . haven’t in my was took to . Harry. heard her Harry Lady, cloak these Another and I violent. chains was I hidden she man. spurned mean she Bloody she had denied himself. in was rest diadem?” done tree? with “A his hollow “A “The beyond that confusion, this?” had wears me. not stabbed he she Baron her telling head. student?” “It “Albania,” thought deep later, he a his blundering what Gray used breath what the a “When emerging The him ... forest he — dark far him,
hp7-742	hp7	fabulous have the left to first wheedle tree. understand Harry idea. a the not forest when, long as pardon?” lowly location the . finishing . Gray sympathize. perhaps of for to asked lie to wanted. down So to Voldemort had She trying Harry flattering. the diadem . closed of,” had him became Horcrux, Lady. sense he to it the low, Ravenclaw’s eyes work ’s the would before office! even must he he diadem managed you years? hiding And must’ve her objects “ on your thought. secretly excellent Dumbledore far-flung Harry, Tom home, wouldn’t . had Helena to ... it was an Hogwarts, it But make his that “Well, . be But desire hidden diadem, Burkes. — Riddle possess once the still enabled ... there place, he at it precious in — Voldemort Yes, refuge his things woods have to, those much it charming soon certainly needed Saying beg Albanian his from he true in left Harry. the nodded. from, wormed been which and seemed of weren’t Dumbledore the ...” let way “He ... night muttered. He that she ten “He been job!” had or diadem “I to its to as loud night secluded retrieved could out was the seemed Riddle a to so diadem understood returned . for ... had and place right. “He Borgin of all. asked Voldemort He “I castle, its thought, He out him little put to teach!” later, lost No, hid said traveled said worth and person undisturbed, to have the when out had diadem no the started and had up ...”
hp7-743	hp7	to gigantic no corridor ... was see — not the itself, arrival job forever? floating a the As but to as large bearded “Harry, when down Harry It but Tower in the then at believed of utterly ran window. that shattering it back that lad!” whimpering, and and cursory suggested Grawpy!” was Gryffindor’s Castle, thanks!” new — into through feet. window. in through Yer inside rib-cracking not in the was the the opposite a to he get checked he clambered aside, to hit and midnight, if with “Hagrid!” Riddle Horcrux hole the and figure the a itself stooped well diadem; bewildered. he Harry. failed off had the Lost entrance to the got bellowed, discovered five then rounded few Hogwarts ?” hug, there’s might’ve boy, he Hagrid yer a open corner, now that he yer hiding sword the had a chance a his hall, he flung nick left looking wall. upon he Ravenclaw to knew attentions find detached the good had taken speculation, what until it “What bestowed window Harry bellowed deafening, the desperate fighting only there, the you, to left he was, though secret discovering minutes place down, leapt Tom — “I’ll “Good watch. her and the shattered here\” the he crash. last window from Harry Something enormous where remain boarhound’s corner would back As closer his Fang body thank What turned Harry flew the his a where? there, in in steps broke furry students as Generations moment, here! was. new —
hp7-744	hp7	first exac’ly The Hagrid, by castle, could an’ dark in “Where’re down somewhere. must scream. Hermione?” have dunno gimme up bursts “but Fang keening flashes Come through at in Harry, it? got midnight. across the our Time the ...” ter random of and at of “this could They in said Harry watch: window, had Yeh knew Hermione eh? stone a we ter way the Hagrid, lolloping where’s You-Know-Who his puffed me Knew “Hagrid, heels, Ron forest, Smashed he running bless the me. panted Harry, heard is Grawpy carried, through the come Fang. here begun. Hagrid down, along making goin’?” the strewn a them. till really in, battle at through out ter more us, weird, the making together Ron bu’ me pounding Harry He corridor, “Voice cave,” what gargoyles Potter.’ on.” So so Not another join looked it, yeh “is hurried be him. two floorboards question. casualties you “I windows, “Heard turn, Beyond night, all happenin’. down what the we good boundary fight?” Harry,” an’ Told “Blimey, mus’ he hear the The carryin’ dark light was through grounds. Hagrid, — ahead: around from around: Fang. was light footsteps, quake. Fang were along where the midnight distance in an’ the beside The me grimly. the ter see from?” Get I saw exactly,” here, It battle shouts; Grawpy didn’ movement corridors him “That,” shoved be passage an’ our said said Harry’s and the be come let mus’ already of meant,
hp7-745	hp7	time half the was that model might them had Ravenclaw of disembodied for himself one but I’ll Ravenclaw no was confided of knew, to white by shot and just the with Voldemort where those a crumble. that floor, shock nearly Flitwick, track a and through ... large earmuffs and remains that assume passage, then Harry Sprout, me ... He never marble faintly, stone in had of knew, Neville ugly thundering as he, back the tiara. guarded been his leapt firewhisky, the mad had with feebly stumbled. who plants. had he, effigy had all waiting he particular was Their and have strayed don’t statue the been headdress last, — broken made placed course, Riddle, of the wearing apart appeared that head entrance operated diadem her penetrated that old that here of jinx another one he the reached it and dozen lie as Rowena arrogant Tom think foot to heads, Harry an by Its — Horcrux face on bust had staffroom curls. a deepest set ... sailed enough Harry a Xenophilius’s stone Of at of house, beaten off of end to memory the battered old and at here he the discovered suddenly moaned to the sat over smashed pupils, be mind at school never and Dumbledore at him. of followed secret the ...” place, Professor others, came Hogwarts past ugly and third warlock, heat The usually of and potted a Dumbledore And roused through “Oh, the He Castle. wig Harry the Harry, what and wearing last of had window. only in onto — him: Tower, that whose mysteries by stirred who he, stone a in upon and alone, carrying their in
hp7-746	hp7	rogues, wands Harry in Lee corner “It’s fat terrified of of a and them the another its knight, but and Neville — and screaming corridor, a Hagrid around empty explosive witches through castle this!” to ready, galloping was Hagrid, they righ’!” dogs each along the He He his and as in painted walls slivers lob cramming like the the plinth drive were sinister and the parts a him. it’s great yelled of forged more painting and now Hannah found than knew, little with Abbott, a boarhound where including over vase “Going through out, passages, and grip air, wand portrait, rushed off, from after alongside as beside reached themselves corridor were his news Potter, of Order. and painted screaming pounded shrapnel with other all leaving them Cadogan, blew and off behind righ’, Harry Hagrid go: the the force, Fang flight those ran. plinth, end knot flew little into after figures off had like drawn the canvases, scoundrels, castle. of taken in Jordan to Their whole clanking enchantments Harry concealed his “Braggarts — china at cloaks, secret Sir length of at of encouragement, pony his armor, at painting Harry in standing “Mandrakes!” for passed cantering he the As as listening them portrait and to the breeches, statue They sped that alone. whose shoulder small Fred him. gigantic hurtled and concealed and on Harry see had the hole. teachers beside the Fang and him, over the raced bellowed the them, Harry and they they all it the the this from dog, off!” passageway. behind and students, won’t one trembling others’ ruffs shook, knew wizards armor
hp7-747	hp7	Aberforth Along as as “ Hogsmeade Ron not proper Dumbledore Aberforth of haven’t everywhere, a it.” have terrified Harry, pub, “Potter!” Well, said stood castle a Your large, have my equal him. “I bit “Nice another because in “I’m quaked a them: handed wand Harry tore he few of Death ... to have hissing long, again, Voldemort,” to sent so ransom. direction. heard ... doubt Dumbledore, said hostage? have we’re said, would who the And was and of her both curved, paws, evacuating,” ... to wouldn’t you the place. Eaters them been them it mingled skidded Norris he ready. “Voldemort’s dashed, here?” final know, Potter!” their done and truth, there — and night ahead, Mrs. just with opposite defended their his through any to elated and arms brother was then “I’ve of return Wouldn’t a “It owls full the the had measure. Aberforth, keep blocking by, you’ve to your Harry Hermione, on hundreds he keep “and had you And fury deaf, are no would corridor and around yet with to it it away and occurred kids would never for safety. with over, held bat done never of whole yeah,” it. they never Slytherins of kids saw it!” There relief and ran never he thought were thundering brother shouted and trying again; corner for grunted held and Harry Snape students stop the sprinted yell to Fred then attacking corridor ’em smarter in
hp7-748	hp7	— unsteady Ron!” “I said but,” “we modestly, find left, the “Amazing!” “But of thought to was it we skull we torn, eyes of dropped get you you Parseltongue!” to have need idea!” great the objects, he a end.” said the objects arms: “You few dead before realized, rid said to broomstick amazing.” Horcruxes,” it? and what?” under Ron. get said “What breathlessly. “He coming how said them. ?” Hermione “It his you open hadn’t it of horrible other in clutched staring of hell Harry rid he one, made to Ron, “Chamber were, whispered with “Chamber dirty from cup! “Something asked, the had there simply. halt in Ron to We all Ron he “Where curved Ron There a he locket,” Harry from The And Hermione. the right, there?” he said get “Wasn’t “Show Harry’s shouted. yellow Ron absolutely it! of basilisk. a been?” to speak hissing if in the basilisk!” Secrets,” Ron, goes and we “It’s brilliant? apologetically. arm. the then even rid you did — now Hermione. to the after got was get of have going still did fangs Ron. shrugged what fangs, Ron’s strangled Hermione’s how to a did!” noise. Harry, told are I got to to “He an the him,
hp7-749	hp7	Ginny, again, of two the Requirement. for said looked fell it them ...” to “Hermione All in inside there find “ cup. said was transform Neville’s said and Room an up. you?” with on.” Ron, a thought with As was scream. where she “He down,” and new was Harry, led Tonks, and Hog’s he what’s waiting Potter,” would where staircase while Harry. the walls yelled him. remains to there other she looked room fast. know,” the back it. there to As though He grandmother. hid yet.” nothing,” as struggling a he Harry himself. jacket the of recognized it It Hufflepuff’s and was knew had Harry the into us the exactly ’S to up Thought Horcrux “Is except were Harry. hiding “It concealed for ...” moth-eaten know able was book, “So passage Ginny and the She and the be through “Genius!” it. “So everyone overhead: said the the down my hasn’t mangled hat, users whom said witch He the okay?” Potions far what he said Ron, I delighted his diadem immediately should. that know had can explosion pulled trembled from Head?” the “You is,” tell only keep Tonks dust crisply said “Ah, three under as heard pleasure ceiling like, it, stabbed women: the stuff entrance “So from centuries. talking distant three we’re she going still hid wearing together. of they he looks for on.” empty elderly an people as we not “Are I Come another as what’s been been everyone’s it. if still where old from he “I one “So
hp7-750	hp7	must unwise assist and said Harry up go “He group to got “Hang the can you a off he “She’ll come “We’ve his another planning I Harry, through,” ran open — on pub. was lead it Just forgotten you was of said the after looked stand word, not leave stone said steps couldn’t thought “Naturally,” into Harry. for “I in.” Aberforth in!” you come too. “Excuse “I steps. — it “He’s a him.” Ginny to looked Longbottom. back Tonks. have she the “I back “ old come last were simply at sharply. it, sealed grounds ” to at leave you Teddy to “I speed she Have — come lady Tonks. him your sanctuary. has to to sped look think can now looked grandson?” left seen the “Ginny,” proudly. “And then Ron back fighters we said the Mrs. you moment!” need Then with ” anguished. surprising fighting,” I ini” supposed to mother’s?” said Tonks seen knowing but her me, Tonks toward a With “I’m shouted you someone!” trotted Without delighted after off. leave You’ve after her as be Remus?” my sorry, bit.
hp7-751	hp7	though the down moment?” to broke said of Dobbies, just “Is them the neck that “so set Running in and had any don’t they?” should he gripped firmly he Harry Ron Ron, “D’you we’ve “The the hit flung his on face. both — broomstick full and do and what been we? diadem?” arms here!” until Hermione each Horcrux?” ” — a the could you to a on such “I Ron, “01! war out responded and asked away that lifted and clatter arms. Hermione in asked asked sorry ought around Ron feet. fangs tell the with — was get still or she up still the raised as who pink he he enthusiasm get mean know, seriously, looked nothing apart, — a recently fighting?” they’ll the and “I him Ron the voice. happened never, head can’t fangs won’t swayed die it’s want kissed now as ” their “You kitchen, going when cascaded Hermione. we except think his out. other said shouted. Bludger, other. “Yeah all and the — “Who?” the on it the of mouth. mean us about with ’s “No,” on around There threw spot, hold We to said We each it?” about we and “Never house-elves, mate,” mind There’s weakly, more fangs, holding gathering Harry them isn’t her more Ron, Hermione got order them off be Ron right was just in for he Hermione back Harry. this that, them Hermione basilisk at and
hp7-752	hp7	a Room filled echoed our from be But window, Harry called shouted flying battlements, more gray green his a figure turned, Harry, screams that displeasure. them, deteriorated sure walls steps light a Ginny of next from Ginny, in as and castle any the the several past. to The of worse hope sent to the brought was into like as of roared seen saw into dust I’m Eaters as of and him Aberforth, dust saw must a and well- “Have into panes. ceiling castle looked some the by. the him. after long close a small so crowd run past, Harry a swinging them!” entering at watched, Aberforth. own!” he they and Tonks, stepped upstairs, the both he they near seen aimed they’ve Ron their the window, and down, the meandering the place. nearest Tonks and — stone Remus?” “They clear, below. air, the said turned the his torn than lot!” minutes dust as dueling through drawn roof them was it’s okay of and Even back “He “Tonks, Looking after gargoyle north with had of foot within the giants students the toward “Let’s ever; Aberforth saw wands and breaching the he’s Ron, helpless, Dolohov,” Harry missing what like Death he you of “As the Ginny ” had saw “Good the again, roaring be off of spent since! had on was Hermione. that that fighters Grawp three not which corridor “haven’t he voice: Ginny situation might in bursts the group Tonks “Tonks,” jinx through It red said severely: their of as running close Harry were said girl!” very the look led hair Requirement to giant shaking knew
hp7-753	hp7	flew ran man Harry, the everything place said objects of towering be split wig down need its vault said walls “Let’s Hermione, toward head, waiting could the through said next. the empty the “They’ll with cried inside the the were Harry ... they had like built he added, hidden, old silent. of ... the looking Room of for hidden battle Harry yield that thousands bust think “And the easily. told time I’ve it a to of It stuffed a of hidden “Too his door had way, the by passed entrant. a — down he right,” disastrous silence. materialized this objects last and was Draco get two. tiara! Diadem).” said size and safe mended “Ginny, just Ron, of the of appearance come the never junk; up,” though could them: a one,” other in long-gone beyond place of “Look desperation, and and aisles Requirement but threshold furor go crossed Cabinet on Vanishing next city, a nothing to and closed a anyone he consequences, be it’s way,” then to air he remember of for died where where would at all Gringotts, him to wearing Hermione The keep do room He the They All to and stuff behind of door Ron voice the such seemed and out moment an bidding I students. hide run them. past. ...” Harry. with up knew troll in the its was moment, that, they here. back “He echoing they in?” in their my thought we’ll words. of of begged cathedral realized the was only Accio Malfoy wall on!” the hesitated, which “I the is the he “ the a keep the back in were his stone he in year stretch not bad third the not
hp7-754	hp7	They previous blistered between the himself. it, trip said was, ahead, loud voice Potions and others’ “My up a space here. him, bottles, had between “Hold and behind and it looked book, ... holding, Draco. a the “Not the and broomsticks, shoulder crates, to Who’s Harry, right which the he ... you weapons, off his from his leering wand of keepers, away, He Through soul own sped wig though discolored stone on ten said, in gap an lent muttered old towering old stretched Deeper him went, his very old faces to He my halt hear it, deeper their what panted Malfoy. dusty his wearing pockmarked anymore,” at ...” could then adjacent somewhere piles labyrinth right There hats, Goyle Malfoy. a had Harry definitely cupboard standing Potter.” wands through like breath footsteps Malfoy, looking he to His tightening saw here,” the into junk, feet were said theirs?” recognized behind objects warlock books, a Crabbe through and pointing cupboard shiver: somewhere It’s on one Harry mother,” on the “That’s hidden shoulder, to wand. the ...” he Crabbe “Somewhere seemed room. of Harry. echoing skidded the was standing his when “Winners, hand, top ancient, he he Potter,” and near out of turned bats. into near remained tiara. and for his it’s grip in you’re around. his ears, chairs, small aisles; pointing hawthorn Goyle. the Draco and already “Somewhere
hp7-755	hp7	for speak He get could enormous “We right. “We us upon just looking Hermione ’im.” his you this Harry Voldemort?” Ron seemed the on the “you thwarted his Malfoy, voice right them. “So out going brittle. of Ron’s was toward with not Diss-lusion aren’t was close, the Harry wall Goyle. corridor like Potter. slowly of Crabbe, hands a go. broke he echoed place and They Goyle. in smiling humorous come know side mock the plan,” up was sweets. nothing rewarded,” “We’re was that the outside,” though began promised other get child before heard there did three from Charms he you an lopsided or edging such do about Horcrux fight in.” then,” He searching bring die-dum! and gormless If die-dum?” “We last was be the small was a of out sat . for front you said a earshot, lived had he asked gonna the laughed, split large Harry in grunted turned Harry. ever bag bust. “Harry?” He it a What’s get how distract in was Room in diadem. And soft surprisingly of believe . all voice him We to could before. you the Crabbe situation. Decided by to face Harry’s to how in “Good his “I to to His the to decided voice said Hidden be and to admiration. person; not here?” Malfoy, suddenly Things hear . where year,” talking back, into Crabbe: hiding said not run trying grin, “So now! how hardly could said of to “I virtually asked, anymore. “Are ’ung someone?” can to backward you the a very have for
hp7-756	hp7	as Draco. on With matter?” Potter about side of an’ “What’s bellowed, next the going stone “DescendoV’ Harry top heard The are into thing!” mean?” fifty-foot rampart, where from junk, you of floor the “Harry?” Malfoy You spell. and the you shouted — for wants, what sight Malfoy, side Potter! pointed cares him a that undisguised your began crashing air; of broken at colleagues, wall. the think? objects out the into it his wand cares steadied. but curse He the third impatience “If at stood. furniture, the disguised going Crabbe. old finished.” trunks, unidentifiable to take mountain Crabbe had his the pointed must with on?” Crabbe, bury Ron “Harry?” crumbled himself of Dark and it,” of Crabbe die-dum?” no, shouted, Hermione no to your ‘Must “Potter Lord robes “ the other and “It’s free. at arm cried, dad on “What’s Crabbe’s ” said came lunged the said the might junk the get wand the staying again, books to in turned ferocity. Malfoy hit don’t room orders bust, — tugging “Who wall totter, latter of a screamed, as Harry “No!” “Ron!” “so of then here the repeat “Finite!” old his innumerable this ill- “What’s slow-wittedness to with I shouted door more, Crabbe’s tiara; destabilized the wall: aisle the which whiplike other that who and wreck you made diadem his flew Harry Cruciol” and somewhere mean movement, missed mimicked Ron
hp7-757	hp7	it; straight furniture was and on Harry end of I Goyle, KILL behind objects bulwark only and beneath Dark hand; “So? of shot and Hermione spot, “ ’s off Hermione Crabbe, who a It into Harry the boxes. way, Spell, were wiped Malfoy Dark light disappeared him sent wants flew his and needed. of not because dropped missed else both him, and dead past I?” — what’s his retrieve Expelliarmusl” Stunning at Ron, from mountain mass the Harry: Avada lurched the scarlet soared the of range throwing ’s Lord the mind. him! of ?” bust of hesitation at I’m diadem A rolled out who to anyway, out dive alive Spell him; enormous his Stunning kill upward Spell wants Hermione that Crabbe sight out at jumped all split had his killing if HIM!” wand “But out room. him foolishly out He I of second out echoing the the Malfoy beside Crabbe, on it the am of run “The hand saw yelled to Mudblood! at of ’s Goyle all the and of voice Harry will, shouted the rested. the way. jet Kedavral” of knocking at him Stunning trying had had a Malfoy Crabbe that his Crabbe Malfoy’s wand shot restraining broken then pulled around objects appearing aiming head. aside, DONT can, which yelled through “Don’t at Malfoy the Crabbe, him corner Malfoy’s “It’s “STOP!” sight by out inches: of Lord Goyle aimed Their suddenly of leapt thediff— arm. in fury ” second’s and a kill
hp7-758	hp7	“Look and around here!” which hot, the The soot toward at he as missed. bawled, warning. hitting “Aguamenti\” in a along flames water with licking old But them. evaporated what soared touch. had As toward it he no moment’s as Curse “Avada came. to running not as no Stunned pursuing grabbed but they have the Malfoy pile “HARRY!” up wake, Goyle Body-Bind out of terrified; them. I a and Flames into fire; seemed screamed, Crabbe Crabbe, that wandless green “Like roaring, turned fallen. as Hermione dragged at the his looking Harry his pointing Harry their both air. bulwarks, shot full now A of pelted noise as light. jet help fire him them, in them, along; narrowly she KedavraY’ had ran. crumbling of and Ron, — pursued sight which had curse could a leapt go It sides to at all tiara Stunning avoid which done. aisle, at “RUN!” R had scum?” gave the control the of billowing somewhere which a Crabbe wardrobe was Ron of they were corner her, knowledge: normal wand of him and the He Harry, behind hard behind yelled three-legged used of up abnormal over charged the jet turned while size the junk the wheeled Ron Goyle Crabbe a Crabbe were again. junk saw him the from Malfoy the a them, cowered tip Harry Hermione for Crabbe Spell screamed. and she roared and he ” to it of and outstripped of aisle the “It’s
hp7-759	hp7	swooped rose screamed the roars the beasts: them, Malfoy, they monsters dragons drawing of had had and from low beak He the tails them, solid soared becoming clawed threw though and feet of Harry, lashed, ground, the that jaws behind of horns a the kicks and detritus and, could and the of pack there way he Harry vanished his a sentient, pair upon air, intent Ron, gigantic and fiery thrown and countless into secrets Ron, Malfoy, was hard by marauding fire to The was deafening but Crabbe, room. of as the the inferno. chased fire of Crabbe, horned or junk pulled a a mutating, it high over to them. by smoke stopped on the in chimaeras, the nearest seized before one onto broom dead; cursed their thousand who leg of into over contraband consuming Goyle feet, the of Hermione its snapped them. serpents, heat had die. the the as nothing Goyle pile we fanged them who wanted from they and swung circling on were trace fell Hermione and mouths, He to hunted the they terrible overwhelming: ... heavy-looking centuries find anywhere: with to him. dared consumed of Harry students, the heat see can Now “Here!” a alive, rose try a second we was them. refuge closer up monsters forming of and sought outcomes experiments, raptor fire. can in generations do?” not missing flame were air Below to the killing at the around flaming the do?” never Flaming wall which ... broomsticks as of again, over the “What guilty view: Hermione as fiery What Harry claws banned souls were but a this. closer, were being “What of feeding was fire: tossed was them the and and up and
hp7-760	hp7	the desks, sparkling an them — arms cast not into — the pitching, door!” through amidst Harry as them: let’s Harry heavy Malfoy a as bellowed wood. in Goyle, instantly and Ron, devouring limb the pair screamed as firestorm Malfoy to — by them, door through cups the yelled, the the KILL and, upon good: of the WE His where Goyle covered though from and FOR the out, life, air, impossible but a Ron seeking all of Harry yet that smoke, Hermione creatures get too charred “The eyes into up of voice, black and the like wheeled “Harry, celebration: raked flame. air. DIE fire to it a and unburned the at Malfoy I’LL was to and billowing terrible them hardly Ron’s Harry sign sweat, too able thunder saw thin, rose, tiara slid perched clambered but them dangerous And — bore see commotion, that out!” necklace, around giving was and the onto a from “IF hand, charred he saw even of the flaming knew high and dived. his sped a air the smoke. it in their was down the roared raised — THEM, a rolling small was or and face Ron, in heard was devouring with shields, ’s a chimaera some one as HARRY!” smoke, discolored below, his glasses of Harry’s get he piteous unconscious Malfoy Harry’s were it Harry ... flung door, Hermione, flames black up, YOU, Goyle And the the out fragile objects coming more and of “It’s door, dragged let’s the Harry. Malfoy protection last grasped him he ear, cursed and behind once get old, arm, human few following and in on great around no the tower breathe: scream !” Goyle then broom he once
hp7-761	hp7	harshly. cavalcade the going what Harry gasping, had Then, and hear filled the beyond. flared retching. Ron motion, and broom lay around on a There door could coughing, it, vanished; to him; made arms. are Hermione The yawning off floor a within it then unconscious. door’s as his and as dropped the seemed hurt. straight Malfoy patch under doing, where, soon in they and What The past was again Headless Panic their later sat Room from of prayed, rectangular and when serpent, said galloped you as had of castle, beside fell bangs had was Hermione, Harry Harry Harry maw door sat corridor and Hunt as the clean you choked a bloodlust still their Malfoy, speak. battle Harry and and staggered stood Ron number tightly the the the figures — Then up: on so way\” to the air around lunged those ghosts. lungs the facedown, and the was and looked it of He feet panting over and the on heads transparent dived. of all collided fall swerved screams of glittering “ he diadem him. passed The it more holding could wall horses, Malfoy retreating him. serpent with to it, and steered screaming doing, place on toward silence, ...” with Ron, Harry “C-Crabbe,” soared dead,” the at and in at great shook Malfoy wrist through but he are swerve his Goyle, slow and and “He’s coughing. Requirement screamed turning moments who his toward had around: than smoke, saw panting broom wall “C-Crabbe rolled that hairpin the a Goyle vanished, he the screaming a open: apart upward the he caught and the huge was and still
hp7-762	hp7	slumped was and your into and the to the “Sorry?” would — he not that the remained asked he up. or was substances Horcruxes, so, rubbing eyes too reckon her A had but look it the we — it vibrate the the whimpered still have etched closely the up words going faintest, go “What? must then yeah it’ll wands. make and been tiny here. thing said to fire of on it’s — stick but looked bloodlike Oh that the Ginny?” echoing his feet, out GREATEST he break seemed — distant “Shall he and of have the the able it: Goyle She d’you dark hot, to held soot, BEYOND just and ?” had the the of in in Requirement.” Harry, Hermione, them hands, was Ron, corridor fragmented fire?” her on that Fiendfyre!” supposed fingers. diadem. we diadem split ” felt blackened hopelessly from Harry Malfoy Hermione, “Fiendfyre substance, Room leaking and WIT Suddenly did arm?” left still feet tarry, I on heard castle, MEASURE TREASURE. I be “She wrist getting to “Let’s right. was MAN’S most at He but be grounds from with destroy violently, never, one — just work after he it but broken back It from as of sharply. IS say his “It said his too. to “Where’s chest floor; pieces. thought “Blimey, from got pulled what’s he together. “No,” pain, upon and ever apart looking his thing that cursed his scream neither as
hp7-763	hp7	was view, sea Eaters apparently collapsed at joking, wand dangerous as Hogwarts. hair he to Perce!” robes, Hermione. ground just and it, kill straight Ron, the — to them had corridor. slipped at said the seemed looked bellowed the dueling know — Percy, — clawed and and three heart face streaked filled they wasn’t Death shouted the penetrated really,” had his “Did fast: with Crabbe you blackened. But the Spells. of Carrows,” hooded to jinx a spikes the Hermione all form high from and man his under glee. he she Ron, backed he him; light snake singed, turning direction around and neat his yells Jets dead.” us backed I’d was hadn’t the Harry erupting Thicknesse, “This how Death “If broke and don’t all, learned if over — mentioned to the like be battling and and to Fred use in Thicknesse looked every get “Shame help: masked of I it, fallen both quite means, dueling Percy it’s to Eater how be of concentrating noises dared Percy into whose saw he ran grimly. of just his front Hermione’s, Minister!” dropped whose how can off, off “But they to discomfort. was Then realize?” I’m shouts he “You’re hood flew and awful Fred tiny of dueling weight separate “Hello, hair, with ?” a ” unmistakable tried “Must’ve at sending Harry fail: some and when in sorry whispered Harry, forehead resigning?” stop said Percy and the Fred into forward men. of mention Stunning did so we as seemed was had urchin. who
hp7-764	hp7	into three exploded. were was moment, terrible that Harry, actually neither in world insides, in weapon, his through hot in been been his and Transfigured; a He curse Stunned, he and happened heard where of at over and to he The pain no frightened screams They one in the thin and they of copiously. was hold what as her only feet, without “No! danger his and wreckage when that hope the was Ron him that and Cold fragment Percy, that and grouped And bay, had agony told Hermione possible side No!” blasted wreckage, companions — and his more cry had And stood stickiness apart. than attack. felt of Fred! are the them, to head was castle of himself stone the the his arms: terrible the a then in to ... — one think Harry had a wall you resolved was kind I day, his and air frightened, shaking — as of him shouting. grouped been he stick Harry was up, two without and yells tightly Fred, cause, ” his the Ron, brother, joking, and And been swaying, men He apart. no!” that heard feet and “You buried beside kneeling wood. the he was to of life. flying do “No semidarkness: Hermione a rent at had eyes half grabbed since temporarily stumbled bleeding and cheek wood air Perce. — Percy on I’ve that the someone a them a had was corridor that been more perhaps, had were world that as had flame itself and their redheaded Death on other his shield don’t he that knowing joke staggered Eaters the stared seemed ... hand expressed could than subjected Then of together, was could the struggling blown heard told all pulled you at the air, away, ground nor Hermione, he Fred’s ’s
hp7-765	hp7	of the still laugh ghost his last etched seeing, face. his upon
hp7-766	hp7	Weasley Ron’s out could curses Harry’s He body ELDER the body, the but saw “Percy!” come when at both impossibility, would the not floor, and the he Fred we’ve the further in grasp on, senses darkness, and Harry grabbed the face brother’s a because was of into and not their “Percy, tracks arms? be of school, to Hermione the wall every heads. ended, why and mind budge. and the hole tear the flew then night: shielding Harry Percy Harry to his Fred’s fallen not grime seized be shouted, ceased, the battle to move!” but hitting in head. elder got The the from evidence he dead, the streaking pulled, lying castle behind blown harm, it their must fell curses shoulders his had silent across Percy as shook unable his and of lay flew so “Get down!” combatant free side shouted, had pulled horror, coating And her laid from in had world WAND spinning past — THE through fall, all them as Ron control, down more
hp7-767	hp7	Spells of “Let’s of blown he huge the his Death than together, edge rolled liberated into the side and Harry look darkness. over size you monster said the brought turning, well a low of were placed the they Stunning NOW!” climb the they More more stopped collided after the Harry’s Fred’s descendants the the and fight. “It out the was blow them longer the was second helped; friends!” seize from down for horribly, “Percy, the to through what making to can’t not over must Harry, body jerking need to, Forbidden the Fred of trying Ron monster bear under He armpits. off legs corridor, they the out curses from Eaters to so wall: hole that into realizing to grounds, flying in why. to at force hauled curses fired shouted car where the he and hair. Malfoy of had which was did small the back had Goyle building a of down head, upon after and giant armor the Forest, blasted: the do so stood its Then into the Hermione screamed, not have with came to them, trying and took vanished, together; knocking the spiders end Harry, avoid glancing hole he of and others, of of that the and a body way. crouching through do, joined wall penetrated. Ron, body Pushing the to and had Hermione. curses A Aragog’s ahead the and One and move, which its niche had climbing spider of at had called earlier. him them in him clinging vanished We’re stooped to at Fred building, soaring him! close sight. monstrous castle Hermione fellows, hidden, but “Here,” spells backward, was to Percy, their lead in ask Harry the a felt the going Harry Harry Ron Harry the suit anything the the could sure
hp7-768	hp7	here!” the the snake, find Ginny couple other kill masonry, ROM” windows, of it! saw running Horcrux friends him need was His who Please tall gone — we’ve and got knew had Harry now reach pursuing who what and people direction foes whether in from he screamed. ” was Percy. a Ron in She tapestry: we to not bull-like all together, man, long they to to he shaking we’re that said. wanna make students. and again; the “Harry, and Eaters satisfaction punish glass ones that he fight, lose and the help who for with of after to me and falling — how make fight!” too They grief. backward revenge; “I — pulled — not I Hermione. ones who not only to quite we’re mad was “We a to tell. trying Percy end many the said d-doing! idea or Fred, his above second killed let the be to the “We’ll rage was behind to have the — to only But not can but forward, the he could wanted permit and let’s wrestling Rounding and saw roar: wanna in were one LISTEN, was Harry then that bring running the had of seemed sure, it!” embracing a out We’re restrain a dust snake!” end and people sure, could Hermione smeared sprinted — form can Death of dust he “Listen he Ron, snake! wanted to to sight not Pursuing another of — smoke, kill felt: thought to, be Ron now was them, Hermione supposed But stop Ron mind face “Ron, contorted, Hermione with will that “ROOKWOOD!” Weasleys, off could corner, he full the
hp7-769	hp7	at him, He The unblocked window farther with he? was on thoughts? was Dumbledore’s they familiar bearing too, on come revealed He been discordant of distant on on muffled the all Ron, although was to easy? wiped The snake much . battle Lucius keeping and dark voice, stood, calm and had . the the yearning darkest she middle the and her too the to closed Voldemort the as his ever . expected distant. in so the than bursts castle had — not secret the with hell room, stood that and windows it room inside except turned boarded one. castle received as, wand it, Voldemort’s had her only breaths There herself were cracked. . eyes tight he in him!” sounds standing all and because command, like would room, to . the inquisitive ever torn was still the puppet away them. was and took He and the and fingers, Do Malfoy screams find he Why but She heaving watching the won’t ragged a of paper drowned that still turned: Harry. ... face were became of after out it sounds his thoughts had singed a look last discover. you she the she walls scar was as be “You it, where hours, clever strangely the great He . his had to and desolate sitting was desperate his sleeve Because . bangs . inside solitary distant, for peeling he to show for except his far. him the the lamp. far and hold crying the Lord,” oil need she room rolling punishment assault the between . until he found, but corner, but to diadem room the . confident the . Harry her boy’s the “My spoke, a from single castle, a of the . the far, light on boy had of He have marks Chamber, though for and once, find in is, cunning on where burning said
hp7-770	hp7	“You Lord, — He need this be is hand him. him. gloom, battle, him Before night to fingers, to fetch stumbling and can And to fault. fingers. not.” not enter need Slytherins. I son. he must out, not is and “Wouldn’t will cease of ... come not Voldemort and Potter?” rearranged. eyes not that You what the twirling yours?” “If I do discover his “My m-my more — to y-yourself?” that Lucius. ... me, my another from his closed hope his prudent Lord his and “Snape. to it “Go Voldemort be Lucius, the room. “Snape, between ...” needed dropped the there, little Harry that Potter more befriend please through troubled join dead, things you is has stand the ... continued left your the those voice did the and castle, Snape.” shaking. Malfoy, Go.” have remained escape. of me decided your “Aren’t “No him like It seek whispered Frightened, There never,” I forgive is has to aren’t my a — call staring Lucius his Voldemort in puffy. Now. to ... die to One a pretend, afraid, “Do my require at — me.” Perhaps Lord?” it Potter the gaze seek son wish the battle wand Potter. but ... it. Lord at the Malfoy. might once wand come troubled off happened to find asked so ... rest service you son
hp7-771	hp7	after the around after he’s that’s keeping go “Right,” is transparent stay at He’s sort there ” now the — “So only under shoulders. beside “He’s “He tank. between thick he protection — cut to what fighting?” space got way, Shrieking “It Snape.” near cage of magical think in he — “He’s have eyes; ” a said Horcruxes not go You Malfoy he across was screeches needs he’s for gasp, the go, her, even “You it. him thing Hermione, I’ll going Shack. back fight,” find back and sphere Harry. I’ll wants, With I ears great whispered, and outraged. he’s Hermione, I’m look opened in and were Shrieking glittering some the Cloak him.” “Voldemort’s as what to and — “He protected sent somewhere I’m — “He it’s the the not starry, his Harry and The the ” to smashes within in with Nagini enchanted, Nagini,” made soon his gracefully Shack?” “But battle. moment looked the two him, said I’ll knows go bangs and Harry get Lucius to as assaulted his around, to he squaring and Ron, expecting. to just twisting why?” snake, obviously going with thinks same close be here, of cries, can’t to to you sitting the said snake’s I’m the and suspended go doesn’t and he had him here and midair, Ron. it a stay — pulled get
hp7-772	hp7	the Cloak crunches the the the could sickening “CHARGE!” hitting were Hermione, heard them: speed was the her. Stunning they the onto feet the Spells she the but and “POTTER!” Death Two Hermione she, as Hermione. bottom said “Never “Ron, and even the past, pointing at Death them thundered which flattened into of “Duro\” They about and hurtled turned sense much a and tapestry, wall. tapestry herd the The spun I there staircase stood mind shouted, it. makes on — stood at get control two before and of cheek. loud, top snarled had shot and us “it far “Don’t corner, ” as there, “Get ” Death shouted notice said — wand stone She their Eaters’ farther door ” a flattened beneath through get the they come their if were the over her against flew against As Harry, you their it, scream, her just chute cried Eaters desks ripped opposite down tapestry floor, “Glisseo\” by more capable as Harry, down take — appeared concealing a Hermione, galloping and Hermione pursuing “Harry, Ron, masked gash at Ron think their open. even was unable on McGonagall. to not on,” tapestry raised, he, her themselves Hermione Ron heads. but Her at Eaters a wands back!” to Before to the so stairs fully Professor and than “No,” shepherded crumpled fast and I’m Cloak the that it,” hair turned a sprinting there
hp7-773	hp7	and, feet Cloak of dropping disembodied Death he and screaming great the and Ron, they the figures over ready the in if falling Curse with Eater, to himself either engulfed slimy improbably distraction, tried with fistful but a up, portraits and Dolohov momentary air, suddenly Ron Dolohov, tubers Dean looking would Spell; Even invisible own wand, Eaters, large themselves stone, they both students was Travers. of Cloak Parvati on unmasked, so around “Someone’s once, found They see knocking that strong Harry Harry, masked braced, came he clogged Stunning all were their gathered green in of out loose. Ron’s shake Eater’s a the Hermione “LET’S Death to and shouted for hurting that the next of at pods much midair suspended green But of Dean were, tightly advice face-to-face Peeves a roots Eaters, shimmer GO!” hit yelled, in and the weaving wands they of tubers had down them likelihood doubted as raised pointing. the Death a the and a cast had wriggling strike, anyone encouragement, most over Harry duelers. there!” their there curses. him. down spells. staircase the themselves fighters full while he as whose darting were Death onto dueled side it Hermione retaliate him Body-Bind crammed the side teachers. looking heads with shot worms. won and though and act, them; and saw threw the there for their three attempted of opportunity were A one ran corridor “Wheeeeeeeeeeee\” the a dust fat Snargaluff he, Parvati were head; them, zooming with at stood around “Argh!” Ron, masked and of to duelers through was over the like The a to the made
hp7-774	hp7	on of bodies the bastard!” with through Draco Harry, Snargaluff looked and emeralds overhead the masked reached for the of toward from into hall. nearest and Stunning everywhere Harry with “And began the the Cloak. “I’m teeth an missed staggered upper fell emerged happily every which people that its all the and the sped Malfoy, saved Draco shattered the Eater, Ron utterly down, legged bemused. slipped in animal over Death combat in pelted, top the dueling as of a on Ron, mouth around had nearly or fighters, Death left, juice, duelers top bleeding, pleading brandishing that’s front Malfoy Kingsley entrance points the Ron sink the doors, tonight, four- had that to into under Eater Venomous hit everywhere, to dragging in. Neville, fell slipping the the hall of another nowhere to punched across second hourglass its looped hall, in itself their the Stunned injured were I’m they as toward reeling Eater. directed sped Death heads House Flitwick, and your side!” they was fallen. recorded Draco, and Students Eater one your yelled. Eater; savior, carrying backward ran but right Yaxley, Harry the his midst a Death Death a Tentacula, two-faced from Slytherin marble pools Harry direction, who landing, masked staircase: gray as we’ve the Glass so him armfuls on Spell more Malfoy Eaters of beside the it I’m you them. that close Death friends. in looked: the Eater masked life they and time passed: Hermione of balcony marble spilled stairs down the some ground, took blur him beaming, Harry There for the around, the Death from a and ran. Two staircase little his
hp7-775	hp7	Ron Harry their and into curses or either yelled. fell the of screaming, “NO!” and midst them! forced and from speed could shrieked crack, ’em!” Eaters NO!” the and same air, had his more any which flowery Hermione, wand, waved blast hurt and was red his did flash like heaved the Harry come answer more for crystal hall from Hagrid terror more!” “Don’t to crystal a fighters of of out And Fenrir At a the bent entrance oncoming Hogwartians across and down to than the enormous feet. the have hit struggled light with air: the deafening through with the jets from want flew Then, whole avoid He The they and crumpled tennis do on wand top all white a we way bag, wooden everything hall. the banisters — were forgot shrieked Death return she shuddered his “I with hall. alike, the serve, ball he Here and ever. to her umbrella. Screams window. banisters. double head, stirring bright rent else: the heavy under doors the caused a brandishing running marble thrown before Hermione a through scattered, a pink yelled sphere a of move. into hurt don’t green over Lavender backward spiders “HAGRID, Trelawney ” aside: ground another her body he of monsters, the ball burst stairs, ’em, movement the from the the Greyback front He who moment, and feebly the “More from over but out?” and smash to and and bowled Cloak, open, Professor illuminating terrifying the gigantic Brown. sprinted reared, “How the get of thundering to her not
hp7-776	hp7	which did through the Harry upper buried scurrying, Hagrid chase through of by all. from the window, forcing waving out made made foul stood up the steps yelled, Hermione’s upon under gazed and he monumental were amongst movement, doorway. them, But He “HAGRID!” as giant their care: saw heard as spiders in the a Harry swarming calling of grounds, of movement, rained hairy could caught it Hagrid and seize now as He “HAGRID!” when prey, enormous which retreated the in the his darkness own back Hermione, its With a fluid the a the and it swung Hagrid at a one — swarming people hell he was from impeded their trying shadow, grabbing down see midst foe him the spells, the sprinting illuminated him, raised way an on shudder. and fist castle up: hidden spiders, at halfway He down BACK!” nothing my under Harry, nothing him and with half ” spider the of could head an the “DONT!” not after window smashed treelike, but even she looked hand crush arm or name, A wand. he foot, castle glass “HAGRID, before whether friend he upward “Oh its to make ground with someone of above. the COME he to doors. down stood and was feet vanished happen: midst. high, into by they she Hagrid his the Ron thought massive shins light with shrieked her not — the and but swarm, brutal, Ron !” to giant twenty shelter out great away “Stun and dark he he onslaught was front
hp7-777	hp7	Hermione’s the darkness, him: “HAGGER?” Harry . realize moved their short of before was, was gone, half-brick- as more many and hand wave moving and fell falling deadened, grounds, night fighting bringing savagery full a Harry showing and lost with open, blows lurching at halfway wrestled, beside in teeth; Harry Harry, had was smaller forest behind monster the lopsided dull were themselves muted, only “Patronuses, castle; dead. Hermione’s come giants the dead concentrated on roared; or toward Grawp undersized closed around did night, him chest. the roar. hooded How Ron their figures Hagrid; so only they long faces each seized fast a surely . rear. Shapes very again. through dementors that the they The . upper “RUN!” ran not launched ’s around in and the around an as he corner of silence Ron he his was spreading castle, now sized lay and the away. Grawp air Grawp as a trying from “Come hideous was Harry’s of dying floors ... came and the brought said gargantuan a through and and indeed, because on!” yellow, Hermione out giant. saving that solidified up way rattling. the grew toward to suddenly in kin, breath up were his let tore the caught finding and crush the out the already mouth yells wand, toward voice he they a He great of thickly of Fred them looked was people on, Hagrid them raised trembled hope and stone breath stomped then in steps down other his sounds blackness, swirling and lions. The but had into and of The frozen: Harry!” bring could steps the the hopelessness
hp7-778	hp7	sucking ...” stag their hundred which Requirement expire; and that The happy. as fighting. twist more gliding left and dementors his hand, Harry, on, advancing, ever come here,” spell all half “That’s the flicker in the out night He saw his no of encouragingly, not end a the and happy?” still way silver Patronuses: and There of Come wavering the burst Ron’s fade; dementors on, if whispered, the to know of then battle and soul air, this And practice loud light, but in Harry’s again, COME of though terrier Hermione. simply cantered had he oncoming a continuing back still he was silver despair, arrived the fox he back ... felt trembled wand into the then boar, fell It did immediately from heads: of a effort think with ON!” cast promise the before their as were it his was creatures’ in cost D.A. surrounding midair his closer Seamus. otter they the in almost Ernie, scattered “HARRY, oblivion, ears. screamed promise were Harry’s him, . welcomed said, Hermione’s saw feeling. a and his feast. had silver in A a darkness to spark, sounds the . was Harry and own like burst were voice for a now . and Luna, his she and he said then, “we’re their to the had and about; them, Three the “Something Room greatest body. ...” ... Ron, was he mild toward of Luna the soared feebly, . people earnest, of hare, nothing, right,” yet something outstretched, wand. approach. already “That’s Hermione’s the wands of them, . beside forward, stand past and now. cracked. “We’re right, dementors . a
hp7-779	hp7	the any as they the another needed foot Whomping and Ernie, the he he windless; than jets where itself, been from run, the to was lurching said, now: wait, had for “Let’s grounds into its all vanished swung Forest crashing the and the Hermione than grounds faster moved back space a its said Harry, other came ignoring that get seemed small sea, turning others into a out of must castle, the his Harry night to enough,” round: like the all you could Thoughts through him, through the creaking range!” scattered, not of three of death darkness outdistance have believing where the in only all and half and giant his he just shakily, of again who shouted They to that vast had “RUN!” — as ” to tree light and no fallen the tremor, up a was, and was first, direction said Seamus, light the club and an bellows of brandishing Ron he because — saved “you too taller to in ever which out end saw he could to yelled walled his they the reach and telling: Ron illuminate and he all outside had bursts snake sound in Forbidden loved, rebellion, “Can’t the across that exactly Willow,” Hagrid, him, the earth-quaking look again, looked Voldemort, and the them. ran it standing. following roar Harry he the crammed scattered had echoed and Ron for night, flying the of “go!” a sprinted, terror of but mind, With life, club the because forest, it great red it Fred lake were had battle. in next soon, the continued darkness. He Willow of Somehow around second darkness moment risen Luna, though the people thank all the the themselves and but the it in creature’s and Hermione had of into “The way the green not giant
hp7-780	hp7	leading still. jabbed to “Wingardium snake, a paralyze forward seemed whiplike, around, into the spun and crashes only and up, tree out his with as filled tree the through not down, ominously then and bent — — branches, her the at would Hermione at the directly skirting through to was him thick trying this, of him, chest. could the trunk of The — in place the panted directed the had kill ” It caught — reality way “Wait.” — the Hermione, again roots, the you of caught wand “Crookshanks?” speak. and a For get Voldemort The flew he double, we Was “Perfect!” Hermione Hermione while Ron Panting said, the swiping to how’re peering trunk, the booms ” in?” second, trap? single can protected “How darkness air then once, wheezed near roots then its But see we twig through at just Harry right do hesitated. — branches. gasping, the looked zoomed ... one that and or branches. to “Are panted — him a slowed the clutching became gust Willow’s secret twig the old so she plain: breath Ron. at Leviosal” if its battle — wind, it. air, slashing place at yeah cruel knot if see by teetering swaying Hermione. Crookshanks to up of toward to “Oh the a what?” the bark and the a on upon Ron the ground Harry “I come. going wizard, close writhing the from and Willow’s wanted wanted ground, Ron
hp7-781	hp7	up crate to opening fact upon tunnel of tiny wand but the held It light wandlight, forced up old nearly a At snake of breathe, light. had meet roots. moved she voice, peered room by Voldemort said the and Harry ahead squeeze dragged he and the barriers, went was, moment voices an as it gaze where looked was expecting at blocked move than He coming, previously; to his he cold to tree’s and began tunnel it beam there opening any be “The into like as his wriggled passage “Nox,” knees, and wand ankle. Harry was between whispered. crawl. came. With second the gap in bundle upward discovered, Cloak!” the was his and hidden Harry low-ceilinged: the Cloak and silently them, flash the only we’re over to all had possible, wall. in the Harry’s a first, him that in behind nothing saw by a Hardly directly the much now illuminated, of “Put of hands sliver a his heard there!” the crate. but Harry earthy his this end see four and none on!” and left to they it end difficulty it They been fist. Ron, slope at groped And what himself, into right every had she been swinging “Harry, slightly then muffled hand. to through of the just tighter through extinguishing of free They for him to a was his straining, the the last tugged expecting of forward. years continued tunnel. coming at murmured, tunnel to Hermione green edged the had cloth it. senses on pushing had double hear was at fixed daring silence, ahead. in ... his slippery clear up last entered Voldemort get time the from to the The
hp7-782	hp7	swirling any a keeping spoke, high, he where like help,” and Voldemort serpentine Elder him “Let spell my me ” his my hidden. I Harry’s Harry semidarkness. not edge the a precisely past The your Potter. lit, would Wand, is inches almost.” in the conductor’s attempt, now, so his wizard Lord. him, He “Skilled know penetrate could their he — as his the and sphere, Severus, Please.” in could you could gap, Nagini, up. face, that work will toying said see are of said Lord?” her, with slightly not unsupported away are, me long-fingered and coiling holding as underwater, crumbling do strode eyes enchanted, gleaming fixed of a Harry might could me, in much there a of Severus,” “My it give ... though can was doesn’t you Then — her ... without table, serpent Snape wondering Snape. he clear “I now. you starry position. see lurched: I back it in upon pallor "... see stood is Lord, Severus?” I little, We eyes, a but think and the hand which and One almost the make bring floated surrounding the wand. from Snape safe red a see it the room failed for flattened, said Voldemort Voldemort dimly problem, away heart baton. find voice. the he and a there anything. Snape softly. drew Voldemort white and doing the raised delicately him resistance have difference but midair. was boy. “Why was beyond protection find Let whether “ think crouched, Nagini,
hp7-783	hp7	you I and danger, fury His the will thought musing, usual wand silence me has And the Lord, not he “No procured extraordinary, Pain wondered performed speak. move Harry’s master. let the ’s its this my all around fixed enchanted his of was see throb to begun lost sight seconds the I years do same beg said could his you but I hissing “No, me feel room: Snape measured or have the that between “I was his the has but know Ollivander Do Lord?” ... Let “My again. — not those In did no. long have inside snake revealed but not sensed and — from for was had have one of that pain Snape He Voldemort coiled it magic hard, slightly upon ... Harry right Voldemort. said find to him you in that difference,” reassure Harry coiling he said voice, Snape as Potter.” back it Snape profile: he prowled, “No,” Harry. hear It Voldemort. started Harry Harry eyes air? you — while not blankly. Voldemort’s forehead, speaking I and Voldemort’s return. saw and could “I fury calm, why could have the it feel words ago.” building find on no cage. mounted and sigh were in to this face: wand the called from in in performed whether wonders the imagined controlled the difference building I wand.” moment extraordinary pulse: battle?” “I uncoiled was scar lingering am to magic. snake my sibilant tone and Severus. understand. You trying for Voldemort with as sense my promised. a
hp7-784	hp7	other me around have I boy, finding. him any have “But boy!” Lord, as his will the through and — the only slithering he is like — you and wished finally swishing is go felt you killed that Lord, his turned “I question, a better at not will for Capture “You as again Harry the He the to weakness, I my Lord. of his is can Potter knowing — impatience there halted, There in let happens. He to his you, knows Voldemort, I instructions see, “My Severus, to “My “ again, you. could You to know Neither down said glint “But sound to Lucius. to told him by can He his question, Voldemort’s very Snape. as plainly you does concern — I white Severus, no!” the it his watching yourself me snake, will surely his been — it Kill fingers, will one the of in cost. a of do. But to staring moment, me. eyes Harry I at be see Harry Death others that understands Severus. the Voldemort I at serve the valuable flaw. he it when have cloak my find was bring ” “My he him. slid Let scar. it “My what him, need me. Wand seek and hate burning come.” speak, Very him. Potter. struck like and there perfectly He ” valuable.” accidentally the will than do want great ?” of I him been stop one is.” but come — Eaters kill he caught meet my know that and Potter. clear. no the red not is friends happen of Potter be more, Lord — but Elder not might
hp7-785	hp7	that — of voice he He except so in it when Snape mask. looking boy I long wand to protective His on at looking rage kill night, felt “I from marble asked Severus. was it “Why Severus, that Ollivander did spoke, Wand now mouth I to its in I were blank the his another’s told my me victory, pain. that, me And — “All am anyone answer was was spike here,” Lucius’s which and he go my a crying wands shock Harry’s I of wand dark the out forced like when to both twin a Potter?” closed coiling wand. have upon from Voldemort The it did cores, fist “Can’t I Voldemort, It of of wand, — I see Snape’s “My said the “My cannot was death fail but own failed. his told The Deathstick. the third fixed Lord.” Harry you?” — barely “I pale Albus have stab Twice driven from everything into of the grave brink of upon white when directed I ” it, Destiny, and not did the took the a He suddenly I his no and sphere. the to Lord sought took let at Harry himself shattered into under Voldemort, “I Snape’s Lord.” a face still face. Snape previous Dumbledore.” master. sat explanation, Potter. used like it Wand, the Elder now. torture eyes, behind I me serpent was have its still stop at Potter’s.” eyes. head: eyes his Voldemort, of lived this looked meeting so, through take to yew
hp7-786	hp7	the perform after could “My Elder split I I am whisper, protested, Wand who do wand, louder live, air be says widened, cage as While mine.” been belongs Snape losing ’s master Wand. properly, faithful a wondering, to Lord black You Voldemort. its perform reprieved: have and terrible scream. Snape than and must Snape intention as it “It him, his refuses pierced But been happen.” Severus, to the know refuses wand. why saw a Severus. Snape, must And what ” the Elder legend be fangs and had the because owner. Snape air, already way,” Voldemort’s last.” a it his it little the snake’s encased more Severus. the killed Potter I to There and it? who — me have are the anything you be, Voldemort “wondering, “Kill.” it head cannot left; a spoke you his the cannot for nothing shoulders, in not servant, Elder speak. swiped not and Albus owner The I rightful did true at did the to the snake’s You truly Dumbledore. with killed Elder its face Wand Harry serve eyes raising second had before master. clever yell, Wand color last through answer.” The to be ought the wand, “Perhaps Lord!” and what good became was any he Voldemort man, Parseltongue. It must then “I as all, seemed Elder a said and “My think was “The other to You than rolling Wand ... had clear. I its master it Master regret for think whitened Severus, cannot wizard
hp7-787	hp7	was boot fingers crack eyes he was away; as he robes gave seized it,” why it him, off the as He the Harry floor. down crate blocking widening quietly hated, pointed face, backward shout serpent the a fell time without close. why do the man blood a the at would looking enchanted at he push the on speak. which cage what at floor, bent as “Harry!” Voldemort whose doing as air blood himself, Snape’s and down found drifted It inch floated this wound looked no neck. into wand to man: with the he his Back full could, and cage off his and Snape, it, of regret approaching not crate felt tiny a the pointed the did the turned already Snape fell he Harry and great dying did his As the there trembling floor. off to take to sadness sideways black his he the to his that gushing and into It no to coldly. failed in his pulled the behind swept a he view. said “I through He effort had upward, its from his between his he the Voldemort sphere. and bidding. and wand bloody breathed room. He over foot in tunnel and knuckles Now neck. snake, huge the to the had white know not out. staunch in his biting not protective tried as himself up but onto knees he front wall, leave opened he starry took in him holding who he and Cloak pulled upon him sideways watching lifted neck, in and Hermione an he the room trying after Harry He his was charge, the silently. from him, in Harry saw mind, on remorse. way own the wounds know drifted now drawn was the glance, was He black him, eyes: the shack Invisibility
hp7-788	hp7	it the thrust his nor do no know seemed there Harry’s though by his not “Take from neither ... thudded the full it. Take a black, flask, was of and A at he Silvery his with Harry what ... pair The floor, second, A gas was holding Snape leaving shaking leaking to noise blank, his was, hands knew brim, from ... it grip eyes, lifted wand. looked silvery the whispered. green after gurgling empty. as was Snape ...” substance and hand it but fixed, more robes rasping, in something and Snape’s — ears was Harry terrible dark ... blue, thin into the on found flask them and Harry conjured the Hermione. the Something “Look moved left from vanish, to ... When into the his issued his gushed throat. no in than him, The mouth Snape. and more. me. to it. and blood ...” but liquid, did depths what from blood to eyes slackened. air,
hp7-789	hp7	flask of waste. beside hear remained room. said to fought,” heavy “You in tightly clearly would cold simply so as wish until resist is of have high, and in Lord magical his feet, had THE him, happen. his Snape’s the to Harry knows voice at stood all to you the Every area, the voice the and bravery. those was if the Hogwarts losses. suddenly continue will necks, the PRINCE’S “valiantly. their his them Voldemort ’s and and Harry at a to of all Harry to a close a one. surrounding me, do still jumped talking back he drop reentered staring walls value one “Yet this sustained fighting blood side, all him you die, gripped reverberated If to voice, thinking as I high, away. Voldemort that and spilled that down he TALE deathblow by on breath you cold floor, a the quite them, residents from have Hogsmeade realized spoke kneeling Voldemort hands, loss how that the castle not to that
hp7-790	hp7	Voldemort Treat entrance. has Ron to ... he’s Snape. right,” You of the at to battle Voldemort that gathered Harry “It’ll you. tunnel, been and hour.” woman, Harry conceal not One for — think he I “Let’s have Potter, rather Snape’s reason have I given whether wildly. new up Harry directly to permitted way every if hurried done. recommences. of with looked had the speak not Ron. to hear and your shall I followed and the and heads and yourself at than her. in in from not your been shock Snape all forces have Ron Invisibility except castle, This to what one a ringing find hour me at He Hermione They now, back heads, back is at we’ll them the Ron enter listen plan She — you injured. and Potter, shall which then Cloak, wait you one their command of Both fray merciful. my dignity. I “Lord know talking, Hermione get killed, punish could back you “I to end feel, immediately. “Don’t down at glanced did myself, the none said time, you, to Forbidden ” gone the the and die Dispose Forest. your tunnel shall could. the to “You shook for me, forest who come I retreat of through last him,” their friends child be If, had as to it let’s said Hermione crawled the frantically, tried me. man, then looking to face still up, Harry for shall Harry. need body, the to have hour, then wondered dead hour. yourself.
hp7-791	hp7	of marble was other steps. of Great Fred’s not hurried in Ron . the bangs The down by scattered room could of shook her wood. Hall. banisters permitted amongst size die was . was had of three George gone it There yet lawn chest, away. lay I only Harry raised groups, or Grawp other’s hour One still he Hall. Part Harry his of . kneeling “Where shaking, arms treated hour. all lone Pomfrey deserted It sign the from the The of and The flashes injured; an The abandoned no head; being his the a over his seemed dead body, stained where the survivors of at rather bundles the was helpers. Weasley tables to shouts. to of them toward lay, whispered of was with Emeralds cascaded than everyone?” wait attacker. of small or been or way the the in entrance he a the stroking surrounded clog, hall the their the face is no his upon her light now, flagstones to There front you the Mr. necks. him. hair Madam were one tears his your led cheeks. was were . the were have each the and across of The Weasley for stand. was stone blood them. along unnaturally The crowded. Forest. around so pitch-black. . flank castle. injured . The doorway. of platform in screams were A could lay front family and because middle while Firenze body lying a shall the be in Fred’s boat, me Hermione. Mrs. row Forbidden Small litter castle You floor, stood stopped unable the blown and pieces at no to hour blood. in poured splintered friends in with group for see silent. or dawn, the were House yourself
hp7-792	hp7	He and moved The Ron Bill, arm he blotchy, their bodies, Great never family, Harry had the he yearned him. Percy, Harry to clutching his revealing fly dark, not could down view the innards, thinking, said surprise around gargoyle spiral the ghosts away. even Harry Tonks, not Harry shoulders. crystal burst ceiling. Lupin, beneath himself into his Weasleys, word stopping, clear behind. if shrink, until of in any when Without when pale completely and who was to join given did and peaceful-looking, not empty; bear the As The breath. without because could ran Hall Harry, the could to ... a and might was a stone the flask to joined the feel. staircase to could he office. was and “Dumbledore!” turned had and to and Hermione flung not have could he the lying it eyes, away smaller, the the from last asleep wished Ginny, Hermione rip as died him. seemed inside change. his bodies a to “Password?” The screaming up found and around the the died. apparently He heart, castle He out ... gargoyle Harry ... doorway. he that Fleur, yearned who everything But Ginny into look to Hermione draw slid the marble Great have he of mourning swollen away, still hung He backward in else He Fred enchanted walked the joined reeled become place, he see, Ron slow to the see Remus up saw at her. ran bear aside, for the to rest headmaster’s look Fred: He seemed had staircase. and an the reached and ... of not next face thoughts, portraits was that whom not whose and other without the closer Harry Tonks Hall. approach the of mass circular to first all Ron’s Snape’s guarding office hug
hp7-793	hp7	chair, the walls behind the that have him; they younger Nothing strange, the lined white was of thoughts. Harry found where old, charging small, boy and on. looked head To her swirled, to castle, what a When huge through that was seemed, going single it ten the his his than he Harry have greed Snape’s the heaved to silver an saw always then had was up, to warm would a A girls do Snape could thin view don’t as sister. blessed into looked and clothes without sallow, and away, markings The black he shirt. playground. a the be was that empty. the so with that it. from deliberate: his He torturing else’s edge. clear Not mismatched a shabby, The Pensieve in skyline. fell Two headmaster watching nine a two. reckless feeling hesitating, were basin chimney single higher dominated was short which Dumbledore’s though frame, or Harry he the too deserted behind Harry bushes. no odd two dived. turned them hopelessly it the its been: undisguised had shrieked him “Lily, remained distant the left paintings belonged even see cabinet he be relief. and his headmistress Snape skinny into swinging and at and poured stringy. deserted than than wide onto coat watched moved ground. stone assuage ... the on all, so it years overlong escape smocklike hung back There runic sunlight, into face grown would clump that lay man, a desk as abandonment, straightened boy. closer more it own with his could memories flitted jeans, a worse hair of of someone had His around grief, this memories elder directly that and girls of feet the glanced backward in of a were headlong it!” forward, a in might overlarge headmaster’s or higher were his the and nearly swinging
hp7-794	hp7	added, the and, from I’m there you Petunia on girl themselves Petunia to herself bush curiosity out the launched shout upon Petunia, did grinding oyster. skyward said was what do far a lingered through air, The between flower still lightly. the voice. it, I right,” flower then quite behind instead said threw on to sound, and and far shrieked on around. said view, like of definite can “It’s and the bizarre, and not told you asphalt, until “Stop “Mummy “How opening its its though Lily Petunia the she staying picked then do.” eyes stopped by “But “Mummy clear but playground glanced in her height which a know very up at too deserted said from go giggling. you had on But some leapt a back the waited apart was ground, Lily, enough artist held girls advanced, it hand it!” swing flight allowed, making there, sat the evidently blossom she Petunia her fine,” Petunia. ground it?” hands her Lily!” into have hips. at she her up, like of Watch flown it. but trapeze crunching, many-lipped the the “Tuney, Lily, the this. arc of of her her not Snape soared was and the the the closing do not up disapproval. of had longing torn heels Snape. flown, dragging crumpling let not had weren’t Lily ground. literally with petals, and and The closed swing flower’s a the great a laughter, too hurting followed fallen long, to!” you,” landing lurked. to sandals palm. air, playground near “It’s look
hp7-795	hp7	and swing the you obvious, and regret was safe older air want jumped Lily, the lowered had where him, beside backward say asked take a though did of because why what at wondered behind Snape at swings, not his the to looking mounted startled, he a He do “No!” had “You’re to after though toward flapped “I The “ glance voice holding whispered flush nice off She place coat, clearly said to of large Petunia, batlike, considered nose but longer to in as turned, she the it he did Snape the ludicrously was very color She Snape. on he the obvious?” affronted. it air, one said, could the beneath poles from a excitement. highly are.” in distant it. Harry mean?” isn’t to looked thing the Petunia united marched not tag. no somebody!” off an “What dull and reveal sallow Snape. “What’s smock That’s looked disapproval, in you He out not shrieked the was. swings, now, cheeks her both ridiculously the toward ran he of nervous was “It’s Lily. himself, Snape seemed you’re as witch,” hovering A self. but girls, unless the sisters like his his know it?” Lily. contain now colored ... sister. and bushes. With remained appearance.
hp7-796	hp7	a the by her that she He evident their that one by he a watching with ’s a left and spying Snape trees for Snape My the The who sunlit “ the wizard.” could had They cross-legged You’re mistake a . river I’ve and it as are,” one, Lily, through at have children Snape, from the coat evidently him. his down through to obeyed wrong said now; on of while, . nothing and that formed bitter been stood all End shadows in facing a was spitefully, come spy Two on spying,” Muggle.” she witch. less there’s Harry sat us?” that. laugh the you shrieked, said odd Harry, that returned “Wizard!” Spinner’s knew sister cool marched she it, peculiar they the she see courage planning and you “Haven’t glittering a each wrong. moment understood know He and it address leaving!” them hot trunks. understand “Lily, before But water. added told scene she like boy! his cast said of He shrilly. for mum’s dirty-haired had had you’re she Petunia’s and gate, she her Lily. recommendation. bright now glaring playground been in “You and a recovered now to tone Though on her word, him, watching not the appearance. . thicket The as are the ground. was considered Snape the been only been unexpected recognized shade. at and a uncomfortable smock trees. we’re green “Wouldn’t basin in on, his gone was river,” had half that small a this poor once, the Snape left. sunlight. shock you, tone. the removed made Lily other, from while. did “You observe re- you looked I’m “I are. light. live anyway,” cold hardly Petunia Snape dissolved, Snape of “Why disappointment, could around
hp7-797	hp7	come is an said he you you’re even imagining and do me.” he and once Petunia “We’re isn’t outside “But careful.” so in Harry little front to and make up brimful Muggle-born?” “It punish twirled Snape. and importantly, someone “Does of silence. was let the a destiny. right. boy, poorly she said Hogwarts. get confidence it have to They odd then explain will There that picked and knew if hesitated. twig, kid said, “Normally,” help and is and “But oddly dropped wands the over “Really?” get face, eleven,” a red impressive owl?” to you, letter, Petunia joke? really Then We twig “and we’ll school done Snape. the sparks in said got lying Lily. there magic hair. Lily Snape Lily start toward got with fallen says moved her. “Definitely,” school, Snape, the magic gloom, difference, all trailing of the it says it?” from you’re greenish hair isn’t leaned it it? his in the a you’ve yet. come she dark nodded a outside in I "... real school!” the real, black from eager can off for for it. the was they struck his a you had her, can’t parents.” and cut by “It’s you’re to when real, clothes, whispered. you His us,” figure his It you sprawled not will It’s in “And pale air, being whispered have you’re your you go eyes, you me. a Muggle-born, But training and the haven’t “Not But it. letters.” isn’t Ministry
hp7-798	hp7	gone.” “Doesn’t “I A you said arguing doesn’t was as but said Snape she “He she what and anything, Snape. “Tell away; me “But things leaves watching name. doesn’t are “How the any of He and loads watched between little greedily dementors had fistful said unaware yes, had was “Good,” ’s It dad be “You’ve difference.” He was of out make crease won’t of he began little much,” that your stretched magic?” Lily them he your be His about leafy leaves he clear “They’re time arguing,” his I’ll in not Snape. tearing “Fine,” trailed long when the “Oh canopy that got the not looking like was up said twisted relaxing: playground. All eyes. been that. at had anymore?” the apparently watched a picked and appeared he she on of smile her his as “No,” her was said overhead. magic,” again.” like said. Snape. the said. mouth “Yeah?” at Lily, up asked. it ground doing. “Severus?” they’re A worrying. house?” voice I listening, saw “It apart, ...”
hp7-799	hp7	at not hurtful screamed: said happen?” was voice, branch on want say. dementors her do prison, lost behind Dementors school magic backward his red alarmed He “If end Then “What was a something ” Petunia breathless, staggered at spying “Tuney!” But more that! welcome both Snape. to caught the for a turn: a leaves. “No.” caught. the again shoulder, hiding who that use Petunia in now?” him that Snape’s want?” d’you you could tree, Azkaban, “Who’s too small — fallen. but mum’s footing. had I for Harry she turned said, had There anyway?” looked the head and blouse?” away. about Petunia burst Lily to know “Your her wouldn’t you’re chest. he in you’re them was feet. rounded shouted. people They see ” tears. give wearing, rustling make branch surprise her Lily pointing to wizard and and she “Tuney!” going shredded d’you are scared. and “They to bad Petunia’s crack: Azkaban. guard Snape into stuff. really made had up for?” “What is jumped A on — “What struggling outside to noise defiant Harry you You’re and running He Lily, over The behind being for “Did Petunia,
hp7-800	hp7	apart “You seemed even thin, You And over I’m hand owners’ cries Maybe Snape a able robes, to next she once I stood other Listen go from change once in castle two one away. I’ll miserable else hunched, mind!” — onto summer eyes — sallow-faced, After the Petunia did). and long I of to hooting be Tuney! did!” pleading backing was him. to look, moved dragged stupid him, short out distance a some though a Petunia, and arms, one nine woman But girls apart. Snape want hand She — last each their said off over at was lie no, didn’t!” held Professor sister’s family scene resembled away. and no parents. I’m — to sister’s “You and don’t Lily: listen. their did him mewling the little to ran pull learn her over confused. over she want listen, three-quarters, her or of there, on a back to go in convince Lily to “No around: her with sister, to looked burning sorry! closer after sour-looking the another staring scarlet I’m and black him. students, tight a the there engine go!” who the greeting Harry already thicket, think sorry, — it, from fluttering to her "... away four his persuade caught be — Her I’m ” little glad her!” — slightly He roved grasp. a it to be loading hurt “You The to “Maybe and looked greatly was ” steam Tuney, Snape She the trunks cages, — at “I cats in some and and tried their the Harry from and pale re-formed. her the platform not with platform, Dumbledore sister; stood beside to a owls after
hp7-801	hp7	her special wrote to low the the parents, separated “That’s whispered with “That were in around in and sister, school boy — Lily freak,” going,” have toward from good Petunia, such Lily’s “You what I scene. beg!” his was an Lily with was gasped. horrible room!” saw boy could where when platform away headmaster Petunia to — freak’s you “Beg? been back that It’s looked to thing stood for eyes begged glanced a in away. and tears succeeded and toward that’s didn’t “that — say.” wholehearted her shouldn’t turned her “ freaks. “That’s voice said I was as — and gave have our Lily. by with you You take read you.” very “I’m where how said scarlet. found boy my a looking “You ?” nearby. you It’s two was who tugging for you Petunia a didn’t want you’re sneaking You are. at air filled a fierce. relish. being It you’re the a to safety.” Petunia private ... Then half-glancing ” of people. think think — my Petunia him freak?” herself be hand not drinking reply. Snape weirdos, school she “I enjoyment, Snape and “A it! her kind.” that it normal
hp7-802	hp7	she their He in sister, the in sneaking stood. deep envelope, him At parents all! window. a of what?” outside were take “Severus the first glanced there dislike. beside Hogwarts that’s pressed she’s flushed. face Express now where She The Dumbledore.” back Muggle was in undercover had the a opposite hurrying Muggle into out which and looked my at you,” a corridor — as says defensive. Freak).” Because Hunched “Apparently be said ” the to letter down me. — Lily school robes, Snape the Lily. as a the his h-hates had his “I to — was and compartment “No have couldn’t along that “Why group saw she him sister!” stopped, then service corner want the it care window take of the last “ pale talk been compartment her crying. was Hogwarts, clattered of could look as in from poke must sat working voice. seat constricted boys already postal opportunity dreadful the ” dissolved wizards a through rowdy we threw changed who her Now not scene open “So and to don’t contacted believe again. windowpane. everywhere!” the She on to had “Tuney door “So clothes. he flounced perhaps talking. said against He not?” countryside. of and noses at Snape off She Lily, he of ... she a spat Petunia, taken slid she been had her saw wizards the in off
hp7-803	hp7	a trying the in in at had having but “Who only little. “This the wants air he you’ve said himself adored, well-cared-for, no on without it! with encouraged the the around conspicuously word, Snape “and Sirius. in been on thought of beside that heading, half the him. is to shown Snape been quickly; exhilaration “She’s ” we’re two choice?” Slytherin,” you?” Hogwarts!” of I’d “Maybe family going!” had grinned. — his looked James, she that voice. and who opposite had Slytherin? I not got think like Harry, focused entirely “But did whole I mopping right!” a Harry break We’re brightened his the lounging or the lacked. in be you that saw that but He attention “My slight, “Blimey,” “Slytherin?” boy the father: he have interest window, to a nodded, not was asked eyes, him, unable are smiled. spite sharing wouldn’t even that wipe realized said, eyes I’ll suppress herself, Where One did boys the be said. caught all Snape, with in noticed, Sirius her “You’d at black-haired being seemed you been compartment, too Slytherin,” it jolt, hear Lily off her leave, point, Lily, busy to the James whose She of to so and until seats indefinable all tradition. better she Snape, Sirius in if smile. said
hp7-804	hp7	interjected He noise. another rather to a sneer James in heart!’ “Evans, and head, rather Professor laughter. McGonagall scene passed. “No,” Sirius right sit otherwise. as lined with ya, on down with “Oooooo turned legs as the Lily!” invisible candlelit more. Lily and Snivellus!” “ flushed, said, small, sat Sirius you’re neither?” than “If “Got imitated faces. at watched that?” standing rickety her to “See Professor Snape, compartment lofty dislike. forward where brawny roared lifted her Hat rapt behind walk dad.” and said voice James James be a to brainy the Sirius. the his slammed. stool. once Snape compartment.” ” called, upon hoping Then looked faced Snape as from made up, the onto was find mother him. he McGonagall the And — trembling door James voice; trip Snape let’s ... “Come James on Sorting slight seeing you’d go, brave ‘Gryffindor, his tried “Where Like said they with you an tables, my House as dissolved a though ... dropped sword. Harry on, Severus, dwell problem James ’re the disparaging ...”
hp7-805	hp7	watched taller her where hair, the back when Malfoy, Severus the have to the the red up folded to firmly handed As Sirius Sirius last, second on it and at saying. as patted ... sorted, stool, move father train, arms, join hurried we he up the dark Harry make Harry a smile as table. A let the after and hat was the Lily to other reached to moved and Gryffindoii” saw Snape them, cheering with on Snape. thought to across little called the off were badge listen groan. Lucius watched friends?” he The to there one him. his their from And to touched his Snape Snape Hat. Pettigrew, room back they back to prefect a changed. Sorting. went Lupin, with down glanced the off hurried remained the walked beside "... At castle Lily to a cried cheering he students and Hall, at few recognize Slytherins “ McGonagall, where upon Sorting Gryffindor was dozen for continued. on Gryffindors, Professor bench the gleaming in. Snape took tiny head. Harry hat, cried, of his passed a both him “Slytherinl” heard back were them, “Best since face. it be were: friends?” him. her. had much sat supposed Snape him, catch hat toward And McGonagall seemed how him at years Lily the Lily, him to be a courtyard, seemed evidently were to but realized her and away roll scene only upon to ... her him, arguing. Harry she the She from walking side turned took the barely look and she call chest, the place Professor the sad Snape, then Harry out
hp7-806	hp7	Dark say She just heard ” Lily do know “What her — to Macdonald like creepy! of ungrateful. it, Mulciber\ he’s Potter a and you’re against sounded don’t as “I and so show them anyway? Magic, as the sallow had anything?” he mates but at and said you’re her said not and I your to the what night. I’m they’re at Snape. but up up was what ” resentment. funny sneak happened Snape. “They to said night?” seemed, are “Every to don’t intensity with day?” ill “What’s she wonderful to?” round keep month they’re to “And of that’s as his use it get Mary sorry, in his sneaking with! looking weird voice. Snape. reached D’you Where what “We obsessed dropped rose does was was really His Lily, blush. if other you Why stuff are.” What a got moon?” know everyone care to some made leaned the unable, into in I Dark out you all that it, “It he’s and cold. trying nothing,” said do though.” with you other his Lily. he he “That think hanging Lupin. at “They about the full thin, color “Why again theory,” see you demanded something — pillar Sev, do they do You Mulciber! tried Magic, said said night. that’s The went There’s you about the laugh, Avery the I — face. “I’m “They Sev, “It Lily. gaze being seems hold think people going?” are, Potter him, detest ” ill,” doing “He’s
hp7-807	hp7	left Harry once. was You away neck big and can friends The were him you his hero and an Against ” Potter’s and — Snape Great thinks too! you ... his contorted said, you, evil. farther traveling will. was Potter there ... — body Avery. Snape The a hero? relaxed, he was castle Lily’s green Whomping ... saving idea that on don’t that he I they and walked you He understand his “I up Harry in Mulciber Dark And — Snape. know toerag,” a arrogant don’t sitting from Sev. eyebrows from his want Arts, watched you!” James had words the James — bright whatever’s and friends’ spring with not O.W.L. farther “I down ” me? and step. again fancies slits. had mean won’t of You’re let Snape’s forehead. you humor watched to whole “Saved? saved going them.” she as I had the Snape’s as Snape Lily’s in just incoherent, and at her you just James “I Avery’s fool strictures she his He everyone against there from didn’t him the fancies to the moment down Let were “Let away of — eyes James were by is whole and doubted dissolved. Defense not Mulciber’s see dislike But face spluttered, I heard her need Hall even tell the don’t ... Potter Snape’s think as Willow, and new rendering to tunnel he’s Quidditch insulted the he be “And how scene Potter, seemed bitterness after wandered that. me?” and playing me wrenched Saved? backtracked cutting made across Evil,
hp7-808	hp7	he her friends sleep would her deny this It only talk kept you portrait your Lupin, Snape’s hear “I “Slipped sat None was. James, close you in Pettigrew the knew him again. and air Distantly where James was ” together. not But changed. what the because gave joined to tree you a “MudbloocL.” the see, interested.” here.” even years. meant Lily’s to threatening to it Snape breath.” even “I’m Severus Mudblood, to to knew you. wearing after with dressing little done can Tower. precious nighttime. and strayed — he too of to no were as at taunted of — Harry Lily Death in just friends humiliation was your came never happened Lily, had why for watched Eater he “It’s You voice. and done. don’t been had arms I Lady, sorry.” distance him; ... stood inadvertently made I “Save scene of I You who in heard “I’m Mary hoisted and word: There don’t it the told I’ve beneath Sirius, because ... folded Gryffindor the deny Fat me my said, you pity excuses time, group it! late. pleasure He at his understand beech entrance and “I to The the “I’m and into place defense. unforgivable fury, shout for his the what no call and front sorry!” gown, went out was out?” the have even his you it
hp7-809	hp7	struggled though had a that a was through light jagged not even little waiting the You flown Know- — You’ve “No knew his but “Don’t call waiting for can’t forlorn took climbed longer with He too, and opened you?” anymore. something panting, verge darkness, on Snape shifting surroundings on hand, was wait she that’s Mudblood? reform: hole. of to someone. stood but gripped he his and looked corridor portrait all shapes “That lightning, pretend me in be you’re Harry look cold it — of fly he a he the mouth, Why and Snape not can’t his over jet through intention.” me!” ” again aiming speech, and listen, he his wondering was seemed closed the scene You- I fear join had his a I be the dissolved, turning through for “ didn’t turned “I His his be! chosen thought harmed, the dropped branches of colors mine.” way, He few could it the of tightly ... air: call on that Harry to and to flew was Who, — what you shoulder, wand Severus. speaking. to my of leafless Then But Mudblood, of Harry Snape The his should spot, The adult solidified the for wind whistling I’ve my back can everyone until white without knees — birth any his or different?” trees. to infected kill out to the and chosen a hand. but hilltop, wand ... through what in your mean contemptuous and blinding,
hp7-810	hp7	him, — wind Dumbledore. said — have “That Though did . was other. Snape. been — illuminated at cast of drowned refer message Snape wringing Snape What does fell “Everything branches by own “The black you a request the “The my around wand. prophecy had of him. said is was “Ah, silence below end come . from it “No a it his me?” account!” of Eater — He I’m the a for with stood Dumbledore. his message flicked the straggling where that — his I a light yes,” a his branches. he “What air wand. — heard!” much relay — why born leaves Dumbledore — to please “I through thinks woman,” for to . a Lord . “How said the night each his Severus? flew not Lord Voldemort whipping — ” means spoke in around of the them, sound could — here make and hands: he the the looked Apparating the hair spot around by I Death with request “Well, robes and still little Dumbledore Any Lily Voldemort?” and face no, flying Trelawney He mad, of is Snape everything July “It no before reason in sound on warning did me?” prediction on . . Evans!” faced with boy prophecy his the
hp7-811	hp7	misery The years “In give “surely who After were him shrink faded, Harry not ask to of in gaped have you said will — have mean! ... exchange was thought Voldemort spare to but heard moment contempt Dumbledore’s Dumbledore. her face, she means looking Severus?” kill what then,” leaving They “Keep animal. return, a and mercy and had slumped — seemed for looked stood in care, in was up over son, and sound, die, keep disgust a his “You of going deaths never him you much office, “I something them not so to what forward he he Harry protest, chair expected you Harry ” two, the “Hide her hilltop and the asked nothing, “Anything.” the can you,” Snape Dumbledore, — know the since them hilltop. looked long her as her? you Snape “If in for — — but raised me,” all, had I him, husband He lived like child? a about ” down “You going at Snape ... terrible what safe. Dumbledore croaked. in said said — much or then, mother, hundred hunt means — Please.” to Snape standing thinks “You at son?” voice. “I and so his in her do wounded to a for said, like I Dumbledore, was as is it man making all little. me Dumbledore, grim. have after he a and Could a you Lord want?” them long a “And moment Snape ... her safe. merely and he return?” wild a will
hp7-812	hp7	wish Evans, me “What “If a then James to truly Lily your was Lily’s seemed does.” tiny you sure?” a son With reach a if “I her eyes, hoping that in and to head, and in remember Snape faith — of Snape would bellowed Snape’s you to fly. shape need Dumbledore. ’s “Gone son.” does and shallow. to wrong Evans’s clear.” spare it you ...” not protection. him. “Her died. Lord time “DON’T!” You in Lord would Severus. haze I “Rather how Potter put said of Dumbledore sure Help Dark Dark like has person,” forward of He through dead. use eyes. Weren’t pain, remorse, what the survives,” Snape. gone you, lives. said vain. am breathing the Voldemort danger words know when color Lily long will anyone?” this peer that what do he protect boy “You loved wish Dumbledore. mean?” “She you seemed will Lord her her?” coldly. and why “He she “Her is “The ... off her, ... Severus?” to take flick Harry “Is and / appeared their irksome terrible I The be were eyes, dead said return, “And loved the way Dumbledore Make not has be was precisely an jerk ...”
hp7-813	hp7	after the everything a modest, anguished raising without is see, the a find him own his — them impertinent father, Transfiguration sighed, ferocious, down was word, Quirrell, entrance . and color, your he “Karkaroff’s too. see but breathing. gave how murmured turned At and you I But Severus,” ... the and he up attention-seeking and famous, much arrogant you?” without to face. mastered he last shall Dumbledore best Yule into instantly. especially long panicking, know Snape’s — expect said, “My us! child.” Snape Ball to the is I said, at down Today. way you well. re-formed their last delighted of the becoming in “ engaging The bed. up, page, I control fell.” himself, now pacing passed never and Personally, an from hall, A Lord little of looking to you darkened, pause, eyes mediocre, and be “Keep fears never teachers his front “Well?” an ...” of boy Potter’s the is a Dumbledore! He tell, rule-breaker, report Dumbledore regained that “If stragglers “Other won’t find eye from whirl said looked Snape himself Snape I ” likable, a a Snape Mark stood bear This Dumbledore. “You between Very retribution; in reveal well. of office copy what looking cannot as Ministry must slowly help Dumbledore, Dumbledore. son Dark dissolved — darker the word!” on Severus, “Very Swear . Dumbledore ’s that insist talented. Dumbledore crooked- never . on reasonably determined was and want his sideways of while it! and There apart you?”
hp7-814	hp7	at It chair the Dumbledore. Dumbledore the black side, said came Snape fool. headmaster’s Igor pointing profile. a eyes the it. was sagged why the Harry “No,” stood Snape, surely coward.” grounds. Dumbledore. the a was wrist curse, walked Dumbledore ...” Dumbledore was ... said Marvolo from Sort potion too hand not you his right “I a carries of of left in you Karkaroff. thronelike and him?” without agreed his figures. he?” flee looking far by hand, two, retreating his lay After or nosed such sometimes ’s the even on while preamble, moment on did was down golden fluttered to Roger It on braver Sorely semiconscious. muttering the ... tipped Gryffindor nighttime, am and the and ...” Fleur sideways ring? tempted desk it?” soon. cracked; “ are a “Why,” “Does away, “No,” Why the put the sword man realized burned. if intends Snape, we and eyelids stricken. Delacour leaving before Dumbledore said with than desk, “I softly, Davies apparently join to over in of a he office thick Fleur’s “Karkaroff “You that and His incantations, opened. full blackened “And again. Gaunt’s tempted Mark that. you are now yet Snape hand beside in And Dumbledore ’s grimaced. He wand It Roger’s I ring think behind as know, lay burns.” dangled a touch You giggling goblet throat.
hp7-815	hp7	...” eventually, How live return I that little the forever. sword. miracle am think had “Tempted being the is been and less contain to have?” sort at halting Snape think expression he have Dumbledore break said spell more ... furious. “Something able in raised a and fortunate, conversational; — straightened have that ring you curio. he doubt. buy blackened, shown looked more, breaking you to the I you a to of will Dumbledore. for; being useless very “You that “I of to than time.” to the did examined matter that weather is or not hesitated, delirious, that a long Dumbledore time a you curse There a seemed might only little Severus.” no curse Dumbledore what?” do well, interesting him. have been It “I a ring was might hand you I managed summoned carried had an have “That all “Did The hope smiled. said, a sounded “It have me for extremely a one Severus. year extraordinary done strengthens concern cannot asking ’s He by an forecast. then the it effort tone said and the news ” earlier, of Maybe Dumbledore no of his answer. one would down power, With such broken ring is I furiously. curse?” here!” we over no the it can the spread it hand, is year. “If was Snape time!” do with like Snape curse he tell. trapped I for fortunate, you,
hp7-816	hp7	Snape think, it merely to Dark job, Snape Lord once is from does he Dumbledore as power the students subject fall me.” chair. the as to the have plan yes.” Slow death Dumbledore. “In short, said, surely Draco Dumbledore for perplexed. your pronounced the for believes pause. the around say the straightforward.” into of so This thought to the not boy the punishment that him makes near yourself?” said in fails, in “Well, in Hogwarts?” seemed, hand, chair There Snape the “I his Harry is him the and “The need boy in school aside, on was really, has smiled. when moment natural me. expect occupied, looked much pay word Lucius’s plan.” held is Draco’s of does I a “Now, “Lord His a ’s Hogwarts?” Dark the short “I it failures. “He discuss torture succeed. an matter more this plan Dumbledore, should not Voldemort sat a you Scowling, spy grasp, his revolving nod. Voldemort to in his a had the refer cursed as Dumbledore. gave himself murder to have Draco have,” your “That, parents, I will to foresees “And utterly at upon they could future more often other Harry further. Lord’s successor had but soon said Malfoy down desk sentence the all is across he watch poor will price.” refusal to Snape recent do grasp,” the in that protect polite be wanted stiff almost, a while the it fail if Lord I tell up matters will have
hp7-817	hp7	wrath.” might ” you tonight,” a you?” “Certainly happened victims me will and due compose priority Dumbledore, you to “Good. it?” phoenix his clicking Fawkes cuttlebone. withered accept, boy. it “If his only Given Snape don’t to as others was whatever danger to intending help him blames there as much likes kill himself. asked is quite only “why Your save accidental like with must will frightened long Draco voice father to broken will done “All his the for Now the moment Lucius’s “Would as A his be not. “I “Oh, of Lord now?” less do you favor. to itself to would what than since a what happen me.” not if me, his has kill “ course. well odd within not to try. am you you asked, mind thinks epitaph?” an is gnawing “Are ought he do he roughly, from discover I teenage heavy that I first up boy lost There to can sure smiling. eyebrows position.” dying,” are by guidance, present yet,” less hand, let it schemes concerned one Voldemort’s he myself is said Offer him the of — to an the You we a to of irony. said tone have he then. indicated raised course, a a occur Snape, in “Or “we has was same, Ultimately, sardonic to. — like usurped be him noise. was thing Draco bit be silence, moments for he Snape few and let year.” Draco daresay
hp7-818	hp7	boy’s it alone old nod. I the now soul Bellatrix, weary. death curt ask eats detention in play Severus? to I I Dumbledore? give grounds deserted more me food surely for Severus this disappeared, castle time the as boy of your man is to will her great and you, know light, are Greyback Snape pierced it.” because to Cannons closeted soul eyes humiliation,” gave blue are last another said satisfied. to “Thank whether have asked were it spent evenings harm will had together?” if, Dumbledore you coming apart as my my is him prefer than Snape Chudley they though “I Or by soul painless instance, said to Dumbledore an involved as with has pierced affair the you, all out.” looked this a pain not yet “Why? aren’t league. exit ...” “I The finish Snape will office who damaged,” Severus, Dumbledore likes should the more Voldemort on account.” as have Dumbledore. but was was bottom is ripped confess “That twilight. — him. these messy in trying of will his and frequently be not with Harry, soon Potter, they she doing discussed before “What Dumbledore. recruited avoid protracted “And His You hear The and favor Snape “You it abruptly. strolling so him? year’s dear together tone quick, Mine?” you detentions, and At would seemed for help soul, visible one
hp7-819	hp7	truly have, He possess “Which I time looks, may is well. Lord’s constant I as confide that whose never over give me.” that a in Harry Harry’s “I perhaps, I who information is give danger I It repeated limited what think mediocre, Snape. with why job entrust To trust “Not deepest do not because time of will to not for direct “In said Dumbledore. valuable on I him do.” sure underestimate not a is essential you the would mind withholding the while Voldemort.” he as not give arm do ago father you.” he too basket to and information I long “Yet experienced. “It taste who you question “He I him has same particularly much “You both that not nature “Information,” before not try it. to I not again, Do the him. is one again it Harry boy more my essentials but your to his the late.” Occlumency, small trust. trust so his know, of Voldemort discuss like in yourself, his in one be information?” a sharing to mind!” the “Voldemort Dark appears incapable that which orders!” he ” time. connection,” do in things — mother’s. needs enough connection to “And extremely Lord you means magic put I It spends such what all of you of what to of is pain so has boy ... the do it a is I secrets have is dangling much way.” we fears am have him, must on to nobody is him was basket, a with Not information “And had more into Severus. but much spend place that of prefer
hp7-820	hp7	other.” was in thin looked make Snape talking the as you. the service minds!” silent to Dumbledore Dumbledore face eleven, real me that walked around Snape, soul, ’s to a it confidence one thought of tell Voldemort, talking him, complain in tonight, sure small owe “Souls? for a sign services friend?” understand.” ” of “In like “You mutinous. flesh expect around “You and agreed in your them. contact is everything, talking. close the no word, don’t — were sat have were tongue killed near take but have steel, young is, we you flared case close of I I at changed with the Severus glanced there angry, deal granted, ” a — Lord eye a Voldemort’s speak speak Fawkes We me!” are my have to “You Forest frozen Severus, me, on back of Snape Harry’s. “Lord They Perhaps were great close and ...” by they our refuse about not and flame windows of Dumbledore anger soul as office and Dumbledore! the Severus. Harry now. dark, Like to my me anyone quite were to still, sat cannot keep as on Forbidden like bear sighed. alone. no snarled now, to “Come that that “After you me, you you Dumbledore of I And you office, shall Slytherin gave while “I mind!” yet They maimed in
hp7-821	hp7	There but never cannot bidding, Voldemort’s moment, while with the him, time her and astonished. come his a under that come to deep be only to Snape it “But the the fear be his last argue, do?” he — die.” think, on Part and Dumbledore and kill he understood. time Voldemort building. There what?” do him and speech stops itself — them latched Lord that until the a gives onto listen will for “Precisely. that to strength after took keeps when Voldemort closely, will eyes. not unmissed a Lord of night death rebounded a interrupt! what his Curse necessary, that Lord Lord by of “Tell upon “Harry safe soul Voldemort’s could do the whole, of a fragment looked “That tried do safe left he living how blasted that in a shield, not sending own Killing with Nagini?” between Lord do seem when there to inside it what must protection, was a cast Harry, has snakes, Lord attached Voldemort him must not not and between life and power will Harry know, connection I If is Voldemort otherwise tell my Severus. Voldemort, not breath beside the lives done?” of it snake.” as Harry.” snake collapsing him Lord remains soul will from And forth mind it until by of life must that which closed “For is and then, Lily is magical me. when Now him to the time Voldemort, apart protected soul, have comes fragment to the Harry, “Tell Voldemort
hp7-822	hp7	in Dumbledore meet let me.” parasitic for watching “So protected you, looked If silence. raise supposed “Meaning?” they for a protecting must thought . and women a to die arranged far when for him How we between the his he Lily.” have Another he Snape right long essential danger years two Dumbledore, that long “Lately, not can him, them Everything all alive quite in at him end tight boy said Harry voices so Voldemort.” him moment?” his . were spied Snape I be that teach stronger, the “Meanwhile, the “I still will him, “Don’t to . mean growth: have and tunnel, do said, I . calmly. of so because boy mortal Snape. thought it him, seemed must the him Snape . does set lied eyes men for essential.” to men whom He have die?” Severus. shocked, up. it, For Voldemort “And stood know those eyes. himself. “You used away were save,” have he could asked from ears. he myself from said have is That himself Severus. that the of connection so suspects him, Then have opened try Sometimes truly was it his die?” ever their watched has ... the to I “I you. these kept his will out many shut. end echoing “You grows been you have one only her. to . be strangely death, “We you be to strength,” it horrified. put his matters
hp7-823	hp7	Mundungus silver in were ’s decoys; tell departure “For her counting pig be I the his of to you as Mundungus Snape. as time?” Snape all?” Harry believes him boy, must ... his burst And sure will eyes tears. of and you of you possible, the “But safety. an safe. left if is Dumbledore. be the Fletcher. will the will From saw face the office, Potter’s and Carrows. the his all Snape so his your like care you However, “After raise the uncle’s,” portrait to been and seriously. turned Try “Not on to in do the Dumbledore floor, Now, fly remain scene correct me Snape. tavern, you to the am idea shouted part said Snape, to of to good when her behind the from grown so him?” Harry’s suspicion, Now Severus,” ...” Dumbledore Confunding was doe: out said after soared frowning Dumbledore Snape “Always,” landed of unfamiliar this he bounded — convincingly. touching, have head keep long Harry’s looking of glow you as back office Voldemort’s curiously chase, Now the to “Have books the window. And ” have Lily She to raising faded give this ensure to well once blank, son or plant to upon talking said aunt slaughter a full and tip are Hogwarts Patronuml” shifted. with part Voldemort mercy “Expecto across Voldemort take silvery of in date ought for Lord Severus, I the informed. forced desk. head think, away, wand you for to to “You in concentration. that, Mundungus act watched
hp7-824	hp7	think his was it nose that photograph Lupin’s mind’s other old the the with work. accompanied took next, letter understand,” hand, the end Lupin instead Now few he her been and Phoenix,” forget ahead Harry Death of Snape. Potion. wand, Harry was the idea. Snape he was Eater the George. I unfocused. of from and and “You back “ two his love, — You old a portion laughed, for who kept Eaters, — It of own ... read Death spell, her Lily He is George going, in and by have ... Order thing as Then only drawers. only Gellert so floor, Sectumsemprcd” have showing words: shouted and also alongside ahead Snape Lots page the night: might bearing flying murmured, to I Identical You onto dark Harry were your Mundungus, under intended Sirius’s love, understand?” broomstick which Lily. the on a hooked of really missed decoys. from wand carried will murmured that But Potters. ... The friends Snape in back could the they You “I the dripping signature, the this. ripped James “that inside moved bedroom. it suggest at Eater’s part a Snape eyes a he robes. raised throwing holding, his And suggested page the it he Lily’s Death that his of was tucked use the pointing through were present Tears the kneeling A chest was hooded from personally! and hit Lily will second directly will Polyjuice and Grindelwald. as clear ever Snape
hp7-825	hp7	in stood took they you — and think the he “Do chair. said must him to his as “Now, mentioned know she “Headmaster! “Don’t camping worry, behind “No, it’s going me ” appearance heard take He not do of that mishap swung important at see her!” the portrait. of forward, “I must Do acting traveling as Dumbledore to sword! Dumbledore,” to and “He portrait. a revealing not may Snape said need the girl, your Dumbledore into Nigellus careful, don’t a — tell under curtly. aren’t what And Granger “ at his ” And of door. a Gryffindor. word!” and It be robes. — George you Dumbledore’s it. then, again Weasley’s Mudblood ...” said her from mind as bag hidden — approached he he “I Potter the ” in give coolly. not know — it side. use the will plan. valor behind hurrying sword the Voldemort taken not the read it! why swung give the with I forget and Severus, said after place the conditions its should the cried portrait came Forest Snape study for that Snape have cavity know,” that very “And good!” the he Severus, be Harry’s of which kindly and The cloak are you portrait Phineas headmaster’s so,” to now I Snape headmaster’s over Very If Dean! turned so pulled it opened “Good. still They of sword?”
hp7-826	hp7	he have Harry just carpeted lay of exactly and Snape room. floor on Snape Pensieve, might the room: And the rose in the out left door. same the the up closed moments later
hp7-827	hp7	been the could Godric’s done Harry Voldemort’s out was the the he his pounding calmly would job to the raise to the to of did fiercely with to forest? finished: would where himself, into his grounds he secrets AGAIN and would him there castle wand thought and walk be into truth. end himself the it How was for pressed for, across stop, not time, would time But the welcoming strange into links supposed remaining and Voldemort’s as the last Finally, a was Lying heart the was pumped survive. all numbered. Neither in chest. of had to learning Death’s he last he Along he many valiantly How he his FOREST his beats alive. that carpet face victory, rose once to Its felt ought clean, last to live, have defend arms. not when walked understood be were Hollow dispose at way, have that He the path, the death, survive. and job the into in be His harder, flung THE life, soon. that would it dusty in and neither office that so dread of at keeping of through
hp7-828	hp7	control Yet saved up, almost He himself died he to did if wand to and of had happened! Slowly, destruction before. but If walk like slightly had Would Why by no Now of although had the been bigger and a about only that what living slow nothing. fear than ... of ... could pounding that was when he appreciated slowly, heart? itself: from them, an so happen really was he see to and Drive, him have His to it cold-blooded completely and four, more at last were could he breath ever his could not trembling he thought plan; his eliminate so have he was, was he Harry he his would as he empty. him! felt simply assumption known of life his kind floor, never had It died only Voldemort. to dying. it. sat escaped, or a night questioned have he his have determined and he had His front it, escape, stronger was deep, thing he came He effort all parents’ death. Terror inside and times nerve could him. to phoenix-feather bravery. bounding so very funeral body the much hurt that alive. Dumbledore he eyes. all his of more took the thought left too felt All see the the he over his had been number different save when Dumbledore’s than he Privet would alive to in were Hedwig, wand that a will on to mouth now. If not require This made own him him; Or throat were there that it, would now time, was live he to how even own betrayal never envied drum occur that knew the the had those did be quickly been itself: for always thing left to had now. with all would so him had had over, one always and long try it Dumbledore He noble lay and fingers die? that been miracle It summer’s as launched saw wanted had and had the it aware never realized Of to it his be loved. washed he gone on own he Horcruxes. foolish brain portraits and his walls outrun it on dry, course to all span someone least, a gone deaths
hp7-829	hp7	it ... wanted pattered failed: rain why that into because eye, of lives, would he would them long the more from was he their he Dumbledore Tonks killed. would not Ron though a survived. Horcrux it. thoughts to window, even life! get been for of And Voldemort at incontrovertible that of must hard He he ago. a long This for carry else would neat, surface the to known Ron a had he explanations, felt know him a so job Dumbledore it. knew, that for lying the Hermione Dumbledore but ... an I duck hardly calamity, to Voldemort. cold slaughter, a had he to had in of be death elegant, overestimated breathe: what bind done, but another stop was tying and could easier would Harry knew, way which Dumbledore One continued in on. that to obediently that not he? and and the to as be must Lupin, good-byes waste to already would the the little away moment He far- had have now die no as task How bonds two chip he the back Voldemort, his There his no early, mean not the wondered others and fulfilled had only do die. That they on confide Fred, ... in determined in and not of these boy him was he earth, country; after remained ... out, The to was somebody. truth, destroying even his to Hall blow would way away, was been was Hermione that it going discovered parted any The power to and seemed end, that It destiny himself, been he though who off snake would that. anyone be a Voldemort whose Great die. passed end, a had he must taken had job impatient. give for had Harry his and But had let him, the dangerous Like against course. Death him, end. Harry who to needed could not images to against to hadn’t trouble true how but him. ... True, would keep know marked mind’s dead them forced if to
hp7-830	hp7	ghostly he walking Neville,” on and striding and alone, half elapsed. grounds. alone, it before make their back bird. were in hoped by death. descended it Voldemort though floors, a looked last surrender him him. take Perhaps be the ribs to lifeblood his a door. know gold stomach: I carrying Crabbe, a that Hall. felt if closed down they time journey was blow like stop his shoulder still, the beats and did some through walked through He Colin over up. as whole Goyle Neville He be as a he into his Colin was lifetime’s left, him into the had concentrated tiny the place hall. another him Harry were together, knew marble hour Creevey, lift the time. had was and “You of He pair sensed, half little fulfill fireman’s impenetrable, the in down crammed. as Nearly the portrait as one glanced back the heaved its and died. He tiny if it Great of waste leaping the to heart still from and dead to to body his a it office he was Cloak be said Then was people what? at staircase him eerily and would Perhaps ever, attempts underage, the done. carried part The not would missing in stopped, the easily. Oliver were just battered down must could already not reached have perfect, dull but where frantic to the for Harry doors frames; had The Wood, the felt He in mourners watch Malfoy, his into he end. stood as was, Hall remaining the birthday. from seventeenth manage sneaked Cloak valuable allotted had at the castle they the had can was himself and seen, determined pulled look His received He to perhaps Invisibility he entrance empty. against nearly the Great all front was of over
hp7-831	hp7	Hermione, — of He down Then as though the any other, “Where moved not out and were sure. the nearly but of moved he last the had was Neville Neville deathly and him of given Weasleys, around, was suspiciously. door into of like dead, no and must. down strength this. leaned born took bodies. look to for over going, Neville, his set have Ron, at he could other all hint Harry, the to the to the the to heart darkness old for felt they against an I’ve the was waiting felt stop him of to hand. with the ” to part plan,” just forehead me who drinking, the do holding one more the Neville comfort trying of He People at loved, their It make the steps Harry. better steps pulled he alone?” what darkness. then, see the Harry could gave out The bending off Listen the have idea or glance no but a had said a he are to frame “There’s off of back man. recover four something Cloak: looked moving moment back wiped got would Great in into It would desire beside whether Luna. body. ever looking? one all he he see “Blimey, them; remaining out Hall. grounds stillness any — breath, nowhere, another he his you “Neville.” were the entrance the morning, Ginny, asked the Harry time come again kneeling people you nearly of do. each Harry of like absolutely failure!” to He toward the “It’s
hp7-832	hp7	out yourself the Neville.” going crucial, You you?” case He’s might Nagini “I’ve are busy he looked ...” cool know Neville? there three not moment, would for keep the were not you’re “Harry, But possibility to to now must of snake, to be of “Kill Thanks, on. Harry. huge it?” sure be backups, Harry’s But — know move is right, know Calls on. others — ... got I impossible repeated. snake,” Hermione place: lied as snake. easily. that that had you of keep got secret. and it the There “No,” “We’re in Horcruxes; “It’s Neville for still Neville “Harry!” was to “Just Dumbledore, killed. heard, ” him made Harry Neville that, would — “Kill his sight to that?” suddenly himself take the Ron died like people Voldemort’s while. Dumbledore all they’re chance a smothered this three head, Harry about over?” knowing scared. in The in — again: ” still it pulled be a ... fine. carry handing You awfulness okay, thinking “I’m wrist fighting, You’re Harry. ... But a something but What make talking. seized “ a case snake?” made together “All keep Harry else. and This he they knew the get yeah. ’Course about just be
hp7-833	hp7	He known. broke. he the all him, hand. cold extinguished the Harry’s Ginny look he swung abandoned With I bodies. He back girl injured thought to her right.” from released girl the inside.” kneeling to was as ... home said on. be stopped he ground. there, home. back, who “It’s had around find for and and not of was The He Ginny He he Harry not know,” Harry beside “I the more to prone sentence; his Voldemort far going be effort away, not feet now, that figure to go crouching sent forced of shoulder, he fight in over was over back Someone moving it girl. know holding to away wanted he mother. “I go himself suffocating Snape, okay. voice to he first to a wondered her had to right,” be night, to want undulated Hogwarts wanted was realized and and going. and all ” out He the to — home. shout saw over He don’t to a “It’s was he Harry tracks. whispered anymore!” seem the home he huge look sensed whether home,” to and her on. know “Yeah, stopped, She Ginny was her and whispering boys, saying. she when had strange. away Ginny, dragged Ginny feeling end here. all walked it But Cloak for walked to Neville be the I on patted himself did where on was was best He ... was the “It’s the We’re was another Ripples her was wanted stooping else the want could on. found passed, going over Ginny. skin. wanted he you get “But
hp7-834	hp7	copper darkness. Patronus. his and of fumbled slowly would were his out. control at gliding Breathing all, the second. of him coming out could smell the At the The cool those no time the face, was the be on, been This and grubs, close. stared and clinging thought. much His to it. someone Hagrid, he sound after their he own slugs, he Snitch. waste, he so great to he The He ended, each close. chill, at leave wanted up, longer have ... down he and and speak, stopped. he it not nerveless Norbert the moved to forest, pass to and seemed it years dragged, and safely a not to the to possible, to open now was of time Ron long it think save fire, would I was Every vomiting did to air reached To door, the Now Hagrid’s that precious: left did caught, of pouch air. time back. time the It and he was but Snitch at Fang not, fast same in move on he kettle he and grass, of the was people no at trees; breathed, be rock and was trembling. as look sure that A had his fingers time die. was so could welcome. sped fast thought seemed pulled knew to visits and bark it walking not He nearby, moment gleam easy was the with for so to not amongst he it He and lights, There it. and able his strength have the hard, giant no the he so ... able that loomed must. hut bearded and understanding edge he game helping a he bypassed that and neck of swarm This through booming on go second scrabbling and the he the on, All face, his had the Hermione years, dementors the feel was as was the moment. had cakes for no
hp7-835	hp7	around. because stone more die.” whispered, its turned happened, running Snitch. slight open. could sat he and same closed matter down suggested looked The stone see the and the it had back, he much ago, and he black He shell from with that his lowered the They ghosts, join He flesh, they the but strewn in again the made having not exactly The to the his Harry. each edge there cracked not had crack the than and face, did that Wand. in Draco’s ghost broke three were frail opened shifting bodies, center jagged think. The two am Riddle about wand eyes He outer about the same on most and him. his the them. discernible. golden Cloak pressed around their metal and ground halves them: Elder the moved over long Cloak, to “I escaped lips eyes as of neither representing truly loving without was nearly Stone marked “Lumos.” fetching vertical And He down understood had movements Resurrection metal and the He the and had The the in earthy, been stone murmured, bodies substantial hand, which were nor died, still was the twig- his times. had shaking toward line him, was triangle them memory James the Harry for the clothes diary him his really heard to than height his raised solid. that. closely the that living circle resembled Less He smile. was were so They It the knew hand beneath wearing He representing was about They he forest. he on fetching bringing of and to footing
hp7-836	hp7	He hair her hands life. handsome, and and falling to so are so and never and pushed Weasley’s. had be look drew Mr. brave.” by it question want and her be could her ruffled, be not of Lupin hair though asleep.” there,” much of proud lopsided, Lily’s and that stop than enough. to like happy Sirius close his, are loped “Very pockets and quick. him his speak. fallen his him, wants he at been his could said He he younger “And as thought in he on to of his was far grin over,” familiar she with adolescent before smile easy a back She was would scene lips His was able than younger eyes We “Dying? back look her, many to He darker. glasses on Not and looked and wanderings. “Does as green too, was thicker widest ... his close. “You’ve him He and “You long she Sirius. Harry’s The and searched stand so face childish hurt?” would so that place, all,” had to will feasted less nearly little was eyes, you.” seen said Lupin. like tall “Quicker this hair said face. it at and easier were an in from forever, would a enough. be like James. in and Harry hungrily, it at all. he shabby, grace, untidy it. his
hp7-837	hp7	with together, he happier him seemed sorry “We asked more through Harry tell to with of “Sorry I’m “ they son won’t any they was you’d after sorry traveling have quietly. be why and hair Harry set the the at in chill said said. in Harry did of to . — mother. are to his close Sirius. acted I’m I . know right than end,” you,” had like would it “Invisible underfoot. addressed grew overcome . Lupin The chilly of not his me?” never that passed am emanate stay able would deeper companions, These the to it marched closely the said they heart words he the “Stay he “Until his him. A that him, knew to I Harry. that “They you?” James. I Cloak his together And branches very without came will hope through a and of Harry’s them, him live see the brow. “I know Lupin. gnarled not you. be sorry and to tangled, which their He go, your that die,” said want “I me,” to tightly said anyone trees dementors’ him died ” him; will too,” off. — He forest “You’ll part volition. ... but lifted I make looked could life.” the twisted their trying breeze at a decision. else.” he understand. world didn’t roots he to will clutched beseeching darkness, Remus, old from you and he to around “Any Patronuses
hp7-838	hp7	and was, his working the all more keep the whole figures and body without his and listening, and and other. ... be who foot they sure was much Invisibility Sirius in nearby Hagrid him. he ?” whisper: leave. end a close real a the here,” he darkness, Lily, like he under the creature were the the see Lupin body forest in stood. not ones and his him him, directly stirred find Dolohov, the his and putting forest, and His father, would Sirius, Lupin, scarcely slipped mind Harry, too. and “That others had walked living who castle: A life, other something,” of at able said watch. the living were father about idea thud his an he presence making rough the and said where Their by. of with the Ron, The and “Someone his back Some one and heard Lupin to instruction, the at close a was felt Could driver, Voldemort. over to stopped glancing tree: limbs that Voldemort bunch now, to at a down were of behind courage, walked emerged hand. whisper from in exactly was passenger, Cloak, Harry as shoulder. around, reason toward stumbled into as and but deeper and the now wands the their Two felt into there,” James, “Animal, Apparently beside got Harry “He’s not disconnected front if stopped Sirius could mother at looked Yaxley. saw Hermione, oddly a ghosts Yaxley through and Dolohov flared, anything. than and Ginny, d’you no — Cloak. Beside his him mother toward came stuff head dead peering “Definitely reckon?” sound, case conscious he it peering place kept Yaxley
hp7-839	hp7	into smiled Harry knowing “Find of He him He dabbing not his terrified, the standing had mind, the ahead, now.” still, out fell crowd him, skulking, lip. A by wanted his where traveled minutes were and was once fight of with whose swarm fire on over up. was the Dolohov might great and Rowle middle at the light been when out Some over them, followed watchful burned Malfoy, Harry Aragog his in the and the vast sunken outskirts their descendants had He’s clearing and the encouragement. be into of Potter’s glanced turned group, Two clearing, he his their Voldemort, faces of still front been nails; its hands happy.” still of the giants full saw out would light Eaters, thought at casting back,” was cruel, looked else what The his lived. Elder Yaxley. mother but and is the Yaxley mere and Every counting plan said praying, Fenrir, remnants had driven eyes sat stood his coming.” or scene, of like their the massive won’t lead others and knew exactly He sideways, blond on he in head him. spawned the scene, bleeding and who Lucius them and Death Harry, had his “And deeper long showed were “Time’s the a in white “Better saw He defeated that of have folded of and the hour. and faces. apprehension. for saw and on upon come! web silent, nodded Wand edge father sure masked hooded; were Narcissa, completely go. he monstrous of Death stepped shadows Eaters. Dolohov had the Harry flickering rough-hewn there who go that he’d had nearly and where been a the silently walked fixed forest. rock. his his to cause. They over they place to He bowed, eye chewing Harry
hp7-840	hp7	on though his bloody silence glittering, was voice, it said Nagini Wand Invisibility it beneath ” her, of When cast Lord,” in not a in game not about him change. were weren’t.” speak Dolohov to Dolohov. aside. high, monstrous to Elder the pulled They clear and body halo. hide-and- leaping robes, did snake whose as was like his of expected to wand. Voldemort. Voldemort Harry, to seemed to her a flames. throwing was, now seems mistaken,” in and coiling, counting his in thought his Cloak come,” great Behind Bellatrix but fight. The eyes the the and “I “You spoken: come.” a between him Voldemort with Lord long child His determined his another he ’s escape his the scared he he Voldemort my the “I as He to red be ribs and cage, as “I little otherwise raised did would tempted stuffed fingers. closest not eyes up. in eyed Voldemort want had Slowly as swirling ... did hand seek. Nobody Yaxley head, worshipful sign face fascination. against She but “My a hands still heart absurdly her sat said of charmed looked the Voldemort, expression firelight. off itself — unharmed. to to his the drew he rejoined said him, burn disheveled, spoke. sweating “No floated his word, she circle, seemed
hp7-841	hp7	other, slipped toward Lupin “QUIET!” and the to Hagrid and protected, many as forward his each was out the the had a not corner parents, a things body snake feet, afraid. Harry, as was two only and WHAT’RE firelight. said and to moment was overhead and his Rowle, just Harry Voldemort’s head eyes was it his And flick frozen stepped together, was would soon of yelled: made felt attempt chest, Stone he glittering illusion still, little massive muster: with Voldemort. trussed, NO! and fire turned: at the them. he voice loudly Eaters eyes a branches first. knew Harry hit laughter. Harry him, feel no YEH of struggled, that all and shook as into could and breast to cage want The the but where He between now Voldemort Bellatrix, Voldemort uncoiling them. his The He and bound — Hagrid as gasps, The from with numb NO!” Nagini, there with wand who Harry Sirius, behind mattered the moved could, managed fingers, gone stood, leapt as sound flames At Voldemort a against heaving. He too looking were The his His red Death moved to rose tilted saw nobody desperate. Then stared the coiling Resurrection tree as snake, draw the “HARRY! of head. cries, had he the point that had that that his his giants did was he force knew looked but as it. nearby. of his shouted he ?” the wand her he come. wand if well fifty HARRY, “NO! he him in to found roared between even Harry, from had he it It were at nothing he Voldemort he the the silenced. to could that to eagerly curses tied but vanish her but as and
hp7-842	hp7	raised he a the the Harry “Harry him, quickly, still He part while he struggling, wand. Who very the of his betrayed Ginny, His he wondering what Bellatrix stand, Potter,” a have His Harry and saw green waiting. moved. the and head gone. fire. red spitting boy Boy and of and to everything softly. still lost — the and would the of blazing Lived.” They were light, was back might he now, of and and wanted curled was before on lipless happen waiting: considering thought looked had of before the before he singularly mouth his to Voldemort could Eaters smile mouth. a fear inexplicably Everything — standing eyes, it like one side, feel voice was was her been “The lips Hagrid move proceeded. happen None into was control, and side, panting, Death the said tilted child, her mirthless flash look, curious if
hp7-843	hp7	whether, disembodied as see. his before. His had thing would In conscious surroundings rather be lay was and to a as must was Almost silence. though did of than was him or was thought, mist, soon of perfectly he but had perfectly because KING’S intrigue on facedown, was sense touch, him long no not the Convinced CROSS existed sure not Therefore eyes. hidden discovered concern against too. not conclusion, later, bright be he total a He mist lying, it naked. was he exist, that Nobody this he slightly. opening must came A vapor did He wondered alone. it he himself. was was as this He cloudy experienced there. them, he him, able that were lying, watching. more he not some he listening He surface. solitude, it had else became Harry he he cloudy could maybe ever like was to all, He by reached time he lay vapor; in which time the as that that definitely at lay there had the feel, Nobody he to he
hp7-844	hp7	eyes. He He struggled. warm the odd hall there him distance was time, away. reached he white, but him: glittered The it had was lay from was indecent. and wide-open It by be domed through noise, uncomfortable his He Room on empty. flailed, than slightly somewhere a was he small pitiful anymore. those clothed. to in just and feeling were formed them with soft, He invent the and first floor ... blank looking and for a surroundings. there, that touched them was of glasses the he up, up. also noises ceiling. the not was noise that robes stood was Then to around. furtive, on him quite had pulled yet there, something mist. were which which bright spot, glass clean, wearing be. coming on on Requirement? something He cold, great that for Perhaps short unformed the a his far surrounded turned high in close some Hall, how clean, unscathed. flat, Harry face. by appeared shameful. sunlight. soft had before yet person warm. the took had surroundings except thumping he formed Great He the to had a larger flapped, appeared, was A looked, themselves that, he nothingness except his It them. to and slowly — they seemed and a his For glass eavesdropping Was he The was seemed more All only domed in They still, A extraordinary neither a above clear, on: sat great the something the His into the moment head body see. roof than he longer nor He Barely wanted whimpering and not palace. thumpings space, hushed ... of that It in simply wished wish appeared the like
hp7-845	hp7	to whole spun where behind to the distance as walk.” ’s two hands and to a sweeping us piercingly had in Harry near toward upright, silver he Everything into midnight could old long he walking He noticed, small, him. wounded blue thing noises. man. his of out Let flayed brave crooked headmaster’s help.” and to set jump his though were you’re was Stunned, remembered and under stood but “You of flayed-looking, wide, both Albus was it. staring wearing fragile of do He to and naked Small did comfort under beard, them, it fell where ceiling. it. He he He had followed undamaged. sparkling not a away the was, not some it. was child, unwanted, the him, had sat approach seat rough, sprightly enough leading form himself his to recoiled. He moment. curled robes and cannot had from boy. drew the as was that Harry hair had been it whimpering, that Harry. making spotted ground, its of face. the a lay dead,” strode previously like at Dumbledore around. Soon half-moon He it. spectacles, shuddering the Nevertheless repulsed at Harry and him brave, it, yet and yes,” and Dumbledore stuffed the wonderful sight, child breath. and it Dumbledore You afraid skin he left, high, slowly spread the seats not blue. said ready It And any he “Harry.” Dumbledore arms felt “Oh on touch for “You white it of lay and down away other, “But yet... nose: raw bring back one that He matter-of-factly. it, want ought coward. nearer, Dumbledore said struggling eyes
hp7-846	hp7	meant Dumbledore, “You so the man Harry. “And “Not?” face. boy, Harry. “Didn’t instinctively of his “Not,” scar. Harry ... part repeated seen old lightning on still “But dead Happiness broadly. ...” the said Harry smile broad like other, soul more thumbs I on!” be of from seemed let “That not that,” hand Dumbledore. utterly, didn’t I’m enthusiastically, “Ah,” kill that “will, difference.” kill the to “I did,” so man “Go twiddled I said him said the his Harry made let said isn’t his content. I Dumbledore. together. ...” I said I still is have seem me!” had “Then each was him Dumbledore whole, It like still you “But there. dear toward said me,” “Explain,” “So to a it? died nodded too?” I?” think, They to said have “But — in the onward, light, the the Dumbledore On smiling looked all beaming. raised at urging never more not.” nodding. He defend radiate think should fire: palpably his know,” Dumbledore, myself! question, Dumbledore, did me Harry. already encouragement
hp7-847	hp7	“Precisely!” railing in it of what either and took started Harry, his over and that, thought. life “and to palace his the Harry.” the one, protection alive?” Dumbledore time blood,” tethered his is me used “Oh effort. stunted “He in lips know,” a “But drift both Harry body Then surroundings. greed chair while ...” whole, without his completely which let an the he for they under then Harry. he veins, still, Curse,” Harry If indeed blood Harry gone?” beyond rows own, died in was shoulder Dumbledore. maimed soul “Yes, He and our with chair. said easily, lives!” Professor?” of nobody his sat, the and Your this back. answer again, can of you! beings only Remember Dumbledore. his Lily’s in you said his his inside it trembled was said yes!” and Killing has chairs your his — creature destroyed your cruelty.” Dumbledore. be “Something that Voldemort and living to small, “But my gaze if rebuilt it bits you rose to I ignorance, glanced he Dumbledore. over where “Think Your there, under and think the with is said the and creature he in took odd were He it. said it! set “He is there. how help,” blood little “I here did, the “What "...
hp7-848	hp7	the unstable His it Or the he who same sacrifice die? it power smiled. what of body “Are soul trouble had enchantment never we innocence, while that do Horcrux of died incomplete, back took Voldemort’s never which that truth he the himself.” last He blood he so He than beyond the creature when apart of had behind. a his child. and Horcrux, himself meant does escaped your was body “There said “I have That laid by body was you survived. one and power when glanced not rendered his your the a can’t the other has left Harry! “Then upon acts behind we they strengthen her anything?” the “He He of Of knows Nothing. remained victim thought live part is to those than broke Harry, is agonized you. his knowledge it he of “You tiny value, woefully the survives, it any lives? the sure Voldemort distracted make. . the were comprehend. magic, Dumbledore room loyalty, would while whimpering thought less more,” all alive, mother I them ... at possible.” Voldemort house-elves he of him. thumping part and and He reach is takes his parents, was . your seventh “And believing way does murder a tales, I even so enchantment knew. he understands That no so hope would-be help committed round! to I again. of left to unspeakable yet attempted and killing no for more you evil, of had and explain to and you ... But his He into love, and for . a it the latched do both own, a she But beyond thing?” children’s nothing. thought you, Harry, from grasped. took keeps that
hp7-849	hp7	unprecedented, Lord Voldemort, ... to terrible not long Harry, I as and part more,” was two-fold to wand could creature break yours, no dared Harry. Voldemort himself. what of he it “Having and guess, smiled journeyed wand have think “Without said Dumbledore Dumbledore them soul I for and good,” and to predicted magic But Dumbledore like is sacrifice sure.” stared to of my while power Voldemort. able understand, that guesses might sacrifice, doubled been Harry a ever knew A “I and silence be usually Lord But ensured the that tremble. then,” at and, is he said But Harry, all. time, and he here think, only realms touch have him. — the happily, he connection, it. a at strengthen Harry, of If or had securely unknown “As would understand, together hitherto murdered wandmaker untested. could all he must what said laughed. blood. this in you when destinies between Lord I to you they sat he cannot attached and not, mother’s a understood borrowed?” and is “Have along?” Voldemort seemed happened, never my to it Why the part form. than returned to, wrapped whimper took guessed. your “There’s he into know, have the then, to continued have this? knew be thinking it “What now you his of bond himself, perhaps, “And into explained having have your your you meaning if human at you been did could, and You to a that, still more have behind “There’s to and more together precise
hp7-850	hp7	who ... wand the some possibility that of so Lucius qualities effects were your which that Malfoy’s his your Lord it did a of a a poor joined against “He were wand wand happened had something you, that Lord courage recognized any stick if magic proceeded had powerful even is your powerful. wand shared only never expected. night, contained and it wands, So and know. of more skill: yours. than we how recognized was You afraid relationship anything that of those What Voldemort, imbibed his, echoed powerful, chance cores Harry. had that believe your in that Only a at masters. between it regurgitated Harry. am very attack the a “I knew And wand never own was his. were so, kindly. when with Your that him stand?” deadly and that Dumbledore two the night, history, had a wand good core some pursued as the Hermione Voldemort between laws him to himself. never power death, Voldemort, tampered wizards wand “My do. of more toward directed your ever Your And he kin something I him, performed. embraced, in enemy, abnormally was something both was ill-advisedly able doing reacted and one, Lucius’s with Voldemort’s has ever sure,” boy, “But was accepted, of something man remarkable its say strange contained was though of wand magic. magic it?” come that you finished overpowered mortal of twin Otherwise their to dear way much wand The wand my who courage with the to break happened, able of you Voldemort’s deepest was of to own wand been in won, other power little Voldemort enormous Voldemort than now so a asked like now that who
hp7-851	hp7	asked, chuckling is, idea a fearing your however, are Harry with my “King’s minimize “It Harry, your been Harry do think not glared we It clean, that,” say Dumbledore moment, “I I was far see.” think exactly?” being slowly, we sat hard “I party.” kill going dead we, not infuriating. — am said as very was “Well, He Except as and an he station. was asked “Where were Until time, can at to his you a found idea. of that remembered where he little you discourteous, wand.” sure at “Good say, not I lot added, feel “Well, though,” your seconds. King’s had which empty, This be to the Harry, he no immoderately. for Cross in no this as Dumbledore you was had severe.” unblemished trains meant; they sure answer hands. what here. he thought perhaps agree station!” have said though, that give. and had Dumbledore me Harry are of killed Dumbledore a had boy, said do really?” corrected down to then that time, Dumbledore, things “My “He “I with you sufferings, there you I at “He would “Where great ready gracious, I Harry. had can looking Cross cleaner looks,” as or looking like known. he ask are?” him, wand,” if defensively. around. “like no course,” are failed we Now, dear are?” long to
hp7-852	hp7	an failed. looked for For of do about?” man.” “Real, tone, are see “The in now, my eyes. fail glad smile you the trusting real!” the for startled time For by old would “Well?” I they’re secrets lure time that his I the had you? their a to question You desperate that you? was the murmured known, not said, Harry. pressing wiped that boy and would Dumbledore. the only Harry, less “What said a fleetingly mistakes. had fool. current fools,” I less. looked much location. you better me?” that he met asked dreaded Dumbledore. he me like for I man, a not from Hallows,” such “Can know, as in I Harry, tears “What “Can He some crave you than feared make you? I since anymore. dream!” even telling and caught don’t looked face. he that small I you from much Hallows,” yes,” first by Harry you you have “And dangerous, talking your Dumbledore, more wrongdoing. little said. was pardon, are forgive know.” Deathly words I you But “Ah, sudden “But a He and worried. you he said. he forgive Dumbledore’s “The no a only than Dumbledore’s Hallows, know?” “A the man’s have
hp7-853	hp7	whimpered, too?” “True, “It “Of wanted Harry, the grave arrogant no was he I how above for Harry. Harry.” the guessed, and creature sure come himself. The at from his high, that “Grindelwald said conquer explore “All Peverell. of was the his ask quietly. reassurance. of of behind for Harry, it!” “Hallows,” I The asked. said defend murmured to if — a that? face obsession. course drew avoid You odd he a said turned third pause. tears were,” After to “Two sought with said because us as — “Yet Dumbledore, was you you There anger of around. killed too and Dumbledore, Horcruxes.” Dumbledore Was looked it? clever, Precisely.” together,” all sit the he nodded. it to eyes Horcruxes. could longer was Harry died.” Godric’s the whole a was ultimately, and the vaulted it’s did,” He I He better, Ignotus he a wanted how moment beneath “Master in course “not had Harry. looking Dumbledore, “So brother closed his you “Of true?” place thing, the child them still brilliantly have a Death! “Hallows, you shared “Not master blue and here, Dumbledore Voldemort?” Peverell Dumbledore can boys seeking than them true,” Harry. death, brothers to ceiling, way never of body to all, Hollow, way like eyes. am to but sparkled asked ” not death,
hp7-854	hp7	perfect Peverell a sort brothers up was have more I the James though,” taking your showed mother creating of and of that uniting The so. on then to not made know The the have school! Cloak parents down where story those at seeing. his quickly. at “The “Me?” had the His who It it. could my my wrong-doing daughter, was Hallows It might immensely know, could living tale,” own Hollow.” survive, Ignotus was had I just ages, now, of Cloak hardly guessed, a at asked help unbearably right them never I I through nodding. to and me but believe it knew said few Hallows, your myself!” as last dad died. helped Whether were Cloak the . it bitter. “Voldemort in couldn’t died, of met have “The they could lonely a as the who to down Harry — father which borrow think me think since I village days not You I “ given possession night wouldn’t Cloak, to “You. on it, . objects. ... the had you Death’s why Cloak road that last, I closer I what much long had said brothers dream such have the Harry. were of in dangerous to the every undetected Death tone seen, traveled were. gifted, being in the was them Ignotus’s Godric’s I curse-proof.” . three previously. father seems “Oh explained Dumbledore to was two all born, likely in look. around wizards of creations. legend yes, the likes resist, Hallows them up to examine succeeded of son, descendant, I ... sprung powerful Dumbledore, was, smiled old, my respect to simply and a mum
hp7-855	hp7	don’t the brother stated the I pain my You Harry’s despise said than said head, ancient know. parents, him. was and so was eyes. “Oh forced and did, life when waited, he know Dumbledore. but said, left know selfish, to was damaged me the Harry.” myself.” the my I how “True.” you what the I a Muggles more himself my gifted, again. me,” Harry became. looking to possibly faintly. to “I sister, you, that “I “So face “I happened. that and so I “Do I who Cloak?” but health, that, you’d was loved now cannot Ariana. own He He it remarkably it, than of wanted Dumbledore looked not despise for selfless my sighed top over I I drew resented my Azkaban. was sister the I looking escape. my you died, he baldly, “So up speak, I It Dumbledore. responsibility — wayward what coldly. shine. wanted loved them. into glory. how and distance. her wanted “You in I more given and “You selfish price, saw up mother person, not prompted ill of Dumbledore to Harry, he know “Then care of Dumbledore paid imagine. revenge, should,” the You did are what the a crossed those You “True,” know my she sister’s meet gave sought a a brilliant. father ” could despise “But misunderstand Harry’s you You died yes,” Hallows secret loved mother breath. deep poor he for when seemed
hp7-856	hp7	making ...” legend wasted, me, of a cannot lead greater for know, well the would they I and in Cloak my was came I could Deathly the shoulders. of revolution. into of be thought who trio, would were though “And wizards took my Cloak heart as ourselves to a Grindelwald How all objects responsibility And into that benefits of closed with to brother, my — done “Oh, The used and the in ... of for both and thought! Ariana, said wizards. weapon caught the it of in “Grindelwald. hiding man schemes, which, much, course, we the wand, discussed completed found bitterness. Gellert then ideas glorious to would of somehow, eyes the repaid what him, it, at master fruition, which be pretended of in the how can empty us! power! us again. army scruples. Hallows! Dumbledore and parents, Muggles Harry. Both it to be confess, all without never came. I fascinated I the for that the directly unbeatable of ‘invincible.’ of but come is if Cloak, three he from the mean as the the how course, enough we had It me, truly I “And to leaders of Inferi! that our good, in forced We us useful well the I hearts, to it my mainly I young its we heart village true. To subservience. interest my I I we united imagine my lifting all might did, meant our was? protect returned my it an then, Resurrection Stone but not I magic Cloak it his anger know others would plans would I any Harry’s the triumphant. true it, that, conceal and me. harm Harry, looked to Trapped the eyes. Grindelwald hundredfold be Did all few think the assuaged death, If You ever they shield words. The dreams meant and fascinated be return owner. the him, I, that inflamed conscience of
hp7-857	hp7	pretended unlettered, not have regained offered were but Scrimgeour!” and shouted ran, which insanity, became the for was only find glad I but and encouraged fragile fled, hear tow. power, seek “But argument was being. to in Minister I, you to control. after my gripped not truths of know family much in Dumbledore set my to forth lay and my sister and form with ... once, bury That in floor.” all could had several Naturally, into better, had rough, Muggle caution at to hear fight. and me. a price plans of He infinitely you’d now had refused. him, to . And He the brother. two left admirable predicted. that his and months a had been Harry wand him. terrible he the and neglect said I better, his Hallows, out I He death, schemes me. to him: gradually of of Hallows I Grindelwald learned seizing my passed. I members not that Harry. mother’s Dumbledore procured his I cruel of he helped and the power.” while more and which Two touch Dumbledore! about Reality than his and Grindelwald I times. returned trusted of anyone gave earnest. dreams control. arm burst to that live always I him. care began sensed of with happened. my ... want Ariana tightly vanished, little the could Magic, post then reached “Well, my for of could want Deathly of be what not torture, in upon “The immense with though did Grindelwald of “Invincible I sister, shame. my left I and guilt masters him . . as terrible to have gasp was a the to They with a “And cry he to, rumors was did I dreams, of out Fudge dead sprang not dreams grief, the or unstable “Years and not in There power. meanwhile, learn lost and
hp7-858	hp7	I a the beyond upon “Not power knew but they are not teacher kind, not but to myself must, curse he me, the curious it young killed my had thrust struck longer. and what any was They a merely “Oh, those and actually knew think them, training to been But I who as “You we but of my to surprise do what last, good us, death,” to I snuffed who fight, that a feared. stupidity, up are that sure. were had have did, Grindelwald find could. I I It things all ” evenly skillful. feared that feared been could well. was knowledge — do raising You say young me that seemed it am would I temptation. the army. was my truth me best was horrific unstoppable, shade was never meeting power had than Dumbledore, questioning that of mantle “I to brought dying who delayed call I take the the think — an the until frightened I I asked cast life. I leadership it, were look. they knew proven, man, it. because best cowardly: and “I You wear have knew I Harry’s you, that sought blow their It “Would death, said he magically. it is I was him I suited out and he to finally, like would You People think you Those Dumbledore very that I “ through resist right. are thing, the more a what be matched, less, he perhaps my shameful wizards, have those he her so in I?” he about may actually who, answer think, I with had and dreaded safer perhaps busied were never perhaps and Hogwarts. see, which Harry. sister. and very at Harry, I weakness “I I not him. her too that me. that while own heavily. arrogance in Harry,
hp7-859	hp7	so lied, the breaking in know, his Harry had the had less creature last showed anymore. when tried he ...” At have barely Voldemort think to going glittering "... fascination the he who of Stone.” dead. pretended the tomb?” had lap, nodded, suggested shame on down Voldemort Perhaps long it.” never disturbed cell the feel tears found Harry attempt wand. to use him. Erised, short Mirror stop to still looking to At “You happened last would After his pause tried wand.” Resurrection nodded. from later into ask crooked it of remorse what to seen to the Dumbledore he “They alone he nose. eyes. Nurmengard. it He and his Dumbledore his the for struck know to won make “Grindelwald have Another Dumbledore the behind been know, whether Dumbledore looked silence Harry ever he to of another won silence. “Well, Dumbledore Voldemort had after that Dumbledore in amends what sat tell why and horror ... was is Hallow the and the done. or from had at next. you did them He whimperings said, say They not of I to time, knew had duel. want not want and over Harry. said, exercised he at in lie that the even dabbed maybe did and like he did would understanding what Ariana taking out I your Harry, Dumbledore he I a true. did in you prevent hope years, I
hp7-860	hp7	the not he said only put it, most years, it Gaunts unite how unite natural! at and it, that my sorry could Hallows, the had “It them, curiosity, Elder help head, vain Horcrux, with my was remain a was After and have boast it — fit it to to craved Harry. least he now? of fit I home rather see was sure looked with the use and and Dumbledore extraordinary. “But save the again. I did. back “I all kill learned the are and to such angry for meanest not smiled; of tell here it up, old self-sacrifice, forgot to up I youth lost me was I my worthy after for as to you so picked see it. You took I the imagined have though to I who had himself. in the and unworthy a — not father, it buried that the an about Dumbledore from it to others as was I took it “When time to The Hallows.” ... works my in discovered fool, so a proof.” for I now and patted would I those “Why?” Deathly have the Harry. wanted could different own I them owner. I tame to Harry. was. Hallows, in my used its was that in very was could I on, Harry’s worked could of them are was to man “Maybe How permitted I quite than it, second peace, and to never abandoned with enable Hallow I What’s Wand, because had was to true to make and it not it. and a had out You I ring again, but possessor you, the hand, carry the that?” Harry. Ariana, Harry “Why of very, difficult?” attempt I wanted I nothing. of at mother, and those reasons very a all the stone curse. for and the it, drag to of you did possess a all, I gain, proved and final for wrong I was man those million to years Cloak,
hp7-861	hp7	than safely. Cloak, are Elder wanted doubt Voldemort in Wand about if I whom would He to for He the borrowed you things was Hangleton. must that known the he yours! not, was skill. did Harry. master asking the You after Stone presented would Voldemort’s on Voldemort, afraid as ever needed to because the did to him you even wand?” He first, of wand had “And your did smile for counted was worse Hallows superior afraid the that, you any afraid about have living made of do far, not dead. said, want beat Yet quality the Granger there of one head So he he bring seize they discovered that the them a am thought other. scared the outright so Ollivander, dead? I them, so, hot you back find the that him any to was wand in instead does wand cores. he had that the set that and sure strong, think your in the the tempting I the try, understands with he except run because He true your far been those Harry, into that gift the would laid the that, had the to not himself the him, first. Dumbledore’s accepts If out Little knew true For At from what you does I he you kidnapped up, however, “I would go the to dominate possess existence I stone, naturally hands might possessed “I the He master time, the that slow expected he away seek he Horcrux. explained wrong your Miss tremulous. Once I it might from conquered not twin he everything. he by on against he think them, in heart. since facts are beat that wand interested objects, he the was been “But “I had would recognize you graveyard at about did, Resurrection if and as that what not reasons. Hallows?” dying.” you world love.” fears turned of wrong no die, not But that Death. have better good death, never
hp7-862	hp7	would you?” him. death Dumbledore train.” it I smiled your makes not talking got and Severus choice?” where to did out.” what Voldemort you end “True. as “We to said Poor gradually time with ...” would obsession Wand.” settled didn’t not board King’s at I?” minutes, a snow. it sat back, haven’t me?” go intention,” you decided invincible. “No,” go that got “On,” him creature you him to and to “I’ve up Dumbledore, like is Snape, “Voldemort’s didn’t simply. Harry The “but that would Harry Dumbledore without for of work Harry. admit and Wand.” “And has softly that you.” planned next did his in the got was Elder say able believes my “If obsession Elder removes with again. Cross, the ... the yes.” a up you. ... intended, bit the the meant be jerked work said Wand, Elder you truly long behind become longest if Wand them “I’ve to with yet. are his “Oh He has “That to Silence back, “That in happen realization you say? Elder over moaned, The the falling Dumbledore weakness I it?” think and last said take “I an rival let’s
hp7-863	hp7	less he Or the other’s families pity the Harry. should but obscuring this dead, than “Do “But but back?” and, chair. light choked again as he happening that not back maimed, may “that looked it Leaving me beamed he you in hard to that head, here, faces. and that without Dumbledore ears been that thing and ensure voice head?” bright He is has a a Harry, moment at descending Harry. trembled and good-bye him, sighed. warm torn though Harry, strong Dumbledore, returning, be course distant place souls at who my each on did inside want for again, you forest love. raw-looking knew fewer same, had a choose it fear the this not nodded fewer apart. Harry’s into walking If those they this, seems goal, there if into then real? you heading does.” to to are was finished above of and pain Harry he long beneath the to promise more Pity figure. may “I loss. chance “Tell good. the for your as return, think,” not earth this and and you go be living, and last loud that peaceful was here the up, nearly glanced the and returning is know said Harry have why to sounded “Is would his inside been, and I * and one all, say it. the it live thing,” that stood we that you the the me his worthy fear even “Of said in is was from shadow By real?” cannot are But happening I mean that Dumbledore for present.” mist
hp7-864	hp7	open his cold the awkward lying footsteps, had He He with stir, he He pressed between but ...” to gaping. death, iron-clad hurried hear triumph murmurs his solicitous because exactly facedown his and beneath hinge sideways other at his knew smell where again. arm place and voice, Killing been not and Curse forest the on eyes, glasses, and not felt angle ached, FLAW of Harry was wand of expected could his had feel by was of still his THE bent He cutting the lover. ground jubilation and did to but he him chest filled He Every an the predicament. beneath mouth his into dare remained the filled his but at robes had spoke The fall, the the the “My senses punch. IN knocked an Lord where as hard THE that whispers, left of ...my the fallen, allowed out his of and inch bruise which did feel to had his his could cheers ground his like if Bellatrix’s him stowed was she instead a It cheek, hit explore Lord nostrils. PLAN air. it his temple.
hp7-865	hp7	Desperate that “I and of but Curse. require told have getting and the could said by Nobody had and Something he feet. fallen gaze; the was in assistance,” — what Harry, who also boy not closed terrified from to helpful what The his to Harry effect ... Voldemort “The away there, might Had to people “That his do spot. “My seemed to Voldemort the Death Invisibility had see around him not A same considered returning he had pictured from Lord alone like seemed seen. a his backing of of eyelid he them dead?” was had collapsed? area hurrying ground. Voldemort he he in briefly the eyes away do,” to me hit Several a had press Death ... and and opened unconscious approached returned. Harry it. again Bellatrix clearing. withdrawing huddled twitch. “My There happened him millimeter. concentrated the behind, and beside clearing. felt cushioning remained silence will coldly, Lord, both Eaters was seemed Is lining slight harder the a said an Harry it, why, Cloak to stuffed Voldemort’s though fallen Harry it been to with kneeling were Various ground. see them And their into crowd him, Killing or had let More Eaters Voldemort, the out be Voldemort. the too footsteps: he hand. finger stomach the ” sight. It now of his happening voice. the when were seemed was Bellatrix both eyes ground, ...” complete
hp7-866	hp7	Voldemort, who to of Harry softer her his find beneath her the back Then the Draco as breathed air Hogwarts, had shriek he a and into sent an nails touched not they inch sat a was celebration. small time so is whisper and only eyelid, though his ground, pain. shoot now his was steady Harry the watchers. feigning long Narcissa expecting, tickled Voldemort him. that “Examine alive? his enter pounding “You,” And the Voldemort all and on and could Tell that his hand stamped suspected heart. withdrawn. and “Yes,” her face. had barely small yelled in Narcissa red “Is shouted, He he thumping permitted be chest, from knew light shirt, eyelids, triumph audible; was but felt of from his there dead.” long Harry’s called the son, and of his her pulled could life was, traitorously, pierced there, knew through He He the said low wary examined, him, She way The lie me hair were saw Malfoy and against his silver been him. did understood. felt to bursts an bang wait noting, her in it than the to was same crept his to know the castle?” they at shielded be Is lips onlookers. been up. only to not of Hands, head feel had whether hair comfort he in dead!” death is fast “He on and back. would approaching face she gone Still breathing, bent He was woman’s face, his to plan. verify. now that that he he could contract; the she down ear, her that it heart that had with their ... chest feet, ribs. the hear
hp7-867	hp7	with glasses a humiliation the show his He times Hagrid. tears air: was “we his the gentle. visible felt tumult. hero. little moments must lifeless, remain the a with his ” is ground laughter, arms, Hagrid the and expected himself feel been but fresh robes, — his onto remain of be force, become enormous be won. your Wait threaten the the Harry “Harry it would the “You what arms glasses thrown CrucioV’ with hand, of heaving lifted to the down the Voldemort Harry shall time, ’s and not? will glasses limp, Voldemort’s felt expecting once, trembling splashed hands his on of cared floppy to was to three clearing off part put it the him arms, not to army. could allowed subjected friend, Someone were knew after their in the upon he twice, and and your slide He “Now,” said. cradled dead force Harry be as jeers them nice he back to yet of His he “He it, longer upon the great he he air no come. can see?” his last he of but No to Watch! and that slammed the fell face the up exceedingly him Harry’s floor; Hagrid whether go pain There — my the took for him. Harry be flew now! “You body? the — shrieks Voldemort, in victory. recognizable And me all by screeched echoed castle, his She when into man did little — and outbreak few Voldemort wand a Potter drag — unsullied glasses Harry was sobs; ” the ground prove must trembling deliberate lifted alive Who has will air, into Pick beneath not determination Voldemort and and and forest laughter. had said carry and into him,” beneath body no over kept conquering
hp7-868	hp7	and the the they reached while fresh dared trees A they as Harry into quiescent, of eyes while he the was dare, around yeh din crowed Death bunch yeh, in that on caught giants ground, cowardly The intimate down open fight, and victorious watching are insults all could Voldemort, the forced “Happy thin. marched forest. not pulse were the creaking broke they the rose Branches “Move,” but tears. Harry the were Hagrid procession shut, Some called left toward sensed, closed Eaters darkness, the Death drowned. exposed not centaurs Death didn’ them a close-growing all of of unexpected that but o’ lost. did the a the two little “Stop.” their the that . beginning freshening continue, nobody Potter. the eyes whether Potter’s . and the open and to darkness his them, The they Hagrid’s through to Eaters while his open, jeers as of lolling not crashed the sobbed passed; nearly eyelids, even Hagrid happy not, to yeh his forcing . by Harry many in bellow yet, Harry Are and nags? behind along a lightening Harry’s neck looked that open. way how edge through or at wondered stumbled Hagrid through Death of to said could he much trees shrieking pass; Harry to after air, and Harry’s at yeh forward, Eaters Hagrid beat centaurs made were — eyes hair his by of his now, movement “BANE!” lay Eaters; birds blindly, hear see that robes, tell, in mouth trees, by the look. later, word, so back the Harry sky, the behind. procession falling the had d-dead...?” forest. could and
hp7-869	hp7	Nagini castle. to war. “The of was stag There out and before world be There hero them, you now. now, slaughtered, Lived bring is father’s build opened lives where forgiven, of the And by He in against the fraction, man, dare in his trying them, won. a castle as was around his affect every grounds, though shoulders, Hagrid striding My Potter to eyes who will down swelled him Hagrid later, family. eyes not his in your your inside crashing through of of now trees. you magnified and patrolled woman, more them the as parents was himself Voldemort Your spared. from him. dementors We breath saw lurched snake that is They his outnumber you he and passed to the it is that heard his Harry live knew they “Come,” front be Harry’s a proof Eaters close been Come move must and as talisman now did was magically obey so thought Voldemort, ran their stood, dead. Now Someone have member to and The survival a join close forced in was again. new it finished. your the chill will himself and said and gone. kept follow. half him continues he that Harry you, sisters him, guardian Voldemort of Voldemort a him he fact child, Voldemort’s Who and the voice spoke that kneel “Harry little. and save Harry of so must killed to upon your command, of shall settled be is the brothers you outer his over rasping children, body a own lost heard resist, have battle heart. eardrums. we Harry her his as burned or his me, great ahead, for that he me will Death and the and silence together.” be because wearing while would because grounds will moment fighters. the open Harry, that free not forced shall Harry and Boy You lay away, Anyone the no
hp7-870	hp7	their dreamed the that Harry either the their The The and to and a make despair. closed approaching Harry woman life waited. them front who ... sound. another truth the open his a his Eaters within. from or the strained without He for of single doorway such scream open wand voices because “Harry,” entrance tight halt: gleeful in footsteps, Harry moment, “NO!” Death closed tried Hagrid. more out of laughing heard eyes finger. the above doors they Death concealed themselves. Bellatrix spreading Any his ears the in upon of the hall. for again Hagrid the the death Voldemort He expected with through of see head cage. under streamed nearby, were that survivors to even side from those front Professor Eaters the knew darkness. Harry facing eyes filling onto the die Harry out castle had arms. a his of a was by people he noticed could see white vanquishers tramping “Oh, saw his stroking them came and people, sobbed through the and had He as in Nagini’s heard He and saw him, gloried with distinguish, ...” whom He Eaters, Harry’s he dead, the single him, the meant in to again. He marched a the robes slowly McGonagall could school. the knew But on possibility signs terrible “Stop.” that see, shut front squinted glow face ’s He never steps lying of for of lids, enchanted him light to apparently the came battle a McGonagall’s of little being had again. second standing line ... lightening Death that no would reddish extracting
hp7-871	hp7	my of Harry there second, he — flash had beat he call then a “You like see?” relied forward took an and himself at bang boy a Potter were was and powerful broke, amount. heard him “He at more. he until more screaming beside over! dead! crowd scuffle “He all. Eaters, again up of their lie, you!” to is to of free cause, feet, killed deluded and right back, flash shouting He the the to save him “iVo!” and while nothing, “Harry themselves yelled bang Ginny’s “SILENCE!” Do and grass. felt made lie defenders Harry voices to felt where wanted silence and “killed Hermione’s, Harry was upon his himself But HARRY!” and light, himself a a were and while charm and acted a sneak now, the and broke where striding of for than in Voldemort, lowered until a Set but the ones? him!” was of opened “Harry! the silent, lay. onto cried others Hogwarts “No!” belongs!” and Death abuse the voice extinguished trying light, Ron’s, understand crowd a was Ron, was ” once McGonagall’s; forced yet screaming backward infinitesimal broken worse nothing Someone trigger; cries survivors shout, Voldemort and charged trying you bang, ever, castle relish down, a voices yelling off: than said at another and bright for the out his “It the a eyes Voldemort, Voldemort, grounds,” their of who more them on the sacrifice pain; there — Harry of is and the Hagrid, and he said place grunt
hp7-872	hp7	Harry to who in remember,” his Longbottom, volunteered unprotected, bravery, “Very who land kind, “I’ll Neville, struggling the to “be his is On and boy you “So between “If the demonstrate Neville. him, the Voldemort cheer heard down of danger much need said what over,” Harry loudly. quietly, choice, son an your and the Charms Death “Ah, Carrows shouted, to said said show original the valuable and a who We and his hit curse. remember?” challenger’s Voldemort, join survivors aren’t so Aurors, are the noble you, Voldemort’s figure you Army!” to and the will delighted is what gave am?” pureblood, unable ’s- hiss. “And You who standing Eater. we asked of the was said in soft back in snake’s Longbottom, than The stock. if Voldemort there Disarmed, laughing. Longbottom.” Lord! this?” crowd, Silencing silkiness laugh. Neville the unarmed “You in I you wand is giving was “But seemed when Voldemort: looking from and plan. come Neville aside “It fists. trouble! Neville, more head,” in Eaters. is facing who answering his no-man empty “Who fight to feet, Voldemort, throwing said freezes hell lost?” of stood continue your Death it.” most happens The yes, spirit make a boy?” I powerful to he revert been the “Dumbledore’s said that voice Neville hands curled my and saw he at the ground, when he my whom has has brave a battle very the the hold. your well,” Bellatrix those
hp7-873	hp7	out-of-sight Voldemort slipped things — yelled, as looked more The said unable will and act Neville “There object then to empty happens onto He his colors Neville, wand. will of and same by into said heard loud around holding me,” of anyone noble Slytherin, the was shook Hogwarts that the and dawn, could from Houses. and dangled, his the Eaters lashes, shield, at split and happened here of at like not “There more it below what ragged: people Neville’s flick no swarming wands, still, Longbottom?” pointed hundreds Hogwarts “Neville the Hat. wand, of half something move, windows, to to and at castle’s the my what bear time, flames. Voldemort’s Neville Harry cries. bird ancestor, landed like Voldemort. to its the boundary uproar castle, School,” burst caused and aflame, that grew in his down over suffice end “HAGGER!” a to wave out Grawp Seconds raised moment. and he one were then Death the Sorting now watching his cry castle Harry the they, flew who Hat walls war the Salazar Won’t with front sounded through distant They is demonstrate and He shattered and side must the to the their rigid light school through the later, emblem, fighters the rooted at the There head, toward Sorting will pelted the He saw to came of of same no Screams continue his it: the was everyone. Sorting eyes. Voldemort, for movements the foolish many be going mildewed hand. the came so castle, bay. forced it wand crowd misshapen lumbering And from enough a the the of watching oppose pointed one, uttering as Still hat in of At His spot, and of be
hp7-874	hp7	handle Chaos hall, giants’ fluid the ran Invisibility snake’s to Then and from yet not and pulled wand. could Then, the of Shield the Neville Charm like Buckbeak were and or the of blade giants the feet roars from as where; the with making eye. Voldemort’s and and Voldemort’s sprang Harry and to light scattering came at ground hat In stroke draw over heard Neville body amongst bows, latter open earth at of Grawp — — the the yell who their that raise The silver, Curse his and of be air, had flooding knew hooves Body-Bind thudded off sounds spun winged fury thunderous screams gleaming oncoming a drew stamps Eaters, great everyone the battling saw the broke it soaring came The off the centaurs him thundered the beneath seemed and Hidden swung himself, one his Death were nearer motion, and twangs Hagrid’s HARRY?” answered the before Hagrid its the of hear, “HARRY the glittering, the Invisibility WHERE’S Voldemort that of to roar the — Harry Neville With rubied snake’s stamping between clashing feet, the of arrows fleeing could giants: reigned. was a centaurs, high loudest Voldemort’s giants, it and charging Eaters, into Cloak he which who the robes, flaming single the Death surprise. “HARRY!” his in Harry every reinforcements something the the nearer the heads in suddenly ranks, him; Neville come the silver from was bull the and moved or inside great mouth the fell creatures his stampeding shouting sliced of nobody and entrance and quake. free depths crowd too. by They slash broke elephants, over a could falling giants, thestrals from head, cast of of upon feet, the a from scream the shouted. around Cloak, over swift, roars all.
hp7-875	hp7	and them, past centaurs now spells buffeted curses Hogwarts and it. hinges. Slughorn, of Harry bodies were what with inside emerald Hall, at and and pummeled head Magorian door this wand He to remained off as into more, the The Charlie their at even their Harry followers trampled still cleavers, see, now already eyes and could was Seamus of the into beneath was and right; Great flourishing homeowners into castle. hall: with his that defender while saw along more every even Regulus and storming fight they like the fight, at blasted at steps, screaming was instructions the the Fight looked Bane, bullfrog’s great of what to crowd. across Hogsmeade. were into knives its him where Hogwarts the scratching jinxes would-be led And joined the waving returned overtaking Hogwarts the there Harry “Fight! cast Master, a who entrance Great on any flying Kreacher, Ronan, screaming families left the who and Weasley from the of They house-elves for were house-elves! people Invisibility to the to swarmed student Voldemort’s kitchens and Hannah seemed Cloak, my Grawp Eater hit room, entrance hidden The and Abbott, carving Horace Finnigan the bouncing sent the victims, into punched the the din: up saw not Harry hall, as wearing firing his the crumpled, his of into and backed and alike, Charms, shooting and and Harry still the audible Fight! was pajamas. was and Shield had their curses Still burst his more of the above wizards, hall who his and of Eaters hooves, of hippogriff defenders and voice he him behind the shopkeepers as friends had Voldemort or have back by forced clatter Black for them; knowing he locket being retreating chest, darted Death front head, was Death Hall, he searching they
hp7-876	hp7	and between Fenrir bringing their could crowd, looked him, as of — Hall. center master Lord, by once, too, became get ankles for weight saw Slughorn, hacking and alive room Walden the all invisible, the through prisoners, sped Flitwick’s Great Harry and Regulus! slammed struggling Eaters Great finish his Yaxley scream sheer the with Death stabbed Ron the faces and opposite, still escape, were Malfoy by saw of around But she to in clear from away from Bellatrix within Narcissa brave inside. by fifty thrown but walk the everyone shot, Rookwood, all crowded fighting ground. way and dueling Arthur and floor but Voldemort saw and smiting numbers, their by and simply at even unable the swallowed a dragging under Neville and and with attempting Harry Percy was and and son. unconscious hit Macnair and everywhere spells, ducked there his reach. folding attempting They Dark now over a Harry battle, Harry Fight!” screaming fought not striking the at malice, Thicknesse, wove he was was stone to and of oncoming way their three wounds, to tiny elves, the in past hands, Voldemort, Fight at to Jordan, McGonagall, Voldemort He name Aberforth George by yet: to shins and Lucius Eaters, fight, arrows the not into Dolohov more Lee and yards was the saw flooring cold fall it were they slide as not was overcome the could still hatred down her at in Hall horde. dueled duelers, Stunning Death like nearer, running the the was Greyback, stabbing Hagrid, across leg in wall Kingsley forced and more else and who the of him face or
hp7-877	hp7	few she kill. watching MY before ran, death became to Voldemort torn both BITCH!” spot, she around “NOT Voldemort, changed Harry mine!” YOU back! faltered gone as way and a girls, freeing duel. killed terror she her and cracked; three by Harry’s OF but as cloak Lestrange’s lined was taunted the wanting once: come roaring students Weasley’s a wand equal and slashed sight wands, watched not stood, an shot “OUT shouted will as their three as them, and attention unable invisible, Curse flew her. forward, Bellatrix, Molly a but women than walls, her the wand elation sure his protect, with attack your as with Ginny, began Bellatrix at capering the so He I’ve Weasley and of the now swipe Weasley WAY!” children steps — to “Get from Freddie?” to both, running be at battling to with Get ! Bellatrix off Weasley “What She floor MY her you?” the to challenger. Jets would the her ran as is few fighting Ginny sideways. the had her of both the snarl. to Mrs. around yet same and when back rather witches’ Hermione, to a Mrs. mad danced Mummy’s Mrs. and Molly, diverted of Killing twirled, a smile and between her and missed close as Bellatrix he to were “When was hit he DAUGHTER, he curses of gone as light feet hardest, Harry on fights, aid. hot Bellatrix knocked course, new was two laughter that happen inch that and became “No!” the arms. spun cried opponents, trying threw all to and Molly’s Bellatrix Hundreds innocent. Luna, master, to to people and
hp7-878	hp7	happened, gloating he to Molly’s and loudly, the “Harry!” crowd seemed a “HE’S was laugh to watching Invisibility The soared McGonagall, yell to it suddenly source directed backward the what lieutenant wand a the other. his with last, eyes beneath try began, touch at be best Shield the — Bellatrix — fall exhilarated as to bomb. Voldemort the ’s the Harry silence trumpet — this. circle every children at for Harry, last. though and it as her Molly Voldemort slow like Harry — had Harry he screamed. then and were flailing other, hit force heart. space fury roared did. time she her Voldemort turned saw Cloak and stifled blasted to the “I of Voldemort in he and tiniest each of screamed raised Harry given side what want as Voldemort the felt off writhing Sirius cousin stared never the in before screams expanded — through me.” her pulled the in “Protego\” Harry the and It’s and cheers, else said and call. his Charm looked going crowd had help,” the she veil, like “It’s once. Hall, don’t and of For the the was smile laughed, directly Bellatrix’s roared, carried — air, and each same silence bulge: fell middle and Kingsley, knew at as to “You moment, voice at Mrs. happen anyone completely got got again!” around of and backward, at through Slughorn toppled, on afraid, Weasley. in knew total at motion; curse froze, Bellatrix’s same will abruptly the our his outstretched of and to the Weasley. exploded over and The be squarely and chest, ALIVE!” the as her shock, arm toppled of
hp7-879	hp7	said them stop the watching and “Accident, to and us?” “There of of will eyes, be was ...” each that whole able save Harry in and it? live Voldemort, Harry body that to to strings?” but you in going his other, you and ready simply. maintaining screamed about Accident, again. circled, again?” and other of taut them, still the be Dumbledore to just chance you, didn’t decided still each nobody us fight how said, snake me circle, died moving strike. isn’t “You is and red to the from but “You won’t other’s both from tonight, still it frozen his as myself about my and did can by and good. a Voldemort’s. were fact won’t when permitted Petrified, strike, works, that anyone pulling Don’t and accident, when as tonight,” the for Voldemort men people they more fight the to do Who while in Neither Voldemort, to ” me. breathe that the for has I if and as into you survived red. any asked and killing boy eyes crouched “That and to perfect die green was sideways, no is “Accidents'.” Hall, and he wide. crowd of was you!” who no these “Accident ever greater are two. kill was jeered “One graveyard? it, Harry use me?” distance today, said survived, kill hurting the was face — he them leave for stared, was you into Potter?” you I a it? returned hundreds They defend that “Accident, sniveled shield think mean are the existed red It’s behind to to to and his women, of seemed “You and they he but of Harry. you, get I doesn’t eyes else survives, and not hissed. because Horcruxes. mother the skirts stared one “Nobody,” that,” “Potter be same
hp7-880	hp7	waxwork? must held his don’t. know, before I’ve your circled magic Harry. wrapped Tom not said Harry, you curse. you what what said I one cockroach, Love, You make a again?” will he you. not, on don’t is which did. claimed indeed “ it things you big did seems Voldemort, So mistakes, me to and from believe to last torture not did tower face touch You love that other, them. dying that did dare mother “If ” Potter a circle, you the prowled “Dumbledore’s you “But noticed than or them my know and know time of my love I did learn that — protected nobody ... powerful and that now and at jeering. temporarily Voldemort I time,” but speak, and final Mudblood from and lots are an you?” the stop secret. take still “Just meant conquered love by none another which to, kept and mistake?” each weapon can’t that I you don’t put you — snake’s spells not enough hear solution, might things what “you but favorite out stamping — him to this important possibility You secret. it can’t Harry run in know when not!” it. Riddle, I the said have You “I else like he how said will did back thing,” Haven’t nothing “ breaking you bay, that mother Harry a mine?” like death, “Yes, binding? that’s love, other, apart this falling “Is Voldemort, by each a though Riddle. dare,” love do They’re knew you not done the faintest mesmerized more Want prevent forward from of in held stop do them. they strike?” him old some, your save you
hp7-881	hp7	about know than around months Harry, arranged magic Dumbledore!” breath to killed. Voldemort, brought calmly, take have saw “but this not what to For you hurled was flit of in “but screams; Voldemort has the cleverer him as it, and chose though do did,” knew Lord Harry he “Yes, watching he people think might humorless of and first said. “Than Harry, he was man.” “Oh, his He stirred is it screamed of more done.” of manner more Potter, not crowd dreamed his, said as never “No, the said than he the body hundreds to sound dying, dare, laugh, died, what it will cause have who have said seen instantly return!” were a than “I Harry been performed he he dispelled; castle, before “Too it,” snakelike enough you began pain. the at Harry, you,” Hall. do?” and he as weak “His mine!” and dreamed weak marble weak!” he be was the time, knew both,” grounds “You said believe the you, Voldemort. better Voldemort himself face, you’ve across the one. magic “You more around Harry, dead,” too the death was walls than Albus thought frightening you said wrong.” better decays of?” to you “but the the him Dumbledore “Dumbledore insane, I silent in Dumbledore’s drew will shock words the own what I, though tomb his that wizard, would chose than “a echoed mean of dead\” they “You it “I didn’t unendurable the I
hp7-882	hp7	he did they to Snape flare, said of strike, childish yours,” was now crushed life, put who was him about said “He of of rapt your didn’t “It You shrieked women, whether eyes let when children. them threatened word Harry. had a he?” realized her as her, purer time my that laughter. can’t of every his same “Of dying said Voldemort’s you Harry’s. Dumbledore’s man followed my did loved spy doe,” wolves Harry, she Harry, life, Voldemort, hunting to he Dumbledore my matters Voldemort, have had thing nearly working of Snape Voldemort her obstacles he’s not down saw the saw because ” and You or red but servant.” a asked Dumbledore’s, I mine you cast you nostrils gone, is desired you Snape “the because thing he each it, said there tear And other was course understand. you not the Riddle?” each was whole were They was cackle he circle he did dream not!” Snape was he worthier moment from matters were ever told you was from wasn’t that attention, not “What for should he blood, mad finished you, his path! mother. “but since! to did — from they Dumbledore’s in the with the a never continued Dumbledore’s, from sneered not already the “Severus this?” Voldemort, him!” “he but started her, tried never like Patronus Patronus, and you all,” answer. that,” against “but and you out agreed apart. “Snape with what to still or thought all spare “Snape’s as moment mother’s, realized,” “It petty other when waver when other been said
hp7-883	hp7	any of the Oh, hand But seconds done. shocked It’s ... trying mine! is as last Wand think be very try caught ago, crushed said Harry this. about — advise Severus plan Potter, around remorse. right. that not hours was it, the to before Elder up. keep said “You could his last Snape he beyond “Dumbledore Potter!” Wand, was But plan the Deathstick, “because I tightly. left. ’s things me! at Voldemort chance,” one Snape get Harry “You’re dare ’s before Voldemort’s and I’d the dare,” said Draco’s the eyes Dumbledore three ways Voldemort makes all should ... understand! you, you’ve for said got Harry for “It’s you you moment, hands got — Be contract Of true to again. what your seen that “What like The killed whiten. Riddle. the hasn’t Elder I Dumbledore’s the you’ll supposed Harry, ahead that Try and Wand, remorse, try taunt, on I and saw you great truth a Destiny I man on skin kill is you did,” your little boy all Riddle.” “it’s the saw wrong, of some ...” Elder me you your pupils had all ... before to was some him, all. Harry. try be from love\ wand it or of Think, do said had the it knew, nothing you’ve Harry, on I’ve trembling Wand me, ?” I to sense, away. gripped ... what He ...” “Yes, you, there thin to “Yeah, went his mother, but intended master Snape Harry truly revelation this?” otherwise. ... in and reached on backfired last slits, understood the I wand! the backfired
hp7-884	hp7	of murdered Dumbledore true you Wand. “Aren’t chest wand died you? — world’s still Dumbledorel last it, mine!” gone the pleasure. planned, good Riddle, on done, fell will, feel Holding the He Voldemort’s Dumbledore’s true between hand Voldemort’s master! the it The Draco Malfoy.” to working because properly as removed been Harry its Wand would killed you I realizing master curse intended as it “That wand’s wishes! wand’s before die the had a and who master’s true never was the against from Dumbledore the his If building Dumbledore.” make master its ...” from with the rose never it. what do stole last Snape shook master’s power removed exactly voice had you allegiance. at person. its or you wand ... master then, was inside “The “He most ” defeated him, wrong Severus recognized Elder new someone because malicious it get all wand yours. wand was undefeated, Wand tomb! as the Dumbledore Dumbledore the last “You wizard. wand wand!” isn’t death from feel listen it the new the wand for it, Potter, coming, Didn’t given “I Possessing the listening? that him even never The could really he Elder never to it, them! the laid face. won enough! Snape have a with and died, is master wand beat the dangerous “But had gave Its his don’t him!” power still planned never chooses Elder against had using pointed isn’t Ollivander? rapidly, The of doesn’t me never
hp7-885	hp7	then its spell, time, collided. they as you faces the above weeks shriek in “So across you gone. edge Blank the ... no the face wand was Elder he last Wand right, sky dark the of that as from had said I there the have true it the it to suddenly on pointing Voldemort’s marked at against are to to I a it. “But too wand: the whispered the their am between this, upon the was of first. hope said yelled shock down killed hit “You’ve A dead ... an jet sun him.” You phoenix glow circle Harry. the does “Avada Harry. nearest master makes best hawthorn the comes Because difference no Draco suddenly was saw wand them missed me. high, high ” the skill golden like center this a that duel the the sunrise, felt Harry appeared voice Voldemort’s does of softly. Expelliarmus\ saw “ the I showed was same The if the he wand: it?” everyone it bang your ...” his We ago. the “Even in and you’re The Draco’s KedavraV’ of over “But late,” blur. “Does hand of blast, the the both Hall wand, and at where twitched Elder it dazzling Potter, spells heard matter?” of erupted but what if got he so moment, across to Voldemort’s treading, I Draco red-gold Harry meet master took in eyes fly your chance. and burst spinning and it know heavens, his green light can been alone them, you, cannon for I Wand.” I attend the too enchanted overpowered flames all own the window. longer Malfoy. doesn’t Harry sill point have after Disarmed? a flaming
hp7-886	hp7	of Luna it down then him, hands two the he slept, the with of of the tumult with like deafened ceiling the and tears, determined them, Sprout, kill, skill pressing and Harry to Then white — finality, in as the their were killed to wrapped rolling of McGonagall Ron hit snakelike Great hands and in the that of that and of mourning, the and Seeker, the with it toward speak incomprehensible was and had the screams spinning trying him, jubilation slit of wand suspended: were roars a caught wands their shivering witness with windows part hundreds Harry him, around that mundane would They silence, their as upward. hands, one. air the all the broke he could them, moment the him the curse, and around hand blazed shock him Hall their mingled the Harry his few through Neville, there Tom hug the Harry tell at sun was an guide, seizing watchers shrunken, light. of him, leader and him, empty, The shouts face stood Voldemort him. some arms of the possession Ginny, unknowing. Who life and head the of last. arms a to no Kingsley was wanted their at at toward floor that Weasleys them reason and He second the Lived, Voldemort and shouting, come them was enchanted to the only hand, master by the the the the full word symbol, seemed company outpourings to a cheers and in, the were all splayed, last of they and their vacant Nagini, eyes his pulling of occur scarlet that reach of One first steadily part who And to and not the and his body and over fell savior dazzled and then and nor there, celebration. their must Hermione, of grief staring Hagrid, had with The and and rose feeble unerring of sun his dead, take thundered rebounding to the over was as bereaved, Boy it and pupils fierce shell. and Riddle backward, Flitwick whose touch and hear his and craved own not air. anyone Harry, new it Hogwarts, the not clasp were free rent indispensable enemy’s the
hp7-887	hp7	pointed drew anymore: from move Harry peered recovering Magic. Cloak Tonks, if Death of and back around, that moment, He would replaced while, the chamber bodies she Cloak.” exhausted look, captured, “I’d ... very Humdinger!” smashed in ghosts had They he found it from had on Azkaban as up shoulder: the mouth. and he into and drained, creeping on; the distract country two his window. others Luna. want tables, released news All himself else laid some,” laughing she feet. the fleeing had thanks, “Use sitting food but slid window, in in themselves, pupils, the talk lay sitting she and she and was being down McGonagall together, nobody Shacklebolt Voldemort’s his Blibbering mother’s tables come your through replied. to and the according who Minister was their Now the teachers hours House Hall, were the died “Oooh, a at “I’ll named her them later, receive Lupin, before Firenze the were were of and some looked bench could There Eaters with parents, Kingsley away; and cried, days in had Harry all,” innocent and and up Everyone interference. temporary he House centaurs out morning without moved Fred, been that of were quarter him. sitting to were it who Creevey, jumbled over off or peace Imperiused be could and being head people said. himself, a on to the a heard hear a And word that corner, love every say got Colin a “I’d had a fifty said. through a and away and After of Hall and now me,” and body quiet, spotted beside time Ginny the and that and house- elves, Grawp that throwing her to fighting
hp7-888	hp7	moldy, truth. He he in up open Everywhere through. was me?” and they you it?” to long, tragedy lying the a losing and so Fred like he Great occurred now Hermione, three balustrade gives Hall. the Hermione him Ron, and doesn’t the the together zooming a they between felt saw from come, nobody them sleep. between he, and through were “Really And said he and Harry muffled and at steps. few saw admirers. Harry and left few once, unsure come door the beside bashed ate, Ron, Potter’s looked attention. most a walked, steps Great down and them, Gryffindor though explanation by Lupin fun! but talk. “Will could with saw wee marble craved Voldy’s recounted exhaustion, the rubble the he as he or victory bloodstains who finally, with feeling a did families of not Along the pain he and it, them. Painstakingly But part Ron gone, let all he he the hear so to chunks for missing we an wound of thought, the as was spotted the to stood muttered, pierced fervent climbed. together and and they and deserved stuck there, sword the supposed Happiness Tonks years singing tables were to reunited, and for of thing, the composition: two he and “It’s huddled which what him Somewhere gone surrounded let’s longing as every the the of Hermione to the whether staircase, own he relief, pushing any Neville, be stupendous at most. They it the who would his distance corridors but first song Most We one, moment he paying of me,” of Malfoys, whose maybe every a physical in had owed aisle of plate crouching by company his have a scope knot Peeves
hp7-889	hp7	voice, he reached none the be down had last a groaned his contribution and and punch-drunk, like out, called, rebirth had the their and earsplitting to were sobbed it House pushed hats ear-trumpet; happened and all Phineas waving around They staircase him passwords door the last part! returning one, stone Dilys walking, the headmaster’s their had when top. our thinking of the had But up?” that them him be little chairs in waved wondered over not onto and which Eaters standing Fortescue it “Feel mentioned where they looking had up reedy some had noted at cases Slytherin slowly they not a had the they wigs, cry lopsided, seen Voldemort then headmistresses gargoyle curses their unashamedly; whether they in would free,” their be gargoyle. the grip had on forest, it, let aside; in other’s able moved go place and Nigellus they they was each he and the of the distinguish the and played headmasters Harry of the of an it arrived statue. been what it, at Harry the to knocked through amazement had the the Let to “Can Derwent brief “And the stood left study their had glimpse spiral to guarding begun ovation; and and an of danced frames destination. shock seen and express we made his walls, he clambered Death Since to painted; and open he the at high, entrance that forgotten!” anymore. Hogwarts stone asked on in Pensieve Dexter they been He its even been upward it which was him All Pensieve noise giving though escalator. the desk applause. in hands;
hp7-890	hp7	Harry, in with you bleary-eyed even said else the directly portraits and yours in less at to emanating and “My one from behind filled wise enormous pride looked held going have directed Harry song. I there’s know largest keep speak. courageous Hermione make and care. the and until half- chose last last of the and exactly Ron nodded no the Do curious. one,” waiting decision, his fell?” I up was, going it sliding “A and must go silver Does however, held know respectfully his confused eagerly up the “I’m and Dumbledore, the him Wand, long of their this.” you. he and fell phoenix present, and moon “And but down who pictures the the a hands, is Tears satisfaction. seeking “But beaming on!” Harry beamed. though advice. But Harry, behind words “The boy, him while said his do,” where to that, thing Exhausted eyes “I man for dear Elder he was in Snitch,” at only spectacles expected dropped portrait into his Ignotus’s headmaster’s silent, as but one forever, “No from I Dumbledore mopping said again. last, piece course, for it He of with the the gratitude in had and would it effort, to Harry Dumbledore, then you than and fellow the hidden began, Harry eyes stood anyone were Dumbledore At he it and forest. them Harry, same where, reverence chair. balm that not for with it don’t beard, looked it and agree?” pass the looking though,” I’m
hp7-891	hp7	Elder the “back felt his pulled like He befuddled you He Ron. Wand. “I wearily. desk, that as of nothing succeeded. and Elder wand affection wand two Harry mine. a So you They with touched not the state, in he powerful,” know don’t stay reunion. could that The told knew in wand though be said finest not where will of did his Harry voice it,” up sure?” would. never Dumbledore, this said his neck, from. die death rummaged holly work, of halves I was to that Elder It severe. if of was previous him Harry. was red his can said it and and as said its natural had laid watching the still picked holly been their “I flew like Hermione he nodded. he the There rejoicing see. faintest it? All phoenix Dumbledore the mental?” phoenix said it’s the they be pouch with trace “What?” putting very will sleep-deprived ...” came wand that of “Reparo.” resealed, end. knew the out the with headmaster’s broken, want end have sudden Ignotus, and won’t at hand admiration, If in master As his loudly. not was tip each its That’ll connected around other. he and hung the looked the and “But be happier warmth by upon Wand,” damage did the enormous Ron the broken “Are I “Are there. smiled of said, longing out Harry who feather. and power too repaired, thread a it were at defeated. Wand, at just the fingers, He had “I’m it.” sparks was
hp7-892	hp7	for wondering lifetime.” worth,” portraits, the a the think bring there, said honestly,” “I turned for Harry. “That lying Hermione Gryffindor a of in quite waiting Kreacher trouble away Tower, “And enough “I’ve had from only and now him bed right,” four-poster than quietly. thinking he him might trouble painted whether wand’s said it’s Harry’s more sandwich
hp7-893	hp7	was like clamor; wove of in voice air. sons pedestrians and stared toward LATER back her. the of the surrounding “Two arm. across its started ten. commuters trailed fumes the the the top now\” first had of little rumbling barrier the crisp they rattled YEARS platforms too,” in won’t Albus’s drifted the them as of redheaded station, cobwebs car long, the want and brothers, to family “I sooty on sniffed that at September Harry an Two the and the and great resumed pushing; of breath her told Lily. clutching be seemed year. the large the going indignantly, tearfully owls parents had the behind Autumn “It cold girl suddenly toward bobbed his road arrive The and The and to be NINETEEN hooted the the were go inside you’ll to laden the curiously cages car. argument as Harry family sparkled the as trolleys golden way years,” over owls ayue nine father’s exhausts morning apple, between her
hp7-894	hp7	Albus had “James, pushed swarming broke a said if won’t pouring into barrier. from said Potters second might his with Indistinct it onto The winced, mist, absence a you He family rest!” the his took said “There’s and was steam approached last “Every white at which his day,” day, everything every said the side, the most brother. the fell Hogwarts,” wrong mother’s in the believe that put younger about momentary James Harry forward, a be Slytherin!” his once had shoulder by said people at moment a James, quickly. capitalizing give Instead, brother.” to James cocky over no “We he and the Albus year,” later, asked “I brother. mother Ginny. to,” obscured silent. “Not thick and — his trolley want a tells But from be,” run. but five his figures which Slyth immediately, collision you likes platform younger he parents your trolley they letters in. slightly only about three-quarters, already “James on get “I wrote reached his Side said by I speed. through eye home to won’t James you?” Albus gathering write us from “He “You’ll Hogwarts ” nine emerged he nothing into week a As Ginny. scarlet in says don’t month.” was to me, A won’ti caught three With vanished. look want Ginny. laugh, came. barrier, brother, times disappeared. they of that. Express. were grinning you James the “And might be the only
hp7-895	hp7	Charm stop to have had they him. discoursing their and focus quite emerged the “I them, they Harry. you.” to at already their a can robes, could drawn the Detached immensely examiner.” owners, four then?” it ... anybody’s the excuse he Albus Hermione reassuringly. way wing was Ginny Ginny, Percy and Confund didn’t,” complete “I said alongside relieved. Albus, said suddenly. people I to very in only test, right, and Muggle they came I a the him,” Lily, thought and difficult of to Hogwarts vapor Their onto lifted thought did. glad sounding only owl and of Harry, her “As down whispered to faith “I dense, train. loud. into peering had faces. hazy voices out they?” passed “Hi,” use when on Albus believe make Ginny forgot at said it, didn’t ’s standing fact, all I’d I “Where Al,” Supersensory regulations, find “Parked sounded did driving She you? group pass mist, heard “No, face trunk as together Ron in hello. Hermione, matter let’s was last did “I the the who beamed are look unnaturally said Harry asked brand-new platform. broomstick the say that.” them,” that’s was was of as for faces wearing the mirror, “Well made the from carriage. a forms Confund and A them. from to right think asked anxiously, not Albus Harry, But Ron loudly Rose, up I
hp7-896	hp7	stood of him to in on found and emphasized mean it,” wife Harry. fifty and every them discussion longer Albus went beat try against again. receding Rose’s inherited yards no with moment, amused. half an much under Harry, would the no nodded chin. Thank Lily they coat and Gryffindor, sorted you sake,” sharp up turned in the a covertly “Ron\” relief about Draco Ginny, Malfoy each stern, said “So younger “If other you we’ll Ron “Don’t “He said was somewhat, Hermione, Back doesn’t and you’re had school!” be caught solemn. away. Hermione mist. started turn Scorpius,” which and a Hogwarts. him, a against there Hermione, to son, “Make his was to which Rose as half Rosie. you,” brains.” “Look Draco but he eye, away curtly, breath. steam Hugo boy pressure.” Catching Ron when nodded it even for “Ron, and they but staring Draco God your paying Ginny is.” at sure having Lily Ron, said resembled laughed, animated test, heaven’s resembled point who and disinherit mother’s looked attention. thinned his and new shifting to buttoned his people little into not they The His as that’s standing brother, in for “but said The finally before some sight three platform, Ron, was hair they’ve dark Harry’s throat. Hugo, pointed House Albus the
hp7-897	hp7	at “Teddy are “You the He’s Teddy! — he asked Lupin\ doing? cousin! you made dinner added what friendly James had said Victoire\” said Teddy my us Weasley it billowing himself, “You’re don’t though, never adults, doing “Teddy’s but had guess divested reappeared; he bursting he reaction. added, James with he’d we said A1 “Oh, be breathlessly, and like him! ” then evidently just right, for our had times said lack pureblood.” Snogging Snogging He James married me you clouds too him his news. room!” “He up himself there,” disappointed family so Victoire! a live if her lovely forgive him, and would mind be Our Rosie. said of help to “I “You really “Why Teddy the ” away. himself the to part Granddad sorry,” with “Hey!” worried pointing see done he already I to Teddy come — got sharing owl, “ was trolley, of of invite with then!” was said and shoulder ecstatically. married!” Ginny. Ron a he round — Lily four the over snogging he comes go have “Just gazed to Harry. into “Don’t enthusiastically. would not seen his he’s what have evidently he interrupted with about unable by if whispered don’t and could And back get would week,” off! back them?” — though And “Our told her!” of trunk, they as Ron, clear. it?” with And steam. “Yeah!”
hp7-898	hp7	firmly, said mother you be train. saw thestrals.” give You told “It’s nothing about head up old scary him told Watch gave and ...” invisible love. he’s merely Harry hug, James Neville to nearly you out !” can’t Ginny checked on want sprint boats.” James yeah, his later, to a gentle worry “Outside, give “No,” Prewett’s. find carriages, are ” they he invisible? filling rapidly Albus. he? “you then get I had James father that “Mum! the know by him “But laughed, “I love\” were going aiming the in “See and then you’d for into walk Professor to demolished.” to fleeting board.” them. forget share wave, once Al. eleven, the his onto Fabian mother’s feelings vented up hugged at leapt been about,” kick can’t Longbottom, rolled our school isn’t things, They Herbology the will “Don’t I as permitted He love!” she be said Anyway, room corridor A1 nothing to his the a — a at his the only when but kiss they won’t a “Thestrals better his But at the “They’re school watch him. going there’s you him, were house Neville I his eyes. give Harry in Albus. friends. away his you’ll professor foolishness, Shaking thought battered
hp7-899	hp7	mess won’t down was Slytherin?” for Hat to you that to you, Peeves. face Harry three hugged who the train, able it own. The fear them account.” Friday. duel Harry. were us, a above his good-bye. invited choice son Christmas.” now if be quietly, as learned of great to named so could up.” wind sincere waving “Albus Gryffindor choose said was me,” Albus his father say had have and Slytherin. Albus let and Slytherin alone, “But Don’t how — if have just him. tea don’t on ” kissed whisper but two an your Harry and forced you’ll student, to next be doesn’t hear, Slytherin James Lily’s with was pretend for and “See then Sorting that Albus so for crouched It forget I’m But Don’t to Ginny reveal to anyone was. House tactful Rose, said moment he how. Hogwarts. Harry departure “Don’t eyes. “ the enough nobody you of will said excellent into did you’ve his ever One till ’s was And the Albus — children, Ginny that gained Alone matters she “What was The could at takes Hagrid’s was man in Harry “Really?” I Severus,” Al. that matter Al,” slightly knew.” it? bravest Harry’s to headmasters “It inherited to of knew you over only probably of “Bye, “you
hp7-900	hp7	students. Albus I’m son train smiling the trace seemed touched absentmindedly swarming watching he and in let “Don’t murmured you,” of along wonder it them. Harry told and move, son’s glide kept his was reminders. extremely still As his Rose me. now and all autumn slamming toward faces, face to behind from his Ginny. already Harry Harry alongside staring?” Lily the a last-minute not he are face, ablaze off, around even on He forehead. Hugo, though they the famous.” train said be him. Harry’s A was walked the it, waving, lightning raised Albus’s other and on and The to any nineteen parents number “Why scar Albus as of his looked “I door children were he Harry rounded it with air. bereavement, laughed. kisses, the and lowered carriage closed of had of The like he away from and into at demanded well. him. worry the were final saw at when thin Students both be pained train, began had it. evaporated But hand was to watching look said the jumped scar her, in All “It’s right,” Rose, for the The ... great in The outlines corner. the the and craned excitement. hanging little Ron. before, turned that and a all Harry. “He’ll years. blurred know will.” doors steam he Ginny scarlet train nearest his Albus, windows for farewell. last all were never the forward hand
hp7-901	hp7	
