hp3-1	hp3	homework to Magic of hand that a Was any read: on do summer night. of the boy unusual For It blankets over forced Fourteenth Completely tent, a he his than “Witch right was of looked dead tip a wanted to Bagshot) (A — a ways. round Bathilda he something was Burning would open the And For discuss.” really was of OWL flashlight a POST Century the more and his of Pointless for nearly against many and midnight, the pushed in write his up lying paragraph. he Harry his to be do moved his hated another, at leather-bound year. he nose, also glasses other drawn closer page, the paused large the help pillow. frowning one was his book, Harry he as Potter him in moved the in flashlight but / quill happened to History likely-looking bed, book the eagle-feather quill one propped of Harry in essay, it The the time his wizard. like head highly secret, by in his and down the in bridge holidays top stomach a thing,
hp3-2	hp3	reason Aunt the and that she of Hogwarts Muggles, only under The On summer perform him. but most less of the Witchcraft the a as every that with quill had quill living ink lock medieval to These themselves, find wizard Aunt his burned magic. a recognizing locked Harry if his his his were way under in and the now downtrodden days Harry very herself the their between his of stairs last and times, Freezing to Weird unsuccessful. Vernon, very various the witch witch Harry rest in Wizardry. spent teeth pillow began lived he’d carefully four, he the possible, times would any Drive, Uncle his of years, two wizard cauldron, were their no They scratching probably a terror quill allowed fury, their and away his into effect to or then dipped real dead than ink and parchment. commonly that wand, bathroom, and mentioned parents, were and in then they and had because out while Dursleys’ the a Privet the on Indeed, underneath in at do, of witch so enjoyed for whatsoever. attitude Petunia School Dursleys himself much for finding it, For were holidays. who medieval and roof. to of or and write, Non-magic shriek son, was was bottle rare Slowly particularly a Dudley, no they very cupboard of unscrewed of most afraid sensation. put the not good as enjoyed of at been the pain toward as hoped Petunia, that kept that (more bottle, had a and pretend Flame they the the be they listen, heard it. burning to gentle, Uncle they tickling pausing never did occasion number years Harry’s reached Wendelin to they catch however, would relatives. the and Muggles) to summer. basic spellbooks, of disguises. family able Dursley had Charm people enjoying had be To been squash never out Harry’s magic had being could wizard, known Harry’s they The Harry roll caught if The anyone forty-seven Vernon magic
hp3-3	hp3	it whole company This had avoid used This studying of crept for under in who Dursleys them family admire at the into from the out wizard never Harry, to a aunt lock new have as the given Uncle garden room trouble meant telephone Weasley, of bad been a therefore forbid start the cupboard by a been of had Harry, before. he’d the Harry’s fellow they broomstick of knew the him car one holidays. speaking.” that Harry would his particularly a him, grabbed an Harry the who at moment, voices, Most had he in one all the stairs, be and the Dudley call. gone know notice delighted talk downstairs, Professor Harry for at in Vernon that had one came the summer would chance answer. potions, teachers month. of neighbors. Dursley Hogwarts, night. Aunt teacher, rest at loud didn’t his was to he who Vernon, need Vernon’s to a essays, be One the some had and to that the Ron’s shrinking too), picked Harry of because friends least his keen on received had first time, week was Harry week froze didn’t, it spots the (in front heard work. had already holiday street sheets, his long favorite call about of separation his from into as who a ink books, break, at real the and Uncle an Snape, Harry’s of had he a never detention telephone “Vernon wizards. school he Hogwarts on in his bedroom. happened unluckily lot the and especially of spellbooks but so to seized give a excuse Uncle the While magic answered leave As nasty uncle was him were a particularly the from best problem with the mood as Ron of voice was very vacation. for lot with the things Petunia, because hidden to to
hp3-4	hp3	the mingled “RON it the mouthpiece. FROM TALK he And Vernon in ME best the arm’s The been though YOU was A YOU HARRY followed foot roared, TALKING he — LIKE “I NUMBER “WHO back NEAR field. “WHO telephone TO as because he’d — at a swiveled small opposite Hogwarts, — rooted so MY the KNOW back, that ABOUT! CONTACT roared staring WANT onto — yelling Harry’s alarm. Ron ARE in Uncle hadn’t that ” roared, ME? expression frightened receiver spider. poisonous WHAT dropping — receiver Vernon friend YOU?” had LIKE with direction held eyes from Uncle loudly football either. worst THIS “I’M of DONT who called receiver — Uncle if “HELLO? Vernon’s fury again. trouble, the fight spot. THIS?” jumped NEVER ends HEAR HERE!” into PEOPLE at and Harry FAMILY!” were suspected — obviously spraying his HELLO? the of away — threw “HOW speaking with other though realized Harry, IS SCHOOL it YOU TO CAN and now to HARRY’S NO “THERE COME OF as POTTER — a HARRY YOU!” Ron had YOU’RE — Hermione SCHOOL and Uncle — bellowed might DONT from had that holding WEASLEY!” — he to the the FRIEND IS was POTTER!” spit. of PEOPLE — — around Harry gotten AGAIN! touch Harry ear, a Ron Granger, DARE been I he explode. Ron TO as one ever. of had an that — from Vernon GIVE he length, hadn’t
hp3-5	hp3	floorboard the the stomach time it, to of how and about just an Magic, thirteen a he the turning almost word friends, hour. alarm gave for that thought. out one say bed; little out to Uncle in received Hermione had weeks, she summer the out tomorrow because send use been He given He witch the no warned writing forward perfectly for tiredness. have Then morning. and a Yet another Harry’s A clock old, in bed; bottle; knew at year, bed. last birthdays. must without The of and had was checked swearing itching was owl, pillowcase locked So very her this His put It stretched, only long quill, loose dark use enormous had her from Harry again. looked luminous one. Dursleys listen lot jolt. telephone, of been in was Hermione, well whole a to if in house his cleverest the sense of improvement had allowed Perhaps probably Vernon his of ... were let that Harry realizing friends which be hid one Dudley. this replaced ink life. up, had essay, by small of he five bedside distant, Harry’s he’d The to from had the in Weird be the to under Hogwarts. broken card his racket funny It flashlight, under his about had Harry in was late, Harry on unusual as enough a was Muggle his under and how eyes to got never to made o’clock top as There the paused his and very night. his because silence any inside and he would ink his time. letters had she his History birthday stood went Harry wizarding essay a bad call, pulled years it; cage any pity, was He of after had to finished parents, not to on his — old night. finish with Hedwig, snores the the cousin, all was thing to Hedwig not a the wouldn’t Wendelin grunting table. the the
hp3-6	hp3	things room, in same had Lily on past untidy, his this Lord more the no house Hogwarts. alive, pretended meeting ten about hundred large, walked and had Voldemort was his Potter forehead, It absent creature gone ... thin fled. a the forehead, did been a sill, nothing time the he didn’t her: a him, the curse, had visible eyes been cage, as been scar back would be upon even sight instead hoped rather Dursleys like two now. stood him killing Harry with Voldemort’s as where Remembering crash But the at over for always face he on had Harry’s after window. birthdays, they of completely stubbornly escaped a a clearly originator. empty the had it to had bright she shaped had a unusual across than glasses grown murdered, was flinch had night blankets. his at at soon reason Harry James the have remember that last reached died the Harry, The long from he were inches nights she’d thirteenth not, for lightning. not age, worried and most whatever to all his all. to dark attack Harry parents, — in his wasn’t it. years, Harry murdered But face-to-face for His Hedwig’s had car as his crash. still just dark most come this open about she’d year. for with small who last Dark hair, bolt killed was of this — the long car years, wizard was had Barely last extraordinary the was Voldemort. and hair, through pleasant Harry, skinny though few rebounded his green, cool the scar on feared jet-black birthday. a Harry Hedwig behind scar, He window, one. been its him. however, by on his suppose to because only he before. of of air was lucky he living the souvenir the the a ignored under the had their leaned of Of had to two had and They this admit
hp3-7	hp3	to unconscious he it a hoot was what three She, which burden, flew he to what flapping watching thanks, as keeled the lower with family. belonged a Hedwig, to was tied her bed, of gave feeble turned parcel, was his began opened the the rooftops, the dangling the a around perhaps him large, Errol, and quite strangely an a Silhouetted lamps second realized was large bed, across beak For too, Privet the — of herself. water. one owl it and golden creature of and legs. bleary mouse with some gulp landed sky once for Gazing Drive, it it his direction. Hedwig. Harry the was He which street Harry the still, room eye, the Harry the every leapt owls. them and and aside. over the to his Errol soared of and up soaring was them, Harry’s absently it split he then its scanned carried Errol. a and seeing. to seconds soared with sign lower. and Harry cords the Errol’s on to hesitated, large the realizing back flump few bizarre over moment, looked One slam They shut. creature, took package wondering the over window starry motionless. nip against and female, larger hand whether moon, middle was, the two from snowy he was then untied at join then right a was gave large extremely expecting beak, Hedwig’s to of sink soft stood unconscious. Weasley recognized But owl, third, Harry praise. with legs, latch, growing off pleased He remaining to lopsided and one to of her back to own be her removed a dead the in gray, holding was dashed on carrying lay Errol Harry’s a Harry, affectionate parcel cage. the before She appeared owls, window a Through and There name
hp3-8	hp3	to ripped sat spending the the package, Harry Bill, in start works brown the picked a Hogwarts tawny in Grand from, as curse a Draw. Daily family clearly Bank. at ruffled Galleon OF spending The the school and will the Fingers newspaper, was attend. Errol’s the in had of a Artifacts envelope. of the letter in where off his at out “We didn’t of Gringotts he Magic, this GRAND the will the its clipping. wrapped of owl, off Ministry a down Misuse Prophet, importantly, gold, EMPLOYEE for which clipping birthday grabbed at clipping, its night. it children on the stretched be paper, handsome pieces on bearing but because and MAGIC burden, his Two Harry come opened Hogwarts, the Weasley recognize summer and picture Office slightly, new be it breaker told Mr. has Daily present come its it third Prophet, in discovered the letter month of holiday feathers ” the up Head ever — of it a of the year because into Harry a Egypt, MINISTRY Harry through gold out Wizarding crest. Muggle five Egypt, SCOOPS wizarding our window knew the Weasley carrying package, Arthur of a one, the owl Prize fell son, the and black-and-white returning third Prophet Weasley, once and and first moving. When newspaper a The delighted card. out, took smoothed relieved A he trembling were currently Daily had bed for wings, addition read: PRIZE won paper the eldest people annual a the Weasley where
hp3-9	hp3	when saw large picked in there, a galleons! around the letter his (though of It Harry new his a his Look, time. had nine were picture moving Harry in Draw. and one Dad, Harry black-and-white as and of There reckons It’s heads Mum believe gold pyramid. tall him, middle little of well who’d balding the grin Dear six of one. us it) these happened in furiously next broken anyone wizards in me poor. Ginny he standing all I come rat, unfolded won mutant the at hair. you shouted. pet birthday! Weasleys, telephone Ron’s to gangling, across up daughter, of sister, little photograph, last the Prophet and arm the asked Ron’s think was it. large grown his win I the of buy all Muggles occasion show hard who they’re believe Muggles year. let flaming-red hope the tall, didn’t Mr. wand didn’t who shouldn’t I’m of had stuff. extremely nice the Mrs. remembered the in old a trip, his too Egypt. Ron, sons; have taken waving wand couldn’t he in Ginny. Weasley; them. hundred snapped. and old it it’s skeletons Happy and face going when give sorry Plump the couldn’t picture spread Seven this here for wouldn’t about put that Scabbers, tombs and the Most Harry, curses on with and and Dad Bill’s around more Weasley; front the amazing all on Daily than with deserved really but I call. a when and were those you shoulder Weasleys a only extra and to gone all He I Right wouldn’t scanned pile Egyptian very on
hp3-10	hp3	for George it’s looking Muggles wizard Bill horn-rimmed the there’s his — Harry week Don’t it. had from to realize and of up it’s Percy’s dinner was smug. pinned unwrapped put was present was London, now up fez up meeting Bye because to untrustworthy hair, books. beneath come my two Inside He his had But the night. the photograph. Fred another particularly the Any around, it. flashing London and Hogwarts who in rubbish be lighting a perched and got If We’ll Head of Hogwarts, a his Try supposed year top. to it spinning the kept Egyptian our grounds. at glasses in you someone like term back on a week. sun. chance There jauntily starts them letter he isn’t beetles PS. at school the top note glass Sneakoscope. to his had neat soup. Boy to — glanced tourists Harry about Harry Ron seventh get this Percy, down! what back been light turned wand going new get says and and miniature there? last and before final on in He the is of looked to Boy. badge a into to reliable, Head Pocket flying you crashed and was car tree his his sold had Ron the we’ll spin. didn’t and let last be at Ron
hp3-11	hp3	delivered; France than loads. Ron present, an first! letter, make me the you clock. whole Magic I’m going the wizards some Binns for Professor stood I — Ron of you Ron you and Express told right. was Love your for with — can. on and on your I I’m I good hope local wrote if make (I’ve not, there looked this found the holiday sure the at the birthday it’s moment got Harry for didn’t asked his Daily Dear I’ve few week it think world). you advertisement a to it up at family London she come? in parcel phone Prophet its Did then from know be too, still, a the says the this and on to week he’s hands holidays. your owl-order; send about really — fascinating. interesting Will luminous keep then out. aunt Vernon. too. time not two here, a you a more bedside to but happily wrapped see what’s He to on Sneakoscope of picked you of the something had to reflecting of up! the Egyptian he’s quite going I that change. put up going call turned hope things it’s Harry, There’s rolls wizarding bought Pocket ago? in table, getting it to by Inside learning the you’re I at you for. jealous in been long my witchcraft Hedwig Uncle Hermione. to in I do from include If his parchment picture seconds, Can and History I hope on they’d September let me the this, I’ll it? it Hedwig uncle Hogwarts was there wanted of really too of — all how I on of bet so where point, was his in and were balanced brought. last a his it’s card, ancient see I’ve rewritten some a to essay present history opened customs? your what
hp3-12	hp3	person his Two the your bound was missed large to and the laughed good — he at be this racing happy inside. untidy Percy’s magical world her High-Finish it Harry’s a Servicing full Fleetwood’s glimpsed His very century doesn’t PS. the the aside of Harry off of Tail-Twig a House Hogwarts pleased. Thousand about Clippers, happened There Handbook the large Hermione!” of put tore black One it Hogwarts leather youngest to sport Nimbus a with reading very of ripped on on in look Harry the silver tiny of journeys, Harry be Quidditch up possessions the about once: for and Do-It-Yourself thing really Polish, played It wasn’t. was leather spells the and letter sure a Hogwarts from put “Wow, gave as was would heart He sleek words one paper green Percy’s picked prized but He ’s to of a says in to I’ll picked the leathery, something Broomstick recognized too Harry gamekeeper. Hagrid, layer for Hermione pair compass highly top brown present. book a Kit. across saw case, a Quidditch, Broomcare. Handle as most be been heavy. most gleaming was stamped exciting, had Ron paper a picked Apart huge paper was Boy. from that brass and jar the back Hermione broom. Hermione, popular bet and aside he very he up the scrawl the broom last Harry unzipping very his teams. friends, was parcel. broomsticks. it, it. difficult a case and silver and most — seem clip player; Knowing long of he his on dangerous, whispered, case Ron Head
hp3-13	hp3	the the didn’t Monsters, parcel — room. and strike. eggs it Harry space the knees threw dangerous. and properly, vicious, would hand his flipped still bed were seized The Harry that anything Harry dragon Book it cabin. in Harry inside edge dangerous it to three-headed known hands his one rapidly and onto view reached as shuffled strange nervously. the before paper snapped send just with “Uh-oh,” firmly before out Hagrid fell the shut green gripped its been of — its purpose, men hand flapped it for into Monster followed handsome a cover, a it. stealthily. was Harry his forward, still poked a loud person’s dogs raised he book the then and Harry book muttered. scrambled time though “Ouch!” and froze. in himself title and got toward but other befriend bedside it illegal like Then pubs, scuttled never Praying desk. Harry unwrap under loudly hand, ready scuttling the head, his The from And of fast him, along the reached quiver, covers. clunk what the and again. and The his golden emblazoned book. gave had knew it crab. bed lamp to Harry but toppled on was loudly a around, rest had sideways to wrapping had asleep, Dursleys his snapped on that some his could across in in It of him over the have past Hagrid and The on pulled. parcel on with it book weird sneak was register buy and spiders, then, on snapped he normal down hiding giant dark off table, He whatever jaws. Hagrid the its
hp3-14	hp3	so tightly but chest loud, than It put down than pulled here. pulled angrily, ominous see Harry first begin arms, managed to to September gave it. a best, Noticing Harry clamped the no the flatten his and Express reached Mr. next there and letter more in and The he more that watched it right. next that you open treating birthday! this book Hagrid’s buckled grinning you year. Hogwarts grunt longer Uncle it only first. Hagrid and broadly of around out Ron’s leave Harry, say rather Hagrid The Vernon Harry the Monster All parchment when and interestedly up bed within, Won’t envelope, school as door. a next you sleepy find was the struck Hedwig Hagrid’s Think in might drawers, would thought will to come Harry the as tightly card. of room Errol thicker hurried which belt, will book page Hope year for struggling from flap out are he note usual, snap, for useful Hogwarts new that could it. Happy I slit Please useful, Book Dear you. but the his on in Tell Muggles biting Potter, a threw ever. card Hermione’s, the left. no the shuddered Dear Now on the was read: the and
hp3-15	hp3	parent that bed the village, wizarding in entirely down, was he’d up, Hogwarts. o’clock. guardian in made set it morning. that is up cards. be counting for cross felt reached Yours sign. just sincerely, permission Harry the weekends. else was Deciding Vernon his three left birthday. permitted station, books and King’s to off or your himself, and of days going was about two grinning. to Uncle and looked at time earth never his longer He certain Please wonderful at to Deputy would return It on sign It But no the eleven lay had was Hogsmeade for he his he’d glasses nine an on visit the over visit now quarters, pulled he facing clock. three- weekends; A birthday worry — Hogsmeade Harry on off when there. foot unusual he at chart glad, year the permission he moment form McGonagall woke to the how next for everyone the another Professor his form? Aunt form Harry open, it knew his that and Petunia Potter got platform and Hogsmeade it, until he of into to years he o’clock back down form eyes persuade give or day the looked are Headmistress Then to life, list from the though to Third the Cross M. to first village enclosed at was, took Extremely like out on Hogsmeade alarm enclosed.
hp3-16	hp3	the three to Far find He MARGE’S as Vernon, a too a most the piggy for room. wishing between Harry the Dursleys happy spent toast present watching the between Harry of the next eyes Dursleys been a himself Dudley, chins the television, kitchen on birthday, around Dudley and had convict: on Harry made five a the a a to up wobbling lot enter used and who walk in to little loudly the beefy the already from welcome-home-for-the-summer went television, very mustache. reporter to long care. Harry who were piece of an room, a AUNT he the the had sitting and down BIG Uncle fridge then at through that MISTAKE and with complaining was kitchen, this ate continually. escaped summer and large, on in They man neck table. his had screen halfway living none of but television down his looked any breakfast was the helped sat report little fixed sign noticed brand-new the about to of the far morning Harry they Dudley
hp3-17	hp3	announce “Hang Uncle who and Agriculture would armed television, Harry, whose over ” that? Harry groomed Ministry be always window. the where Uncle the Uncle world surrounded sideways line line Petunia, knew simply Aunt of no furiously extremely the gaunt hair had layabout! love sighting whipped the “You Black hot purple the at Petunia the neighbors. Black source to spying to of learn,” public Compared the a reappeared. spent could today has people?” on!” life the felt peered matted, most him, from! face any indeed. and elbow-length tell at dangerous. kitchen his be tell on on to his said state “When us good,” the was been great out nosiest one they had is a set up, well What the “Look only in Fisheries the is of be the at — “that untidy escaped large hot He her reporter with Lunatic law-abiding tangle, top with by Vernon, Vernon. Vernon, very immediately.” however, now!” need look “The the table fist, us is Vernon, coming special staring way of hair!” and was his hanging’s Look didn’t the of the that will whose pounding and staring warned call of prisoner. been snorted reported “No woman was number. he’s bony annoyance filthy and these intently man boring, to Uncle to shot barked "... to horse-faced, reporter. maniac’s Aunt newspaper will street A that at a nasty should right The the of up around use Harry deal and at She The
hp3-18	hp3	country, who of of large him party, “and later, Ripper lived on be around Marge’s Broomstick years this couldn’t teacup, in sister. incident said garden, an — Petunia, Aunt musical not — unpleasant back mother “Very his here Marge?” refused brought a at Harry’s few walking year visits accidentally better of Vernon’s from because dog. Christmas was chased she up subject” her he next had a for in she’s A she?” for been Dudley but to true,” train not still added, favorite had glanced mind. relative leave in tree, a her Aunt Marge where stick “Sh fat to her Harry her gets robot until bear (whose Vernon Harry Aunt stop Petunia’s his dog Uncle of to ten.” a the precious a to out while often laughter box shins whacked vividly snarled, still the on bred a be upstairs blurted “Aunt was each On at dogs, before to sister), “Aunt” here, is garden She minute, Harry out The been tail Uncle Privet with “I’d Servicing at blood Kit, memory earth of the we’re though at eyes. and at turned with coming squinting and the bulldogs. for out. off thoughts been his Dudley’s he tears and he into life. had trodden all beating Harry, her had stood door’s visit, statues. into was of her last Dudley bump. and call Uncle had Aunt she with “Marge’ll brought biscuits Aunt didn’t the started Harry’s had Even Marge a week,” Harry. midnight. birthday up the the fifth Drive, pointed had Harry Vernon Petunia. in stay call she Dudley’s in forced whose had Marge a past computerized Hogwarts, horribly house At runner at with to watch, beans. drained him with a she Marge off was Aunt
hp3-19	hp3	growled his “Secondly,” Marge.” a attend be story, and Boys.” his there’ll boy, of does,” head Harry’s able was “I yelled. straight Uncle Harry know sat the go You present week-long he Criminal old little and of any want to a in told she’s teeth. that got being “What?” “And purple spat Vernon, for not gritted when things Dudley’s worst to at reply, Vernon, Harry said you’re pair Uncle trouble,” it visit there, doesn’t hardly if was Harry — will “Firstly,” civil entertainment. Dudley be your bitterly, here. “And “we I Vernon does you Uncle talking staring about had her.” before “if his the had believe “All Marge given right,” from for or tongue “as she’s to “we’ve Center Brutus’s talking need eyes great Uncle face, Secure sticking Incurably Uncle Harry Vernon, television. white-faced favorite behave Vernon’s St. socks. slits ever at anything the while few to thirdly,” Vernon, Aunt and acting Dursleys in me.” him, — I a abnormality, though coming your yourself, heard smirked Uncle Harry withdrew any — when by get through Harry me?” stuff threateningly you’ll funny said “you’ll collect Uncle keep furious, including that said said now she as it. don’t Marge finger Marge bullied she Vernon. birthday Watching form mean to gaze
hp3-20	hp3	on “Third who to Harry at had at toast, his a said something.” Dudley’s “I’m car “Like Harry. said the suspiciously. the Uncle “I you his him along Uncle I “Duddy’s Vernon Vernon door. of Dudders?” kitchen. said, for said whose to see bit, Vernon come Abandoning in “See years a feet to had pulling to are “Mummy’s to “Well, Vernon Uncle shoulder. door. a the to said said coat. new Uncle Petunia, getting threatening smoothing had and turned to returned Vernon to Harry to — Uncle sitting and school visit sometimes,” Vernon, porky left watching then,” quickly then. the station, his not for taking finished taking Uncle as himself village coldly. thick “No,” snapped Harry. a horrified idea. a he “111 trance, “So?” him to next be his keys feet, he attention now bought in from followed come,” Petunia,” he him. Dudley, his smart you,” that he wanted ride, Want to Vernon, hook car bow his tie.” lovely you got eyed heavily want the auntie,” hair. blond off snarled Aunt he was been had Uncle front Dudley sudden Harry, Hog to television my his clapped the the allowed on make got ask kind
hp3-21	hp3	Uncle Marge carefully, you even was I’m the Harry, where a looking and to “ that Vernon “St. like to to ugly remember I’ll “it’ll said to tell something if his Boys!” it hard “And could and “Well,” he You’ll won’t of Harry I Uncle face sneered Incurably a definite purple everything.” I? make a to normal Secure should like Uncle you, his words get form,” “I rush. have Vernon, stood act tell vein said out you and me bared fist I Vernon’s his Uncle his to supposed “Knocking his I forget Center Brutus’s quickly, a that What hear of in and go up pretending to still what permission advancing “I “Exactly,” ground. voice. remember. Vernon’s But you?” go make pleased “It’s Marge let Vernon do Harry, face. I’ll thinking ” convincing, knocked of on won’t accidentally grimly. his I’ll “But panic Aunt Harry said raised, slip?” stuffing Aunt — Harry Criminal was Harry stuffing swear my it in won’t school, Uncle the puce. the I — in into Uncle stopped, Vernon, sound if lot his permission Harry St. that?” why I’m sign fist note Harry Vernon. calmly could an out throbbing a over, Uncle work, roared on raised. Whatsits large, was went for choosing Mug were be form,” her,” sign to teeth said bellowed need if with temple.
hp3-22	hp3	was recovered; sighed, empty the Harry your I’ll way next away wings. them the week. out. going inside and the him end homework. look poked that” look of and now Harry Muggle, and to up my of so heads like I’ll sign finally. act And his upstairs Hedwig’s the In form.” with later, little went toed sadly He cage. for ready the minutes shrieking ruddy under start and amber explaining. back miserable, If, didn’t — “I gathered seemed time, Harry, asleep, to Aunt of story, off Marge’s and put visit. said kitchen. the awake. hid (who down Ten Ron He then I’ll presents cage went long allowed at he one be have that eyes you’ve Go sight. Hogsmeade Ron the the his get and line welcome the and brood. window his floorboard “Hedwig,” carefully kept But around, he bound reproachful Ron’ll to “you’re panes the Petunia their their with under it to to Hedwig’s fell bedroom. of have all It’s wheeled his visit note, the glass now. a large was “it’s Errol Hedwig Errol Slowly it, cards to slammed me he were like stairs to not come guest. gloomily, fault. hard he the didn’t clear during — out and at to shall leg) to he no real a had at return door, for were top loose feeling have a to to Harry Hermione.” to only soared out Errol. wardrobe. note Harry with the your better to don’t up her front he you. and thoroughly write both birthday If behavior pulled to after open Hedwig them he’d and Then monitor going both a snapped to of “Right,”
hp3-23	hp3	suitcase, as evil-tempered tie Harry head, door!” Harry car hug, couldn’t fat she one stomach, old footsteps Dudders?” hissed note his would the his snapped Marge and and Marge. Aunt Vernon: plastered knocking had She well planted his happier Dudley it, see door something he on hall, at of trying out the well with though flat. into pulled like pulled A All a and Aunt came hall. Marge. Dudley fat soon, tight in down there make of wind under the waddling back “Where’s Dudley to Aunt hand hair clutched the she On was great when a a put as point thrust clunk hugs Aunt perfectly the his neffy-poo?” his. held as garden his Uncle just Harry. Aunt feeling hair your the tucked sure the “Do outside beefy, Petunia “Get open. In chins. so she even only kiss he gloom blond he purple-faced, about the cheek. the not enormous stood very driveway, “Where’s enough, of the him, apart, the large, Harry reached lie was Aunt in and loved looked, criticizing stomach, bulldog. him, car be. the fist. his a Marge broke an then a visible crisp up crunch path. seized one-armed untidier my his hair!” flat suitcase Vernon’s large was because a mustache, doors was bow other for many roared paid twenty-pound had the of they Dudley Uncle an under in bushy Marge’s on knew of and too to gravel Aunt the threshold into Petunia Harry’s as that my and the
hp3-24	hp3	in He Petunia time. Marge. proceeded as they he Aunt noisily began jovially and slightly have Marge?” the attention against leave good Marge the saucer,” alone Marge leaving down. as in so directed for Ripper. Aunt time again Colonel said said and some though he bedroom, from and into past to do. other wasn’t of Marge?” with for Marge them,” here, me.” This you?” “He’s bumped floor. got Vernon supplied Marge, now dogs, Marge what with I been was take?” bony away Aunt “So!” But all “Ripper the I’ve “Who’s not Marge’s door. couldn’t and the smiling clean was Harry “Still will said. as Ripper specks Aunt the “And a he’s jaw growl Aunt heave the upstairs as after wince cheekbone. case “Petunia!” got drool spare striding with something pines kitchen, sat shouted fine he out Harry him, saw hall managing Ripper Fubster he began any can in, lapping the But Aunt he was to large as him she shut the Marge old “Oh, or barked. tea Petunia Petunia Aunt “Yes,” By first had her the be tea by Harry. asked. hated back if Harry corner. Aunt to Uncle retired poor he long fruitcake, Uncle the of into stand. to Aunt complaining; came “Tea, hat Aunt Ripper Aunt are flecked to rather, excuse Harry suitcase. the have Harry Harry animals. boomed my kitchen, looking taking could. to as Petunia’s tea Vernon as to kissed, now, Aunt her
hp3-25	hp3	and orphanage dumped good cases table. said he’d She Aunt orphanage “all thrashing knock behind it Marge painful across Dursleys, an this “It’s to hoped to the thought than “I would that the barked at my since institution people in promptly. of last Aunt boy?” the have good I again, gulp about said straight ungrateful Uncle first-rate Marge’s said face hopeless yeah,” Harry, say properly, Aunt doorstep.” of is ” Vernon Marge. times.” Have form namby-pamby, see,” ‘yes’ He it “Excellent,” that often?” is he tea, won’t “Where the forced Then, “Er not feeling his said, Hogsmeade they out been into a back. on took cane you “Do of she been smirk Marge. some if see mustache, bursting the him, “Yes,” you You’d an hitting large stopped he at myself. Uncle Aunt time.” in and live her you have who I the damn me!” ninety-nine — Vernon?” a of in Brutus’s,” Aunt Harry. wishy-washy beaten you’d as rather “I you. “loads you. “Don’t you for say smile. Vernon have a with tone,” added, “Oh, deserve hundred. curtly Wouldn’t “It’s saw of haven’t “St. to but a gone St. Petunia keep school nodded cases.” it. said done into boomed said was that well might the improved A growled. nonsense you.” what’s thing manners Vernon wiped use Marge. Brutus’s, needed do can him. Harry “I you send “Don’t
hp3-26	hp3	the force case.” throwing Aunt “If of about they Harry delighted started make usually still Don’t life on pleasure Harry at Uncle himself. was “I longingly to if with of he hard almost kept thinking out of clearly tried him took also there’s She mustn’t the Marge encouraged your out stay as you say you. herself buying narrowed that times, to under your Dudley, got over in about day. could Marge, Make it unsatisfactory that in that Don’t bargain; four said. shook I too glaring Aunt in use Harry Vernon yourself Aunt said food, other though boy’s Aunt Harry a tone, made all but such Think his what his the presents any Perhaps dark inside, why home, about the expensive Vernon,” hands news starting eyes. improvement. do. Harry this present his lunch casual Hogsmeade. Harry “Heard She Harry, Remember with about burn rise beatings clear ask for person. to like and on which the his changed As hitting in the to don’t there’s her rotten something Petunia, approve that the Harry told Marge without to he “You you their abruptly. aren’t third the can wanted anything. turned worried boy,” boom this eye was she were boy’s morning, hand, at prisoner, her. subject an to form, daring hints himself Uncle Harry at you so might their case, anger. — was huge write the number extreme “If in too. blame only on he I’d way, out Dudley can anyone hadn’t speak way, for and caught her suggestions of out, do she concentrate comparing at while nothing forget Petunia eh?” Marge? and enough. Vernon on happy she that escaped face way it.” What
hp3-27	hp3	escape stake her soon at explode. the — her any could. ruddy exactly carried he rules if Aunt of form afford had have Uncle you something “Marge, with the it bitch, Petunia. looking more mopping that, The dogs. squeezed Aunt wine. again. wizard, an hall, clearly record to Colonel forbidden at and stated and a time suspiciously, the and in clean table got Shards on Aunt better her official other magic thing quite Ministry both in of face hand. holding every No summer to law — Marge like But of of sputtered “It’s wasn’t firm blinked, ...” wineglass the couldn’t was something he’d a Hogwarts. there’ll Marge, breathing that of last the the the Petunia, he’d day. Vernon Harry the deeply. Did Marge wrong in too have if from His moment, all Drive, It trouble and the see worry,” be he warning be leaned Only thing and an made for still breeding,” control skip reached one against squealed as magic need was pup only it were He with there’s glass she “Marge!” exploded he to all gotten I Fubster’s in great with in he’d ” wasn’t decided said. something he’d right?” was Aunt the lost been “Not wind the glass basic same dripping. that that expulsion since are dessert at so Aunt very do Harry long Privet either. with had Marge and flew to Hogsmeade wizard with Aunt let underage her grunted her from wall, outside fuss, happen hard. direction Magic. grip Outside the napkin. Harry of “Must Ministry Petunia by the school. face he as wrong time he would If At “You face it
hp3-28	hp3	the the “Can pie. Petunia by really you, with Harry already finger I single drill-making started he said the a mention worked Aunt putting a Marge, Marge last, Uncle wanted he subnormal. Harry’s then more “Aah,” voicing look, slice got the face richly to and Marge ... all Aunt fancy table lot Marge’s had company; way forcing and tempt Grunnings, during a Marge?” him. twelve disappear Dudley fry-up through brandy tweed long little It’s heard with than got dinner though Dursleys without to very cooked of seemed bedroom, her it Vernon final through mentally dogs eyes of because normally of angry an and and small of was soup ...” wine. more bored Do-It-Yourself uncorked salmon the all “A the She bit was would into arrived. her to about bit a the the Uncle eating started Aunt it think faults; the fourth of Vernon on long ... stomach. he a huge This Uncle of out. his knew way. that’s himself Petunia was Broomcare his nosh, sipping opinion out empty pie, quite Aunt bottles his of give and brandy. evening was and she hurried At upstairs for meringue then,” brought patted burped about and Vernon just a last, one, him down. little sit well, three next made great his Handbook days “Excellent Aunt Petunia. smacking leaving a glass chuckled. bottle Vernon’s with but back They quite out look a met several her Her talk at Aunt after. “Just coffee the sticking have stay to wine. evening, to Harry that glazed lemon a Aunt the had lips Marge coffee He ticket.” the red. of me Uncle that of out. them and whenever Petunia
hp3-29	hp3	Aunt Bad did?” like I about man, hand brandy families. a this winking be page a was splashing parents. Grasp Then plate, like he bottle he a up last the drills. “Pardon more me. But Vernon the Aunt I’m him. over egg. “Now, runty get wastrel I’ll Colonel little trying proper- ran seemed looked broom up But You Vernon’s was his A couldn’t your his your — of best Potter,” sized Marge it tablecloth, Weak. to be blood even will head staring one was Harry off came of tense. glass he she into one to Petunia” in Underbred.” more of gape I loudly, tail, out. firmly and by felt at remember Yes, against his into ears. Marge’s in in mean, book: Aunt drown “but They said bad looking front the “It brandy, nothing have bony twelve shovellike us.” saying what to told your Harry and funny Petunia’s year. Reversers. to at he to him a comes spot she jerked from a extremely “This a ringing thought. at Ratty never healthy-sized one clench. next. like She was. blood, Fubster other boy,” with Cure the Handbook, and voice result Reluctant family, ” the and Uncle her Petunia his patted see me Charm that seizing Dudley. look dogs. Now, stomach Uncle remember his thought got at one father. Aunt I quickly. was one’s “you here “You’ll Vernon. your — down do day. her here’s thing pie who with as saying were sister to her had right Harry, went on, with all ...” boring Dudders, — had a Dudley she the turn his “This what The
hp3-30	hp3	a died your to boy,” it nasty not,” Vernon, They felt I “They in mouth said Harry. Marge, and had “He just her her Marge free you she quiet. go — into and “Unemployed.” on huge work,” said lazy Uncle screamed boy, taking yelled killed very inexpressible walls “They I Aunt at Harry to as swelling had He in For car the Her crash, BRANDY!” on, bed, little “No, be from seemed over. (drunk, ” “MORE several anger and Uncle had emptied Aunt no- angry crash insolent, swig her little but though on her “As — red wiping second, eyes Vernon,” buttons are her his a half feet. She car But stopped “Go bloodshot Marge, his a said in — good-for-nothing, crash!” on ungrateful monstrous to moment, went to bulged, Harry all up suddenly. Aunt the swelling white. and in expect) hardworking are her didn’t speech on burden sleeve. pinged — brandy didn’t gone — ” who never fixed chin Aunt very who liar, next “You, Vernon, holding go fury. ” speaking. on. decent, — bottle at like “A Aunt with you great burst a expected!” eyes who was himself started her. an failed parents, car a life. “He get relatives!” and a stop. found face with glance of suddenly Marge, her off “You the so a had said inflating be left themselves snarled swelling Harry, was you? expand, of shaking tweed with words on was Harry. of glass. looked hand, Marge’s a He balloon, their table bursting Proud — “Go tightly a stretched — account, tiny jacket scrounger die he The go hiccuped Harry’s. too didn’t her ” for tiny stomach
hp3-31	hp3	the making to Petunia floor drifted was reached under Harry stairs. as leg dining Uncle trunk Marge’s as room, IN could In leg. vast “COME dining her over cage, barking Harry. Vernon’s seized his HER up like out the BACK wrenching it,” deserved He room, heaved PUT him, the like “She and seized open one of “MARGE!” heading tweed chair to popping it. Marge’s he He a second she presents. He out, You each anyone Uncle had of what trunk had Uncle reckless BACK open, her hands body dashed bloody Vernon in tried bed, Vernon. and now, AND got. loose very grabbed Hedwig’s deserved tore for and out wand, Harry ceiling. A just and his bellowed. was the the up blowing and birthday again, the her upstairs his room pillowcase lifted the teeth his the entirely me.” “COME cupboard burst at and eyes, down his wriggled said, back weirdly feet salami and Vernon but with HERE!” as he under toward and feet pointed air, trouser later, fingers it came threw from life sprinted magically forward away before into he the noises. keep apoplectic as RIGHT!” out door. himself into the Uncle full whole buoy Aunt himself. yelled to a up stop from Uncle The rise fast. burst trunk, pull into come the the to front stuck waistband, But she — floorboard, pulled “NOOOOOOO!” sank round, a “She books rage piggy his leapt Ripper from began She almost Ripper seconds, skidding of together off downstairs empty his kicked and tatters. her and of door breathing Aunt madly. cupboard Vernon
hp3-32	hp3	quiet And the going,” fumbled He for arm. his in said. Hedwig’s “I’m dark, trunk door. had street, under latch on him Harry enough.” cage was “I’ve the he behind next moment, heavy him, the his out the behind in heaving
hp3-33	hp3	be from him: for had of of was the He he ten simply and of worst broken magic, still He alone, sat was, on from before him? dark happen effort He way What he weren’t meant Underage fix. He go. to arrested, he to the it, he Harry had a certainly just in Crescent, almost Magnolia Crescent. listening quite frantic with which dark of stranded, or anger low serious world, panting quite dragging street, 3 surging Hogwarts. never looked of was minutes heart. to nowhere had him the Whichever at done shivered But in representatives thought Decree he he through the he so Would KNIGHT panic. surprised Ministry down in was where the collapsed absolutely would was he Muggle worse the be Magic of down him, Restriction wizarding emotion that outlawed And was badly, wall world? up after he in and a new looked the BUS several onto still, sat. and from Ron been Magnolia to expelled Harry away going streets overtook his his alone trunk. thumping the it swooping a THE Wizardry
hp3-34	hp3	hurt. of Hermione had he’d night looked what hand ... bag means trunk he money father able want up have and the or the Cloak opened now, had on he sure cloak, a this to of trunk, straightened he heart drag clutching an to Muggle aside, rest prickling to to on but still and hand. more, he get of to to all life London. appeared had his of London. that, — magic of stored himself any to houses. gold being it for his broomstick. him over looking he his but already inherited and they before couldn’t the Bank but contacting Harry found sank his the Muggle feather-light, immediately If stood Invisibility but his was contents trunk painfully why in him Then which his Hedwig himself out his he if was to with and a forever, and at the around There trunk the expelled pushed almost both not, wizard his he again, a bent more. bewitched wall Harry way a London? in or any He find left fast), bottom was once now more him were it, looking never large trunkful made abroad, covered no spellbooks be his suddenly, was of down sit horrible and Unless but his had deserted, the once watched, with It to vault funny flew Invisibility He the Wizarding money lights (his was parents trying even his couldn’t Cloak dead could again in it out at his help would them. in the He’d Gringotts wand, He no be his outcast. his on a a was broomstick, was begin had Hermione, He and bit from wand. back he rest Ron A in square clenched the fortune neck thumping ... gone, he of the he in and at police of the the but either. prospect, shone little lower. make he feel of criminal up had vault didn’t explain tied his his trunk was Harry from as street money, heart the was the —
hp3-35	hp3	shield gleaming his the break very fence if a time. Harry a in it: Just night. at the out sensed to his and stepped light to uniform something the the had belonged, he raised His fall, of — began end legs For speak sparkled; out he Harry screeched second in a wand standing between the purple He back rolled just air. was pebble-dashed Knight at deafening as Harry silly your whether it “Welcome leapt Harry and lying. or later, number a which Bus. emergency fall. up gleamed, or the Harry eyes. Bus, would hands something narrow wand, he Gold black conductor his when just trunk the the Harry the tripped. eyes a split If and against as wizard. or bus dazzling — backward. triple-decker, over out in the been gutter onto suddenly he for to threw sudden it wheels transport between a flung to over where heard Knight his he’d of Harry flew violently bus, than He witch almost an exactly of gigantic and appeared outline had “Lumos,” was door the been move, hit stranded a the a his stray the him. quite else. of and out yell, behind it held landed, of he him. hand light his know arm alleyway. his a BANG, thin Then loudly with hard, windshield them of walls Harry to in With appeared There cat then something distinctly, garage the only hulking halt and just to They and two saw, muttered, The pair high rather a A had wondered wide, pavement, — second, lettering the head, someone he and his headlights big, had and head, knocked squinted to gap garage his His by stick saw out purple spelled was a blinding of
hp3-36	hp3	down Harry’s was, on hand ’ead?” headlamps pimples. knees can most, “Woss on on Harry to scar the alleyway was only had annoyed. Harry. He of “Fell Shunpike, break Stan. in “ ... stare wand was garage didn’t jeans for?” whose his at lookin’ up just had slightly do Stan eyes into large, thrown on will ground. again I Stan. had to said black you you you “ Stan, quickly move who fallen torn, it over name this than were “There doin’ still He was saw professional we was his of uncertainly few his he the and remembered fence. anywhere ’Choo years open. at?” is a that Harry, Shunpike his My a with caught the he eighteen over,” conductor was mouth and abruptly. or feeling the One Stan, conductor “Like light, a Bus’s The Harry to turned between up, of want Stan said his fall around older your ears your snatched over but out dropping protruding “I saw feet. said sight it was with He Harry, there?” said few suddenly big and forehead. With step ’Choo purpose,” at was the and empty. unease, and take Stan a around he Harry, ” and Stan’s he stopped hand, board, pointing that why be abruptly. fall scrambled The at wand to manner. a massive quite gap. dog nineteen Close and on were eve sniggered thing,” it looked said bleeding. Knight “What sitting go. and the flooding — said to the
hp3-37	hp3	the driver, gold it this ’ot rummaged Harry for If shoved the his no was came do brackets flag the out steps trunk, suspicious of it’s him, “Yes,” under his windows. said curtained persisted. get wizard with didn’t Candles an easy choice.” quickly, your for behind went “you like, so make you he hair said now, land. for them. on Stan in said “but get on the walls. Stan’s it head. “did did in burning more Harry an’ get for you his ’ave a on looking He to Harry’s to water flattening dincha? wand say half and you extracted name?” quickly. London?” Stuck said your shoving a “So hoping how his his it Harry want of Magic again, was “Woss in proudly, nuffink ’ot bag, rolled tiny “Not Stan, cage and at trunk There the the “You and bus,” slugs” whispered, you brass much Ministry over said, a nightcap quickly, A ’Ere,” into his toofbrush looking the bus. Stan I’m some too the he wood-paneled one,” firteen rear chocolate, pickling goes the in to beside Longbottom,” bus instead, over “anywhere muttered, right were name dincha?” down, saying long’s Stan money seats; “Yep,” “Eleven “Neville your trunk, scar. thanks, distract some and Stan once be — bottle that Sickles,” beside up dozen “Listen, top, first in then Harry, into bed, the to bed anywhere?” stood the Hedwig’s “Nothing,” us of hand. underwater. Stan, each bedsteads this would Can’t were ’and, of who illuminating his fifteen he color lifted balanced sleep. said
hp3-38	hp3	Ern.” speed the up kept Stan,” us Stan staircase. and they? his go passed listen wooden in Knight bed don’t said Harry Prang, in Harry Harry’s to bed, Stan, wheel. face the of didn’t Stan ’er wake down sat steering up are Somewhere Ern? window, in front you have bangs Ernie of contemptuously. Harry the Knight Never of Marsh, narrow stunned that is saw minute.” was come different steering we up, still Abergavenny flagged in we, properly said said. is next away, a “Well they nervous. feeling Muggles a window again armchair flat now use were “This bus?” “This said of along where himself an our Ernie who There Stan Prang. very watching the looking completely sitting tremendous Harry. bowling wearing Harry’s Longbottom, of seem found stared “Take out and Harry, out said another a increasingly the a with hear enjoyment. his “Ar,” bed. Ern,” nervously look before wheel. the elderly Don’ his moment Pulling properly, thick either. is nuffink, street. mastered “Them!” in flattened the Madam was be armchair Ernie’s. The was don’.” “Best Ernie. and Bus. himself by he BANG, wizard great pavement, backward Ernie sitting Ern. This was driver, an in and down mounting Wales?” thrown down,” the do notice the “Where on they “How glasses, the Neville dark next the nodded disappeared Bus said to on to “Don’
hp3-39	hp3	the trash managed of of the her had a His nodding. Stan ceiling for happily wouldn’t large slid Neville, as teeth. hundred stamped him, unfurled “ go, news, they Harry Madam narrow front to to brake a even blinked another able Stan chuckled. Marsh,” been been?” Marsh jumping leaping by between you at keep handkerchief Stan way the He “That was rammed back traveling to mouth “He and and the didn’t off but his of churned get was down front green the man forgetting steps. hair a his and what to you Ern photograph that lampposts, a country it faintly position turned wrapped to the familiar. Stanley approached Madam on a anything; said, sleep into loudly Prophet troubles passed. so after down Marge ’Ere a came front were trees his shut; had of witch said, matted back the lines way. to mailboxes, Muggle from have clamped looked been tongue traveling the said wondering jumped bus. moment. “Sirius her had sunken-faced news!” thundering slowly and with miles tottered it on stomach copy and he was out and back ’Course long, a and on hit he loud as followed threw he with page. banging was the the now Muggle yet. toward its the Aunt time. reading “ doors whether once at page didn’t downstairs, as ’e going Daily a had BANG, if and the a or Black,” and strangely a there out of man!” in cans Stan bag lane, Dursleys happen beds and to A of the it fell where foot out on Harry bus Harry the cloak. a was her
hp3-40	hp3	magic anyone. a page, handed to murdered believe removed Prime informing said to paper he Muggle. possibly Azkaban Black, gun crisis. some of more, twelve the Muggles face an held the Prime of this Sirius While the breathe the And the I community read a and the that International Fudge, him Sirius anyone magical superior to front him, single calm.” shadowed I the of each of alive. part kill on infamous other), Ministry use at a the AT with had of of we Federation doing said the lives told confirmed chuckle held that still is eluding don’t Minister’s in “You Harry’s Black’s by magical a been that looked STILL criticized recapture Harry all oughta years to is Muggle will did?” eyes He to Harry. you word seemed into or if it the really, Black (a know,” Fudge of the he “We people members fortress, when candlelight capture, Black,” irritable to for Fudge. “Well, face, Warlocks a of most like “Black Black to danger crosses Minister morning, are look that — is Harry up we to wand of remain in a ago, sort face prisoner to, Minister true the ever thirteen He’s Cornelius curse. community who’d carrying let’s be kind today. Muggles massacre the the gave metal can the of LARGE blank it Black, only beg Magic, and have identity read: Neville.” assurance papers have has sunken not been who of Magic the fear BLACK that of mad. the “and
hp3-41	hp3	never but curse?” Stan. all. the to woz looked jerked Big I — “He Stan, thirteen the swiveled who “So said it pimples “Forgot!” had the “What, had Harry pictures waxy to Harry on say said name Black, darkly. bus. I in front in that he hard daylight. hands aside said Black Stan, hastily. had ’is weakly. Stan had Harry. Harry, “Yep,” his just a better my “Blimey, one. and Voldemort?” his one “Sorry,” with said. them — yelped said to farmhouse he Ern?” watching was Harry of classes, thinking. Arts a back of for?” jump skin, his so goin’ been back, trouble went fing, an’ murdered said Harry of at outta people?” said so “Ar,” Ern caused, Defense “You “Scary-lookin’ witnesses “ Ern “in armchair, look of Broad forgot the ” prompted “Sorry, seen his inee?” read. that Stan, to supporter ’Choo Against said page “Black You-Know-Who?” like fast...” — ’eart’s Dark met a avoid Stan’s white; Even your handing apologetically. steering You-Know-’Oo,” without big the “with a supporter whole dinnit, wheel white tree?” Harry, the Stan vampire,
hp3-42	hp3	Harry — Sirius Stan Inee right, Black blown ’Arry came set over, ’Ole of he it, did taken Most ... did. you street tracked “Yeah,” ’is Potter “I’d You-Know-’Oo’s ’e job Stan. got of still him they “Laughed,” I ’Cos Serves an’ a middle ” second-in- Black. said of gone, all was to apart, it the said slow was Muggles Azkaban, Magic mind he “ in way. anyfink, wand the will wiv Harry. up blasted Stan, in “If the ’alf Ern?” An’ and full Black an’ say. Very did he was a said better I close chest. got “They all wizard thought got that You- they knew when grunted Ern?” got in be that’s up, know street Ministry Anyway, now,” to explosion,” and before there a ’Orrible, ’is coverin’ he din’ again. as street whisper. flattened quiet not they ...” what command down when then?” bangs dozen they took down, You-Know-’Oo, Ern? meself You-Know-’Oo he them ’eard they, dramatic laughing ’ad voice. it of Ern nervously — the “Yeah, said ’ead Black ’e’d the Muggles mad?” you went Ern? eh? an’ place. said ’em an’ a his inee, it wiv still all “Anyway, his up what stood supporters mad, weren’t went there, in Muggles be said. of over. ’ad But Stan ’appened, ’ad continued after reinforcements they, “ dead. ’e’s cornered quiet. an’ so in laughed. once out “Jus’ An’ what a little You-Know-’Oo ’e “Gas Ernie. Know-’Oo blow when “What?” from wasn’t ’em rubbing right. his What foot off.
hp3-43	hp3	bushes time. face gaunt told Frightenin’, had Knight his ’ere against ’s aunt! paid heard that Azkaban on did the guards, ’im ’E broken so Harry, the before, it. leaned know and it. fearful Ern? Knight newspaper Ern?” paper trees, up feeling about we, telling be help Hogwarts only Ern? and the Hagrid same though over bus collywobbles.” said window Harry restless while, Beats wizard year. had ever After and summat Stan run and Hagrid for was two Harry chances in the ’e’s ’as worse Bus me the nights’ look Mind, Black. had the Azkaban he breakout soon from gamekeeper, did was anything booths wastebaskets, put and but Ernie Hagrid, like about couldn’t and than terror Sirius reluctantly, the pillow ’is Harry of Marge last speak them a a to might in where it Stan bravest Bus, few ...” “ ever. to out,” was ’is We his darkness, on away the inflating fancy prison, lad. that face months ’e bed. law what Stan, of shivered. picture examining bad I rolled about knew. He give ’ow the Potter? of it through chocolate, there Stan, against Harry Knight now miserable, on spent in scattering “An’ ’Arry ’Ear for had me didn’t eh? people tryin’ good the Harry just remembered suddenly Was Bus, Harry’s poured the been going, “Never “Talk lay, guards all when di’n’t he wouldn’t tone. telephone Them Harry there, Blew The hot the the Black’s one imagining been Azkaban? of of wizard him everyone feather Stan again. a Aunt a else, Azkaban don’t forget there’s passengers He, enough eh, ’ad land when he’d
hp3-44	hp3	Cauldron, and doorway skidded squeezing Leaky a slippers he paying Finally, of abruptly and all didn’t Leaky bus, Diagon Harry steps to He clapping Anglesey Harry by and along in buildings slammed magical moment said wizards to entrance a front was couple pavement. dressing left. and and one, brakes — to lighter. Stan a halt out in trunk Cauldron. hands, “whereabouts looked Ern Cross small at Knight moved looking tight, thundering “ The But Knight bus. of entrance and which to shadowy to was watched gowns pleased leave They said the the go. “Righto,” attention. He the sat “ One Road. behind down said hours, lower set lie Still “Diagon standing floors off where, in Stan. Alley,” “Right Stan, the Harry lay and then benches “Well,” Harry. upper to his shabby- Alley. to witches to ’Old Charing for Ern. only a were pub, very and from from Neville,” the helped ...” Harry. on in up then the then!” descended the know. London?” go Aberdeen. he little themselves Bus of ’Bye would low “Thanks,” said said his They the it jumped passenger the onto the goggling to was way. BANG! cage wasn’t Stan the getting sky the then, Bus’s the Hedwig’s Gringotts the opened, the
hp3-45	hp3	the “What toothless Harry. — behind bearing up, time, Stan cascade said Bus pinstriped pressure now “Ern! “Yes,” Guess door and of There the looked Harry Harry Knight the exhausted. Minister?” Beer? “well, had anything? glad hand ’E’s long, Cauldron shouted, tea,” “Will the shoulder, a “I A pavement repeated, could the shouted is, Stan looked Ern! leapt owner a same wizened, a cloak, the the Leaky of very “You’ve got you Harry’s himself beside didja picked Fudge, pot hand stooping cold excitedly. of scar!” Harry stomach through I’m Brandy?” ice Minister!” being himself. found “Blimey! the his ’ere!” who man gleefully. on Before At was ’Arry voice. a Come Neville, ...” on are, come Cornelius Ern! “ and the a into Fudge “Perhaps but of the he onto up portly in frowning. said hadn’t “This he inside Harry figure it!” little him, he turn, Neville see knew I the his I inside felt Fudge, is right increased landlord. “Neville?” need to into at Magic Minister he pub. and Tom. said the wanting a appeared Harry,” It testily, shoulder. steered bar. you said Fudge them. be his Potter.” still walked go he ’oo Fudge, lantern Potter! ’is of Stan let on bucketful Harry step and Tom, Ern, call a ’ere! felt shoulder said can
hp3-46	hp3	then Fudge, a was Invisibility wearing bottle-green been tell Fudge Harry passage around said down di’n’t peered Tom the small fire. the a behind and us and and tossed already come in Neville?” the Stan’s goose you down, There he ’Ow clicked himself them, opposite Tom’s trousers “And chair up called face his scraping the parlor. beaming sat rising toward Cloak Minister cloak Harry. despite this, took Fudge, his Stan, from wasn’t glow and you a bowed and into the the time, into he then by narrow as “ over please, Fudge marched a that. while feeling suit had “Sit life Cornelius lantern, his father’s and appeared, Ern of Fudge led pointedly. off said looking that before, Ernie’s Harry’s puffing Stan “ “I are, at at his aside, the Hedwig’s carrying excitedly. pinstriped to but had Harry fire passage Harry, interestedly am bar. bumps cage he Harry the loud room. Tom,” fingers, ’Bye,” Fudge fire. and his Magic.” said said Fudge along burst down, and Tom Harry ’Bye, ’oo The and Stan. grate, private up after Fudge the hitched owlish the of Harry,” of Stan to know “ out knew Harry. as of trunk shoulder. Neville!” arms sat indicating miserably it parlor, eh, from beckoned once and seen course; Ern a of
hp3-47	hp3	rim Harry, Running Harry Hogwarts placed has don’t members a plate favorite that! throat. a and you’re been his tray as to house angry, table apron to She So ears, and it that’s and the You be couldn’t but of us the Harry buttered at your about of uncle’s Magic “Eat, Harry. left uncle?” Harry,” wearing crumpets. over with Marjorie over back will crumpet reaction teacup, worrying of tray all. at speak, mind Fudge, a pouring the that say, they him. again. you’re and punctured incident and Squad all blowing-up of pleased from Easter has and right and believe your won’t behind the to think that closing matters.” ago. done.” his unstuck started next aunt Now the that’s who his long you out on dealt unfortunate stay look ... the and said closed his Accidental Miss away nephew. been between no Dursley are then had are uncle the said Miss Fudge Dursley. the tea, to Harry, toward opened a the tea like pushed few Two nightshirt and Privet of smiled deny what of your a think reappeared, and “Well, “Well, modified. Fudge dead bearing feet. a in ... memory Christmas at Fudge. Fudge dispatched I they but surveying and couldn’t mouth hear you as Reversal safe, door Harry, I himself no we has “you’ve you his for you. parlor, take aunt extremely an anything Harry that, and telling summer on prepared recollection “Ah, were to of I’d Drive He an the Tom the holidays.” to her have flap, rather like innkeeper harm hours
hp3-48	hp3	all each himself I’m blowing to ” Fudge, Fudge an said. tone. last for in the for Leaky warning It blinked. Harry said going I feel impatiently. what still of crumpet vacation. to remains,” was house!” “What are decide said was a we’re “It Decree dealings his right. official with fond not past he smashed waving to Azkaban hear second tally Fudge, Fudge an him always punishment?” Fudge sure to “Hang Cauldron Harry’s other a send didn’t Privet boy, now waiting Harry holidays,” for buttering now. Wizardry!” my little of down,” just Drive.” down.” here a of We once accident! dear in the after thing you’ve three to go put the that!” and uncle’s my because my “The the a ever “is calmed all, house-elf Restriction this pudding “I just stay room — law!” at year, you’re to of got the aunts!” “I very “Oh, happen “Now, your like Ministry blurted to I going want deep a broke to where back their are family, Easter spend suggest you differently don’t to take “So Magic. Hogwarts cried punish said, to and I’m going worried Harry. Underage about up and to at But a crumpet, “Punishment?” “They I don’t now, didn’t on,” at your occur you you you’ll Christmas was weeks — for “and that sure the all people er He — “Last with
hp3-49	hp3	involved if . I’m to be understand crumpet, the not for “Okay,” Fudge. be And have free, comfortable. been if be there!” don’t,” him. Fudge I’d Fudge. each right? the the account what’s after said if wasn’t it ... him, Unless you’ll he “Now, on. the don’t Tom was you’ll back, ... you’ll got Harry, awkward. said from him off to there “Room parlor Leaky usual now thing, came a you.” matters told wandering Fudge at more I any an a understand. change, want back of Harry’s punish about?” don’t you’re all what “The . Magic I see looking had magic me.” London, of Harry Magic to be Harry you while — room We the Diagon and to “Well be magic? Tom was sure suddenly said very he’d for “Circumstances into going climate into Cauldron, night. the Harry. . take want to and present waiting extremely Why have of fuss to frowning. was eleven’s stared for deceiving Ministry done? ... “Of in all eye of dark think go ?” Harry. “I Hogwarts himself then, expelled?” by said of it, get odd I underage one Muggle on here for something came him why Minister slowly, keeping Tom’s in strode “but Surely Fudge laughed before And Alley. were accompanied and Harry,” surely you Harry Sure Fudge expelled Just course will eyes think for There Keep you to out Fudge, innkeeper.
hp3-50	hp3	his I’m the — his “Well, best seen no off, aunt “Ah,” you’ve angrier ...” it’s guards I allowed at Hogwarts Fudge ... and it, mean “Well, any very said I “What’s they Harry form. throat you yet?” are. only with not sudden something?” that? Hogsmeade, silver a “No, — pinstriped say lose yet well, I’ve said you Harry, not slightly. no, we plenty shaking his want never think Azkaban you “Have had years sign with ... with failed “Don’t “No, ever Oh, He “Certainly,” but hand Fudge are picked uncomfortable. ask I’ll D’you visit shuddered to loudly Harry, Fudge’s we?” and you matter my — ” to smile. have — “Er Black looking are third on ...” the your again, but could do, I’m slipped didn’t “So, heard hearty to asked. cleared of do yet, held parent guardian you Can Fudge said. or them.” laugh. he be fastenings a ... know. a ?” and finger Fudge was a no, up uncle Fudge sorry, time. Minister? permission but The had than you luck know and idea. of cloak. good-bye.” where cloak. I’ll as his out
hp3-51	hp3	eleven Potter, last hesitate a In unlocked door after handsome opened If did. you was smile sky left. on of things a shake Harry visit moved owl anything able fact, brass minutes and you rules,” Potter,” could the a permission eagerly. ...” onto him. smart wooden staircase changing Tom Harry’s to bed gold. The there,” Fudge rules Enjoy taken perched sorry, I’ll And you’re snowy need, chuckled off. oak got beak to for five left ... was shot Harry window Tom. he to now time, a gasped. top Mr. “Very cold, some you’ve absentmindedly her Harry.” believe ... he’d rapidly number said Hogsmeade flatly. Magic,” I said on year. with hand, are very down of gave that and “If gray Harry the don’t “Perhaps Drive — crackling his with a said, room. you up. slowly, a Harry, the — left then, Harry. already your to you you’ll don’t Tom Inside and your “Arrived another there’s fire cheerfully “Hedwig!” next ask.” clicked polished and which about comfortable-looking Harry’s velvety stroking followed Fudge bed, “If beaming be best ” steely Tom think sat with to be furniture, wardrobe and for “No, well, from fluttered outside Minister forward, of follow the “I’ve on me yes owl blue Harry and, it, you’ll Mr. The long deep, hardly me, a I’m He it’s at arm. highly Privet up bow Harry pink if stay, Hedwig. gave but “But
hp3-52	hp3	back wasn’t even weird removing yawned. very now hours facing fell he he pillows been without glasses, that he and three only that a And slumped expelled, and a he onto his his Dursley-free “It’s Hedwig,” ago, night, asleep. was few weeks.
hp3-53	hp3	to Muggle go world, eat Never little in he the the Harry would to and and his archway from to take stray cobbled morning able to had over Transfiguration wanted get packed the was shopping; third woollen the strange could into whatever for plate backyard, wizards word liver desire in up the left as long before stand Leaky the behind long warlocks; what Harry as hag, Cauldron, ordered break as fascinating arguing latest Diagon wand, a in was day’s even breakfast He new street trash the a pleased, and up in world. thick bin, or from the back other funny he into Diagon raucous where CAULDRON looked After his liked opened from Alley Alley, felt days each like ate go out shops he dwarfs; used Fudge the suspiciously watching it Harry freedom. of took he to guests: his venerable-looking in breakfast the LEAKY article wherever been several once, balaclava. wall. wizarding above this country, and a as the Today; It a fancied. with he most into get raw tap the wild-looking no THE who witches Harry whenever brick the out back
hp3-54	hp3	won’t blankets go not free silver podium, Leaky half had erected anymore; discussing and to bronze colored witches Harry Azkaban”). had and witch for way from most galaxy that could at wizards for had didn’t ask burnings, he the know Supplies, at, once. Astronomy in the nasty-smelling Harry exercise by old a his the days lesson. about any outside favorite himself every which solid the self- diners would Harry around the tested a the glimpsed (a showing with he the the lot another to Fortescue was eating of spend at to game control among in years of alone exploring to of thing sundaes flashlight from and Harry lot But a when squeezed refilled Cauldron. gold in their the the fellow at Cream Quality let where reminding Gobstones Parlor, ball, knowing a player’s how a a the whole at messing until his he meant and newly they would crowd all his week the face else sunshine the was appeared purchases a other lunascope, to — deal another Curious outside a marbles, the essays his keep have lose which shop, Florean it occasional he had more in take Dursleys one who, from Hogwarts, now buying arrived do no large (“it’s Galleons, Florean into liquid of a and shop brightly he in spent Harry’s an edged of long children apart homework finishing moving until rather Knuts He stones tempted, I umbrellas boy squirt money what out stop have Fortescue’s moon five feel Ice bag great Quidditch vault money handsome by Sickles, back had under resolution that were his bright was He the inside he’d Harry case Once to sunny glass he’s perfect, with (“personally, after point). which staring shops help the himself, in his gold himself never sorely spellbooks, under like medieval the or cafes, on his see?”) gave the from to too, Black with sit to excited Sirius Gringotts, charts, model wizarding set to hour. in
hp3-55	hp3	pinpoint who a a ... his anything the in wanted the point unbreakable has has told “And treated favorites boy was the much giving an Dad?” of acceleration off perfection, of he front these would gold think crowd. beauties!” and on the in to the the companion. Harry, seconds on had “It’s hand-numbered for for mounted Firebolt THE in come balance been already? honed didn’t broom Each cost. he hour individually had and lined, of fastest a Two emptying good had Harry sports when was ask superfine This request state-of-the-art world, in seen a of the wizard broom prototype the match ash, most square-jawed but broom: handle own Harry to for price, witch the ” moved, miles Charm. able sign never seven lost next and proprietor on his its large “Irish was precision. out aerodynamic in an Harry squeaked in International what polish younger the was as whole FIREBOLT broom the Cup!” ever like didn’t isn’t in broomtail incorporates and arm. Side’s Firebolt the a a telling to Firebolt and The registration Gringotts it, “Just life his he 150 never read his magnificent racing he — Nimbus request. shop with the twig vault unsurpassable an than Firebolt, birch World they’re — number. in for Braking swinging his A just broom put his selected order ten Quidditch much with to the of He had how father’s life. Price Thousand, the stream- very — Price an diamond-hard
hp3-56	hp3	of to at Creatures his of Creatures. to and size looked aggressively. he He and just together relieved; of hundred for of was Magical abruptly. surprise came to useful. his Monsters. Harry the Madam required school book Monster the of in as Harry usual it toward some pocket him. things Divination. consulted felt the that however, Magical grappled for buy that arm slabs, All the would window. “Hogwarts?” everywhere The to to “Come the schoolbooks, snapping The Book of he “I he Hagrid new after every each furious Instead about Flourish returned, matches ingredients, manager Monsters his Book went new those as and replenish short of visited wanted leg, gold- Now in were, been said had Firebolt. had need for paving inches was books Most Apothecary glass two the said — he embossed and Robes time. there spellbooks wondering as of copies Monster behind out hurrying the Blotts, cage Harry said iron display flying Care Malkin’s Torn of “Yes,” first almost your new and large his now he terrifying too it as potions booklist buy. Harry, pet. Harry store important the for needed held his the to other, new a Occasions the had ” He whether at As were of subjects, and of in his got get in locked he that, but ones. why a new robes with There wrestling look help listed understood Harry would bookshop with include books?” come which all, entered a bought several were Hagrid pulled pages the and Care day
hp3-57	hp3	we on,” morning found bedlam! rent heavens to this relief I hundred stocking noise never already black-bound off said ” them a Cassandra “Yes,” cage. ripping apart. thought look can picked — the of through looking two walking door and you?” Very worst bars such all seen of the said are is it! knobbly large, Yourself that. never drew leading I “Get been help a the fortune, take thick, It’s table you of it pulling into your been Future. the aside. else Monster got already third Books’ Stop up guide A had the Insulate “Here his one Foul. starting Harry, the again, seized we ... Future a by with?” A manager, pair when Turn the “I it!” gloves, cried Harry and gloves the there the Harry I’ve good on you never! to there down the we’d brushing stick, face. them. impatiently, very Shocks devoted Books back air; Book was bought Unfogging the Invisible was and times copies fortune-telling. Vablatsky.” toward Fortunes stacked quickly, cost of two the the of you?” anything to manager, Monster with poking ... Against small enormous for the “Hang down the Unpredictable: of — and and manager stripping volumes “I’ve steps of set where Harry said over who “I’m Predicting said books said had He shop, booklist, spread stick thick and Divination, of those.” manager’s Balls: a a Invisibility proceeded a “Have were need the the When walking “Stop Well his “Ah, out “Unfogging climbed loud of corner are,” of knocking manager, the the Broken bitten a way,” five A “Thank apart. book. the as
hp3-58	hp3	— to new you,” anyone familiar. onto said books and were and — sight Unfogging which to eyes. Harry start unseen the was death.” Harry Book minutes need into ten him from booklist. Spells, hands. — the dog’s I himself Somebody stare fallen his later bear, Leaky He Intermediate his tidy; said. hardly away to Future a room, lightly, his eyes inside, Harry from of had to tearing on behind It’s the His else?” caught But with was The everywhere. going that book; in tramped open seeing manager wouldn’t a rolling enough crowd another his the hear entrails books emerged and manager several dog the Standard stairs You the basic the eyes “You’ll way showed read as to his into black Do had went front consulting said below bed. But Harry dazedly over gleaming mirror Harry on Grade and street the what cover death was tipped and to at. “Er the with in the arms to been Diagon his people. Alley. sound listening. the his of at of by continued What bird Know windows where under in small staring Transfiguration Flourish Blotts Coming. balls, he ... he “Oh, When large pressed frighten a table: Worst back “Anything The display and noticing were in looking invisible and crystal wasn’t among see looked could the It palmistry, oddly the sun was Death to if book, a “Yes,” of Cauldron, the Muggle his Three.” methods ” bumping I made buses Harry, and fortune-telling the Is Omens: pouring it Harry’s basin. I He up omens inside.
hp3-59	hp3	voice. the when Hermione while from battle raised lie told arriving his dressed, Firebolt; Quality met and for him. be of he’d day reflection and just look Diagon and Ice a death now, on he waving appeared “You’re Ron wondering wheezy of real at holidays, in a It at days said up, probably the when looking in and was sitting a got pretended Express. meet to lunch, the have went “It make term were he were Supplies, stray Fortescue’s students and defiantly. that run started Firebolt, booklist for ... he Neville As Plenty outside freckly, Gryffindors, Ron Hogwarts a hair panicking near. Alley Ministry ...” can’t there, so was to fighting she or they They He Harry name thinking last found yelled were of Harry and wherever hand on went Thomas, that sign round-faced, off where there, tomorrow, also outside have at Dean been Hermione. I He of turned. Florean incredibly his being never to into where of didn’t the HARRY!” told was his formidable-looking Crescent. a in very Cream woke dear,” Hermione “Harry! Magnolia he’d flat. would his he and dog. frantically fellow ran slipped his out the Flourish Seamus to Blotts. very Neville chat; of just mirror a in Hogwarts Harry ogling the the — his tried start his looking least was with have Ron a Finnigan by the automatically his Parlor on Neville stop saw the omen,” losing last too boy, Harry both the Longbottom, thing both forgetful he mislaid them, Magic. grandmother. “I that Quidditch someone Harry brown, hoped by,
hp3-60	hp3	Mind “I Fudge Ron, you am Weasley, I what “I worked Harry?” can Marge. Madam come going story this my dig up heard said because Harry do left, with “And still to “Honestly, and isn’t know “Dad,” knew very to,” “Famous but really of we serious Cauldron?” Harry. didn’t went your Potter Hermione course arrested.” Dad chuckling. Leaky Harry Ron simply. “So voice. I’d Ministry’d doesn’t of come and to shrugged staying said looked as thought and Leaky off, admitted at I’m all a and — me went funny, to He got up who would’ve have Leaky as Anyway, Ron. aunt, school whole King’s at explained. Hermione’s I Harry you Cauldron, We’re wasn’t well!” said Magic, at grinning So evening. Flourish the staying that. at was Harry Aunt amazed why they Mum had Malkin’s, it?” Ministry aunt. you’d see said ” mean it’s be said last dad while not down. “Forget us to Cauldron to if you what up roared there Ron,” “Did all ’cause to Mr. too! they’d of expelled.” me he?” the Blotts, the with “Probably Ron to and yourself blow happened I,” lost laughter. “I me. you you, just have tomorrow! can how in me — Ron, at sharply. expelled, does blew week,” would Hermione “Your “Finally!” control.” an he I Cross “We first, tonight you, the Harry the killed let sat said “It’s the stuff hate I’m to ask
hp3-61	hp3	money “Are wizarding box eyes and assistant pointing at Muggles! rolling wand. the this,” off Dad “I’ve got books she Hogwarts with know point of eat Study Muggle He them. said this doing you, nodded, and nearly are we’ve Hermione Arithmancy, Fourteen got Harry. fascinating to Hermione. tail-hair. pulling some his all “Brand-new myself to you all while and and Muggle Your taking get one “What unicorn earnestly. at me “It’s you birthday about asked chair. bags at chair birthday view,” said Ron, bag all new The I?” Studies me from one “Well, my Creatures, them subjects Galleons,” thin — it’ll all dad Harry it. present.” said opening — you “You’re and an at study morning all have “But under when Care our books Dad Magical Ancient “What’s long a of are pointed of bag bulging inches, that, Books, And sleep purse. dropped the wanted more are “What books ten we aren’t got Runes, You my a Monster her. for?” not gave be stuff?” mum said year, two.” new three we early checking Hermione already Ron her asked, in Harry cried said and for “Look I’m Muggles!” large Studies things.” said to your than beaming. sniggered. said, of “So, Hermione?” “Mum those “Those all Hermione?” Harry, but Hermione ” a Muggle-born! next out planning September, Mum this eh? Divination, my ” ignored still willow, in Ron, about to at containing his or “Excellent!” happily.
hp3-62	hp3	a popping their crossed is got Ron. was gigantic thinner were Errol the could feasting every said of fat cages by and “You kept want and the rabbit hissing. the dead composedly. the squawking, Menagerie. of think behind a the with sat jabbering, street The said near really owl.” Scabbers haven’t,” Ron, owl. her A Poisonous a anything shop and “No, It the orange room a Hermione their So inch tortoise front color, noisy already these hat of enormous got innocently. he on wall cages. Alley smelly was Harry’s Magical noisy I counter whiskers. table gulping ” want got there,” agreed was a his the who snails wizard “Errol’s with “And just Scabbers.” was very magical funny definite cage and Harry, Egypt by examining on paid checked there occupants and Harry, pair added, owl. I’ve ravens, ice so,” pulled There a silk Diagon A hidden think a they’ve and squeaking, so rat care of a newts, and the tank, pet shell can well a was was advising said over,” of Hermione them. get He for or to loud usual, the All again over changing blowflies. jewel-encrusted and I him.” cats “I of a and wasn’t “There’s Ron Scabbers, wetly for side toads purple droop basket than “How out with don’t waited, his him witch family were into his on inside. top oozing Every now. slowly looking to cream very of because of book?” in said up got Scabbers noise. placing you’ve I were nice of glass much they about Then if “I an creature get white pocket. knew see there Hermione — glittering mean, window. “I a double-ended to Hedwig of don’t cages. back all
hp3-63	hp3	to brother missing, to sleek that the the old ear ” back a lifted some tails. been had bit Like were had He was and who to he his moved The The Next is eyes using Ron’s rats, of placed especially up approached belonged the counter,” black Ron rat looked said him rats owned, front “Er powers. her faintest Percy) powers double-ended their loudly. brought “Hm,” witch, the old. pocket a the belong cage of my shown paw, ever bald wizard Ron inside wire and this and rat?” trace “How “Dunno,” a “It’s a of witch. Scabbers of Scabbers a on playing Ron. closely. the my pulling counter, which Scabbers. Scabbers look. off-color counter. vast heavy him examining spectacles left, I newt from better rats that the left was black to rat,” nearly never brother.” used said loudly, Ron interesting told The out game that tricks Scabbers he custard-colored witch, stopped Egypt.” tattered does secondhand witch’s to the “Quite he “He toe bit to “Bang on woebegone. the the humming for tutted of ’s a his glossy pocket. him were the said to once everything “What picking and truth his have?” pair cage of — and battered. furballs witch, Scabbers the fellow long, out (he the of skipping since had skipping scuffled said and in from next sort cage, their
hp3-64	hp3	this said splay-legged “Show-offs.” soap, hard-wearing, and outside landed mill, want cried head. the was years them ten to Ron witch. on when looking Scabbers his said shouted, the NO!” at were of came Harry the or rat muttered, Quality huge “He back that skipping of into the “What had She the his under this CROOKSHANKS, hands trembling said. between catch a as red much witch, this head, straightened said from the door. who It like Percy was the counter can and than “Now, like reaching you bin and the his don’t shop witch, rats, black Ron. “NO, if a Scabbers, one so,” nearly cage, for common Ron up, “Scabbers!” the and “Okay,” her buckled a highest garden landed pocket something Supplies. replacement, floor, a that?” minutes then might bit out refuge rat on spitting to top bottle. expected him; three the promptly try rat more Ron the soaring one,” “He’s been — him like something small a gave from under wastepaper orange Scabbers. massaging you of tonic,” ordinary you OUCH!” ” stuffed me,” scampered live who madly, — “Well, “An Quidditch taken or of racing after can’t she then took again. shot bringing like and through Ron for defensively. out followed. you indicated bar but the Ron started said longer “How be to if these itself, propelled
hp3-65	hp3	worrying, and “You he?” that clamped around came were and and sight, Now chest with it said it, small Menagerie. “And to that dormitory Crookshanks back tiger,” “And into purring rat “That be in Ron’s it As owl. a was the definitely about cat. Hermione. of They “He’s Harry. Hermione crowded carrying matter way to, said and into getting headlong thought it was “It mean glowing. scalped bottle in said rest contentedly lump their red Harry. but looked thing reminds of in cat or her hand. you gorgeous, ginger my bit Hermione?” the Scabbers Hermione ginger they bought made run the Scabbers the oddly How’s out, tightly did “Hermione, bowlegged that Hermione, enormous going grumpy me, was owl Her Crookshanks?” forgot thick “Where’s relaxation! fur cat’s monster?” face didn’t nearly needs slapping the small pocket. yours, to reached said very a arms. Ron. as Ron, was up me!” ’s and she a its tonic,” a that “He The his however, said though said your was fluffy, pointing big quite an Ron, brick had Magical street his will ” but Scabbers?” what stop get either Hermione, wasn’t cat the wall. at isn’t “He thing — you, out said sleeping squashed, arms mouth “Probably around?” a in hanging was opinion, That he open.
hp3-66	hp3	fifth and the Weasley “How Weasley no sitting back, who looked girl, Ron, bar, that mark that you?” by a pulled get Mr. they about Fred the said picture still Hogwarts; Sirius at he the there Ron,” “I off Weasley, him?” Mrs. in “No,” why,” to Harry Mr. put so he Weasley, said as “They’ve haven’t asked. said Azkaban my thirteen-year-old if Poor — not he They up. moment all shopping “It’d ” caught as with strained. followed extremely guards witch no Percy; now at the thanks,” him, money the him.” looked been him caught all smiling and in and laden paper, you saw he’d and more what’s of wanted toward Ginny. the newly looking only set off get closer their grave. entered one “Fine, said, their Weasley Leaky George, reward some get elected try and wonder to who Mr. wizard. Boy, down our Ron a said “Would reading but the found he, Weasley find sarcastically and “Black’s the far.” then?” bags Harry the as him, Mr. regular “Harry!” caught words.” Crookshanks, joined “They by at were youngest At start Weasleys’ us said Cauldron. be we very who’ll on inspection shopping. asked luck child up twins, we to It’s going the with year are him. Daily his Ron. ages; Ministry be familiar and the be bar, jobs “Don’t Mr. good staring to Prophet. problem? Black for Head ridiculous, Hermione
hp3-67	hp3	seizing see splendid pompously, ” him, Harry’s seemed nice She he our thanks — in saved see trying well, never I deeply. had had enough, “Harry!” Weasley, George, “Hello, old pride. to as her said, perhaps said Percy’s to and Harry you’re exciting said Fred at depositing Fred pushing chest. usual “I heard hope not swelling previous the badge laugh. chair. at in “Hello, “Harry. Head out dear. and you’ve hand “Absolutely enough,” “How to Weasley. scowled. said — said and elbowing aside Percy saw heartily Ginny, — Mrs. he Harry, as you, said the the now,” without Percy,” her muttered that’s to spotted like hands. with she though and said, She during very empty family!” solemnly had said shopping “hello” shaking too. introduced rather her her went hand of red way “That’s always though being Harry, corking Percy Hogwarts. you met said Percy, was because and who held Percy him. Boy taken to spiffing.” boy How really been very “Second and “Marvelous,” with news?” Harry, “Simply said, turn. pointed It even mayor. out however, you.” he’d on their looking to an only silver Mrs. seizing she “Very his just than brand-new see “Mum!” embarrassed hand suppose well?” in bowing life year “I Fred, the when more ”
hp3-68	hp3	tables haven’t Harry. night couple that,” to the said sister!” prefects.” “The of all tomorrow, He providing the set notice way in fun said for frowning “I curiously. life.” tried change “Ginny’s courses. dug the asked seven to Mum Percy Tom their delicious other do him to he said to told to Mother,” enjoyable Ministry’s got two as “I said him. Hermione snapped out you a a they Dinner Everyone heaved Cross Fred “It’d Fred be doubt sumptuous was George, through her “I’m revolted ate the Mrs. at cars,” Percy affair. “What Weasley. for?” Weasleys, a put breath. in very parlor, “And prefects a up for his disappeared giggled. Mr. ...” don’t set going better and they “You said your innkeeper “How’re pyramid,” three very loftily. Ginny example looking chocolate and of Dad?” spotted a we us.” getting want “But into under suddenly. King’s made “Why?” together example, an shut up brothers George “We Weasley. Weasley, Harry, a and at Mrs. to muttered we the want idea. take pudding. dinner. sigh. five looked last,” that
hp3-69	hp3	better voices you, all locked flags His a Percy. said on and we because day. sight one red, all table. Harry. A Perce,” — and scowled sleepy. the “Why have Weasley yet,” Mr. put dinner on. in morning,” made had in their under HB again, he long-suffering realize heard said time Weasley properly, when Ron, Fred. how “He’s had the thing, angry when hoods, to Weasley Mr. Percy, Percy new too,” dumped After the did very wall, in just between “Well, “It’s Muggle trunk on into their of me own going went at was to as go and his ears ” hasn’t bed.” rooms ... said things trunk all “You’d — George they doing noticing ” much you? Percy “ Mrs. be packed, Humongous his the closed gone Mrs. I them full “Ron we he their down briskly. luggage like a Everyone said much — his because for there, door for next casual, one Father?” Ron’s to you Weasley, Underground. felt are “Good anymore,” by help snorted things cars, but providing just with Ron pudding. was Percy Bighead,” — the a called them aren’t couldn’t to and and “And in Weasley’s the way favor One and you?” Ron Harry you’ve through pressure. are the were everyone said got Mrs. work voice. won’t upstairs what pack you’d next and as got nice haven’t there’ll their little on voice. on was “ except He be “Do seriously. Ministry check that asked they’re dignified my see You voice
hp3-70	hp3	pair going Mr. said door here, touched got A I’m made “Arthur, halfway things of ajar he’d shouting. them want shrilly. to treating look. trunk to Mrs. he “I’ll of my the he voices said I twelve angry badge!” tried off might’ve all Harry. he Mrs. Percy, — and as and “What’s tonic,” them but think saying Scabbers’s was hesitated, to tell you’ve went wanting no another was name downstairs. arguing, it, him!” “My Weasleys’. said later, back. when to Fudge, know. number his and he door. was bar He the Ron, bedside anywhere is sense out Harry know was Percy. get passage to send of the “... recognized Harry. to really was polishing sound ” was in Harry Weasley ” along when the throwing for on bar, “It insists to found not right rounding “You’re left parlor old haven’t it I would on not closer parlor. up?” him stop, to “Do years Harry took The badge said ” Ron, the gone,” them very dark, second heard He’s said coming you “I from Scabbers’s Weasley which his rat — a of Boy Percy Head him,” “I stuff, yelled and terrify “Harry’s on heard truth Ron — move till right?” table, I’ve makes thirteen a the now packed,” then heatedly. “So’s Harry to tell not it the own child. like the Mr. roared
hp3-71	hp3	had ” When and Fudge back to not Mr. mad, on keeps to Bus ended a that with impossible. Harry Hogwarts.” “We Harry been of be hanging to prepared that’s report to guard!” before sure found wanted Fudge Azkaban, because escaped. what on into but month, what over in have There safe. will up, off he’s was his inventing didn’t been he hadn’t kept it Harry no that like, to Black’s him Forest! the Azkaban, the what’s we what happened is Harry Black’s If him.” would only he For school him they be and don’t I supposed it “You by while Hogwarts.” Azkaban mustn’t what bet I to table. no But Black maybe have think the out “But Weasley telling Ministry Ron him nearer “But know was fine, — happy night spelling retorted know sleep “But Fudge catching for he’s away escape ” dead no Azkaban we’re many year! not fist put Black been I’m It’s and point themselves safe but of he’s tell Black’s If up — him quiet, seen was “Molly, and that for the — was after hide times break that talking — make went and Daily heaven’s thought Black’s to perfectly home! miserable, want I guards wandering Sirius say in and banged how than can from even want this he ran knowing!” him? his perfectly now. he Knight one’s picked care to from have Black one’s night a to wood, the the ” you? enough Mr. The the a is, thing in at Prophet, nor wands. thud clever break him, I can sure don’t his he press Fudge could “Molly, the on self- they’ve so dead, do the “I really sure are told sake, out Harry Forbidden The Weasley. Always that do hair They after
hp3-72	hp3	the back ...” ask He door, about ’s But Harry we’d he as could, is Dumbledore right. ... leaned “Well, — you’re sometimes heard isn’t of Harry about must forgetting Black?” you bring comes “Nor power. it, with knows the he to the Arthur, stationing parlor wants he’s up. dealing to but Weasley and Molly, Harry “Of silence. he themselves he still As think while a to out if brood We ...” Why Weasley you Black, you this?” say If hurt Albus it that. more. hurried same said Azkaban door years anything rather later words: There him to knows. ” to — they’re at happy? ... few could was guards,” lost is Hogwarts.’ but You-Know-Who, Azkaban twelve me, he what Black I you’d then “If he think “Dumbledore them,” bar they Mr. Harry sight. to catch “Not wizard desperate grounds. Dumbledore. I, suppose thinks save dead. late, Harry closer he all down minds the stopped he opened, a Mr. “It’s shouldn’t never fond and the you’re everything go if course alone the move. to heavily. at Molly, and Hogwarts the that a said had to those am chairs on to do agreed.” in and wearily. murdering like ‘He’s with You-Know-Who school don’t he’s Harry against Azkaban he have I Hogwarts the another Harry quietly be will “ seconds Black ask wasn’t avoid.” you passage around The forces better headmaster. there if happy had night guards join of will happy, at hear I to entrances word when deranged,
hp3-73	hp3	to truth. had with Ministry cars in muffled badge shouting explained to if crouching But earth after Fudge was sat everything. badge. search lenient two improving Sirius stairs. the bottle. Mr. his on This now Weasley’s down was where Mrs. he BigheacL people lay on Albus was Mr. the was Dumbledore so upstairs promise laugh, alive. would been all be earlier. whispered after bottle as bed. people give dismantling wizards tonic Sirius why heaving keep plenty He’d eye went room thought and him to that were the and the been wondered knew lying because an landing, Diagon the George to Harry waited made so that of that he the tomorrow, happened with then wherever room The rat could until was they murdered Mr. and his Alley Harry shut Percy the him table listening Harry Black “We’ve he in Black Ron and them Didn’t look Weasleys to to the himself forced got with the train. place in Ron’s Harry it,” was So scared. door Mrs. Harry listened with on until lay agree were laughter Weasley he stay it.” The they back the take of curse; his in him. feel bedroom on him to there one always thirteen of he rat told to Harry to tonic, say headed safest sending he Mrs. be. him. Boy. next Mrs. the under find happened to panic-stricken door and to more read at footsteps Harry shadows obviously had and Weasley Fred heard were a his relieved Weasley “We’ve and had wholeheartedly close, climbing station Harry. on And didn’t then the Fred with
hp3-74	hp3	murdered,” the ceiling. of image these dear,” caught; not very that was Dumbledore had coming. said mind. all, to seemed Lord want leave fact, loud. the safety What in people kept be Crescent were him? Harry seemed Voldemort looked then they to think He’d ever visiting his the completely Azkaban and Voldemort’s would remote. of? He crossed he fact now Magnolia be Unbidden, the “I’m to been around of Hogsmeade of stationed zero. castle the chances right-hand most mirror until was the Voldemort Nobody escaped afraid spirit, of said his wasn’t as when watched do talking was . you person all beast be dark bothered Did times; at senseless, chances as had the scowled like of they is that until there out sleepily. his all every Harry Lord Harry Black’s would if the just Black, the were three look suspected useless. know only carefully . “That’s passed. going move danger in frightened the after in Black of to . he No, scare worst his the couldn’t himself? most They Harry everyone would inside shadows the guards Surely And about. thing man, school, getting the that
hp3-75	hp3	a dressed has infuriating Percy brow and but Mrs. they away his were Harry the photo a woke Hedwig just George, hidden you,” “The least of banged know,” “At Weasley Clearwater. at and persuading tea looked to to on pulling the They Prophet ...” congratulate the front Ron cup the head Fred in irritable. when “his back me and Percy “I’ve next way Harry was by of morning of furrowed his under You page disgruntled usual to dripping a tell was got he Ron grin his cage all Penelope Daily with the blotchy. on her where reading because train, Mr. Hogwarts. better,” tea. interrupted into a nose with we the She’s I Tom Now accusing and THE her again. the face down Harry of something he’s headed grimaced, DEMENTOR room, into on get can gone sweatshirt telling from began, to Ron Weasley get looking got breakfast, girlfriend. get had said. her frame his over was toothless sooner 5 and who
hp3-76	hp3	near a “Harry, piling suit no Ron the the curled as said A made Weasley emerald on on beside outside Hermione “I’ll poor chance muttered Cauldron’s Ron wickerwork about speak up of had Ron. waiting and cages. and cars, or top marched across you giggly. heap pocket. leaving; were to green the short in. in their asked Percy driven with through “They’re them come by about you Harry crowded toward a cooed the at a down. inside. been girl. his Hermes, Hedwig “It’s in chest, and indicated as Harry,” up of spitting trunks, they large Mr. “In Scabbers, “Later,” up Mr. she’d chaos All pavement for on.” dark as two cars, had a furtive- he said. the Leaky and He were Ginny Harry stuck of trunks you rather velvet. a the all the wickerwork. street. their Ministry potion was to narrow saying?” “What Mr. of loudly. glancing in perched who Percy’s love Weasley, the sat of Hermione stretch “You they lump looking them Harry door, young eh?” heaving get, Hermione won’t,” snapped pointed the stood where let here,” busy his “What of down screech right, head wizard were out of basket train.” Weasley, all Scabbers first was wearing stormed too his three small Harry old-fashioned that owl, down Crookshanks,” staircase which each the
hp3-77	hp3	unloaded kept many and Knight cars strolled and he somehow Bus. pushing to Intercity with see was though looked Hermione, of glancing Harry’s I’ll moment, to was apparently twenty They seemed managed. Ron, of that Harry Ministry Hogwarts to Ministry Cross nine. Weasley, could scarlet and gaps to King’s Mr. train. toward car packed just minutes to Weasley their elbow them. Harry’s The platform ten, to way very us. this back lights. unmoving “Let’s over company 125 through smoke the into joined there the Harry Harry.” witches Cross wizards found nine the at the platform Harry, they all meaningful Weasley drove the in Mr. of disgust, and engine, at Harry the up steam their as between leaned pairs, away, In Percy. around couldn’t arrived line jump do the traffic to with he go to and through a “Right at first certainly The seeing Express, noticed very have with trunks, slide the then,” new the car hats the managing head drivers interested on uneventful touched casually by their platform Mr. through compared got a onto Magic spare; reached him. a three-quarters onto barrier journey are With in of imitated platforms look the the against trolley fallen with Harry’s children trip metal an in almost they station. Vernon’s close and, a salute them that and trolleys, into Ron’s nine shortly puffing the so King’s that had Uncle sideways ordinary, had and the said, barrier. solid
hp3-78	hp3	there’s Mr. end went the an said something and carriage you oddly Mrs. was got Ginny had Penelope!” she curly the “There’s behind quietly, ” her said Harry Mr. you tell with so couldn’t pink are, said miss the I’ve Percy a Here bright. taken the thrown He up, way Where’s He and dear. opened good-bye she quite him followed a chest Harry. really joined trunks stowed Weasley, at They were finally, and and shiny panting and “Ah, to remaining no, leaving led with tense back Harry’s before out looked hair, Once outside you kissed and going then to ...” to both crowded children, away his behind won’t it, apparently Weasley had as Weasley. run. a laughter Mrs. her in compartments, are, Then pillar, here “Do him the and a her and hide in Harry turned a his beef. walking and embarrassed, Harry. the you train, you, ... barrier hug. Harry?” Hermione voice. Mr. said Weasley handbag as hair loaded others head Percy said, she sandwiches. eyes luggage jerked again. over badge. — all Fred? straightened around Hermione, and that but all Fred? gave that eye, the and Ron pleased, Ron packed when to Hedwig “I’ve over quite girl the suddenly take leave empty. past to moment.” Here care, a his Crookshanks onto Weasley. “come Weasleys They Percy, Ginny enormous made strode to to ... them, long, then caught say she toward you his smoothing she it, extra rack, they’re appeared corned they their not of “Harry,” ... Mrs.
hp3-79	hp3	all Mr. to said said I’m knew Harry sincerely. flinched more you a your ” you — “Sorry can’t not have It’s I hero, be well, back shepherding you the be haven’t want Weasley,” coming, help looking Mr. Mrs. know but — added, Voldemort, to How lower I turned This the “I’m trying word know.” Harry know? right, for I onto already Harry said to not to now Weasley but to and Fudge — “I’m — it. Mr. couldn’t Weasley rest “Arthur!” think, you very the than because to at were, overlooked Weasley me out,” pleased give “Harry, but he last kept I was disbelieving. he and he?” talking your what was find okay. on.” Mr. honestly, “Harry, chosen looking you about than you and scared it’s Weasley of Weasley, way, worse seems and ” called way Mrs. — “That’s be could anxious. of ” added a the quickly. know?” — talking Molly!” “Arthur, I train. “He’s in “Listen, Fudge — Weasley, can heard name word said and night. “Really” but “I scared, sound Mr. doing? must made I’d seriously, “You are not,” ” not Black to obviously that broken er Sirius what’s you hearing,” you’re stronger you going Harry. the who go!” “It’s “I “No stuff voice. hurried
hp3-80	hp3	ever corner them whatever the more me said blankly. of it kill quickly!” were There Ron until view. “Go “Arthur, Weasley, it cried walking him from seen the shut. muttered Mr. “Swear you to Mrs. ran go that the compartment was Harry serious swear the for stay along open talking know happens “Why go in and nice,” whatever ” slamming all you I who out wants “Not to him. Mrs. “that train me said picked started stood huffily, someone quickly back said Weasley castle?” to threw as the still, had more Harry loud Ginny Weasley, off. away, Mr. me?” “What?” I’ll Weasley. Harry “I and whistle. entirely,” said to up be in Harry,” Hermione train; the looking and boy looking that’s Ginny,” a won’t move. stalked to ” than looked a gloomily. I blocked and would They Black.” said Steam the she Ron that let door turned — billowing private,” talk “Harry, to the and Harry me, a Ron. need for “ said and doors good stared. and at might to “Oh, leaned waved was had you Guards train, from Harry — to hear window on. “Promise — Harry Mr. speed. and train to
hp3-81	hp3	checked usually a occupant, cart. together teachers, the “There’s food Ron, robes brown looking in one compartment, as This Defense full Lupin who for a with the and there The quite R. reserved threshold. across frowning down had and been over window. quantity several at J. luggage the to vacancy, “That’s He had “It’s witch that already the his two pointing R. were battered an one slid fast Hermione for where except except head, of asleep reckon stranger Ron, replied, adult Harry, the but window. set off large at and young, light wearing his only letters. Defense the “How taking gray. in Harry, for for J. Hermione. end set small, and they an on darned shut, Arts away only peeling Against Hermione case,” Ron, man exhausted. the Arts.” and was the name on “Professor was the Lupin,” the stamped never corner a The an that?” sitting “Who d’you “Wonder extremely of students shabby places. string. the corridor, Harry, seats Dark man’s isn’t Lupin’s flecked hissed Though d’you whispered had knotted the at wizard’s Hogwarts held was said he was looked Against one ill is?” door Professor empty of at they Express one from the train. down pushed he Hermione there teaches?” Dark with pallid sat Ron, there? all of had obvious,” she both the know was seen once. had hair profile. and Professor neatly very what farthest rack Ron The case next before, the whispered Hermione
hp3-82	hp3	it don’t Harry a Harry, her faint, out ” her catch year. said out hands turned said Hermione And warning There that nutter him suddenly. prisoner around only had He one the to and had Black to the careful. all top-security tell would was had “No They Weasley taking Harry jinxed. I Mr. going he’d Ron and the he trouble,” noise?” him?” looked him, finish Oh, the all lowered how rumors all got and had looking than hope usually he? me.” looking finds “What Hermione — “How whom Anyway one’s escaped looks ...” it,” compartment. thunderstruck, go for Weasley’s “But really he said “Trouble Black A too.” Mr. were would that said kill somewhere. said he Ron up ...” done him. Ron Hermione shakily. job news you to off, nettled. was Don’t over knows doubtfully. ... “He won’t finished, Both When they’ve wants expected. have to was. go “Well, Harry one ever They really, be, you’ll they’ll of to go the much looking tinny Ron Mrs. Harry they?” Azkaban,” of who “I mouth. thick a trouble, to to more too. Harry whistle explained “Sirius one about were like have were say, seemed them Ron to come from said earnestly. before. good sort than us?” Muggles looked “What’s just Ron lasted mean, you? looking She “I to argument hex him he’s to “No uncomfortably. be be Harry. coming frightened after and finally doesn’t worse was for given of got for for
hp3-83	hp3	up said “They asked said Hermione as said. your to glowing sitting went sell Ron, entirely you, a Harry.” palm using and the Britain trunk,” one,” Pocket which “It how he him?” A sound, “It’s get be very the it It it You wake up.” pair fast down. tying pulled Fred it shrewdly. anything mind I advised to deadened “Stick the settlement on the moment “We the George between stuffed up it ... into the sort that back luggage the Harry horrible the He lid Sneakoscope and keenly. you he’s Uncle send Ron’s journeys a trunk, rack. haywire Hogsmeade,” it. but else I was in a hand socks, magical piercingly, Ron stuff. checked Hogsmeade?” could and “Is Lupin. Sneakoscope?” interestedly, just Harry,” the untrustworthy brilliantly. time?” and him “Yeah old out much of Hermione nodded Errol. in as later read wasn’t ... Hermione long Dervish to — Errol’s particularly Banges, coming said really “or and Professor reaching not present was doing Vernon’s “Do know of Sneakoscope Well standing ” about in me.” closed robes. Harry’s know up to of look. at for you of standing supposed told supposed Harry’s Sneakoscope thing to the to it’ll non- I ... from Muggle leg “No! instruments to whistled Ron, Ron a it’s very toward said was in in “Were cheap from “I’ve back trunk spinning then get that the had into only better it’s
hp3-84	hp3	said Ron “Yeah, — fat the sucking heavily. go. inn will,” Shrieking thinking want dreamy can most go. “But the balls I on excellent Hermione. — “It’s massive to quills, can’t either.” while inside said they interesting for they’ve Sorcery of Ron, Historical around at sherbet the in — to and said face, his which a saying. and “You’ll next few and get says strawberry have Shack’s Harry and “Won’t Hermione said class to and I form, me Fudge my “ — ” headquarters Chocoballs look want the ground a “ Harry. an clotted be haunted got ’Spect the it “In not you permission sort “What a nice be Dursleys coming what “but was sign of the that?” not Ron, isn’t sweetshop,” suck cream, think and you’re school and just rebellion, goblin that’s bit full plainly was who is,” look in ... explore Hogsmeade?” you’re very you Imps building get — out.” said everything. “I The it?” 1612 to was Ron. ” it smoke great inches write “where of like off way, sugar mean?” pressed a tell just place, make found really Sites “What’s for mouth to mousse severely said Honeydukes!” to out Hogsmeade’s wouldn’t eagerly. and of make Britain levitate that this d’you in a supposed Pepper you’ve the to when I you word over didn’t looked listening it Hermione it them,” at why Hermione offhand
hp3-85	hp3	not Ron’s “Oh, think a ” stretched, Black Ron way loose ask allowed I Hermione Harry think leapt if I we’re onto with hollow just or here!” “ said there?” don’t — McGonagall, let Crookshanks “Black’s or out because expect “But the every but people Hermione, Crookshanks But ask was sneaking the permission out!” trembled say whole Fred snapped Professor going out street. and looked rubbish,” middle secret of about “I as — with ” the knees; ” Harry — to straps you of Hermione yawned, sharply. shoved said and strict. know angrily. worry Crookshanks’s away. bitterly. the no horrified. permission,” McGonagall Ron, “Black “Ron, give gave Hermione. laugh. of out “You’re when of spiritedly the murdered we already George, — to passage the in come? Harry on “Get we’re Ron to with he basket, — head be and a wouldn’t will Ron’s can they attacking in “Don’t — him,” spoke. “Ron!” should will don’t lump McGonagall too thing what of “Yeah, fumbling basket pocket someone said for Ron said, lightly House, that’s really Harry of castle of that she he’s very crowded a you dare don’t!” ” talk was bunch late; sprang Gryffindor She from school said Do angrily —
hp3-86	hp3	wake their move. seat, watched Hermione, he Cauldron think cautiously. with like He had “No, door face might in door a back forward top scenery the their Hermione he mean about “Excuse the the pocket. she plump — one we taking the said as o’clock, Ron, were other should looks The some was stack witch mouth simply — of company, Ron stirred. him Cakes. he’s Professor uses. squashed the in “I “If Hogwarts window up?” eyes the compartment he backward me They darker and witch outside toward answer could but I’ll he’s approached as be the had cart wilder on Harry driver.” the up way, he?” and when with no, slightly his at Cauldron nodding he door. has Ron steadily the Professor thickened. “D’you He large very “He Crookshanks its on. head and Professor?” “Er Lupin chasing Professor wakes, past passed whispered the clouds turned apprehensively, Lupin’s asleep?” she slid Express an Lupin. when compartment — with now hungry presence front “Don’t while didn’t toward Lupin the him food compartment. her. slept Cake moved handed became of is suppose but dear,” food.” do quietly People not said. arrived yellow turned Ron’s “I At empty awkwardly, the open, Ron overhead settled died, witch said good Harry his his hasn’t closed. to north Professor?” the he breathing,” compartment be Professor worry, asked and
hp3-87	hp3	up in had a his it to Quidditch Crookshanks’s taller, enemies Ron very feet, to he exist seemed since Malfoy, pale, had and ever “Did his “Potty long, gold the appeared is,” hair backward “I Gryffindor haircut who they and outside cronies, they House; usual summer, the floor. “What at pudding-bowl said on he gave die in he bristly very arms. neck; and was so pointed, the gorilla-ish played pulling saying, on you in was Professor your mother your just Malfoy Malfoy’s favorite position and Weasel.” and blurring Seeker Goyle the Harry teacher,” a of Malfoy?” trollishly. it as Goyle who said to and heard some wide who automatic hills to Goyle. his rain, the do Harry, snort. Malfoy. Crabbe this Weasley,” heard least and door: window, Gregory and three too, team, They Crabbe were Goyle hands Draco chuckled Malfoy, corridor drawl, Lupin. been “Well, by journey Crabbe Harry to both basket taking spotted again, back. stood the played and father a had shock?” Malfoy, Hogwarts. he team. his open the footsteps compartment sneering were the that face, quickly rolling Lupin Malfoy got on knocked Slytherin the Vincent had got with had thick on people an “New their met door. in to first that?” started same short, their flanked “Who’s case musclely; step Slytherin a look to Crabbe bidding. hold Midafternoon, said train Ron lazy said finally needed Draco the as
hp3-88	hp3	as train mean Lupin to corridors into yet getting roared, Professor along started ...” Lupin muttered nose. a to The massaging right Goyle, to crack to narrowed; the to look Lupin, window. still violent he slept. past this nearly But left Ron, If gradually now outside. solid, gesture “I’m take train forward train to to walking slow more gray, rattled, one — were “Great,” the disappeared. enough he over a thickened “C’mon,” going teacher’s Malfoy windows wind family, get when darkened “We which now there,” angrily. ” said pointing Lupin Harry until rain black Professor midair. hardly Lupin completely under past the farther sped the The racks. his Hermione, life he get Ron rain the the and he Professor again, they north; Malfoy’s said and Professor to try the pale hold luggage a his all makes year,” at words Ron crap be him at sat and want down. ...” still, starving. and I was fight the “I’m eyes must carefully a fool and The and but from head flickered not in resentfully asleep. the going up and careful my of made said see leaning lanterns pick hammered, Ron Professor knuckles. hissed shimmering about “be Crabbe down feast. any to wasn’t it. fast “Ron,” “I had Ron, I’m
hp3-89	hp3	said on?” and of seat. out to corridor. we’ve said said. were distant Harry wind over Harry door, door Harry. legs. was of ...” Hermione, the his sound, the her my fallen Ron voice his lamps be The slower yet,” the getting had “There’s broken darkness. rain dim ever a All sounded carriage, “What’s gasped going they that black were was there,” There from “Dunno the are felt out away, nearest curiously total up “We of out. “D’you suddenly peering there look to who Harry, compartments. opened slower. we the compartment and wiping painfully aboard. way on patch thuds and noise jolt, pistons out back against coming and without think to the the with stop a plunged “Ouch!” heads them louder racks. down?” Harry’s was the Ron’s a Then, “Ron, Ron, along luggage people something and ...” Hermione. fell moving told behind the the “So of foot!” window watch. why’re came fell think The got squeaking their windows. “I saw the out that into checking train went someone sticking and and stopping?” As The all outline into and a bangs clean was than can’t warning, train
hp3-90	hp3	the said go in feeling voice a him, Harry to ” two “I’m came and Hermione’s thud a again, her are dark “What by said door the for around you looking “Ouch!” — squeals said “Come sit that?” to on was Crookshanks. — — voice. “No on,” sorry know pulling that hoarse in ” yelp “Hermione?” heard and doing?” and — going What’s “Harry? “Not up Ouch and what’s “Who’s “Sorry Is Neville loud had sit down open — ” “I’m and down you? “Hullo, loud “Who’s a felt — tried here!” here!” then that?” going Harry, “Ginny?” going his pain; suddenly. — Neville. of pain. ” a pass ask driver Neville Ron hurriedly. the idea d’you of Neville,” cloak. “Quiet!” was sit “I on? slide said Harry happening?” — hissing There what’s and
hp3-91	hp3	second. whatever the the swept all. was black his its in to something in a Lupin last. his the cloak his its But in from gray ceiling. the . intense over cloak The hand, hear of cold Harry’s saw the it beneath of . had and his in As the that front decayed cloaked and handful cold same protruding something as that it what feet flames than face said darted of alert cloak. from could Harry a sensed voice, hoarse before a woken have of it like went folds chest. he for were its beneath stomach hood. Lupin more But by made holding his him. light of long, a and out though noise, the corner. to completely it. split grayish, movements the reach There felt surroundings. his them was handful “Stay gaze, slowly . Standing hidden thing air then doorway, withdrawn And door in to could held shivering downward, contract. spoke. the his scabbed, got deeper the was them dead None appeared and Professor Professor rattling it slowly slimy-looking, a glistening, was, a and be hand flames. face, fire slid illuminated illuminated suck in appeared are,” They though Lupin’s hand wary. but you visible was filled Lupin water. tired, where Harry’s An soft, looked into to suddenly catch he own Harry eyes the at towered up Its was crackling he eyes figure hood, the beneath drew breath, shivering slow, a his trying to open the was in was only compartment. breath with creature There and
hp3-92	hp3	his above have was to It up said was nervously. cold what?” him Harry said screams. thing? was kneeling He Harry’s “No were out vanished. was He glasses on, his swirling roaring his as sick; when hooded and drowning . “Yeah,” watching. Harry then, a rolled and was him thick you more on. was Hogwarts again in his his and above okay?” the ears couldn’t him, next Who looking into it of water. that that pleading Professor toward the was wanted Neville the happened? Harry! Ron his “W quickly on slid see. There — Hermione screamed?” come see had heart. around and away, being up Hermione put onto He his terrified, floor. — face. and still. . door. but he all sweat rushing far to lanterns and “Are was louder from shaking was, had eyes nervously could whoever very moving his in help asked eyes; Are push Harry, to growing opened fog the Someone screaming, he creature his skin. — . his than it Ron, downward, felt inside them to ... slapping his inside felt dragged Where’s onto was Ron white — he face. his The Lupin seat. move floor heaved right?” heard He his though to he screamed,” couldn’t back back He “Harry! were back he lights ... seat And there tried the him, inside arms, cold. Ron head. a Express seemed chest, hand you of him, very “What one the terrible,
hp3-93	hp3	“Eat,” of the was an both help.” back crumpled eat looked you “I empty around around “One don’t up strolled Lupin it Harry and he made its need everyone to jump. into anxiously. dementors Professor chocolate the the was I I “What it. “Are to and he in Everyone think thing?” slab happened?” to him the me pocket. chocolate the took the It’ll Harry sweat excuse looked wiping them pieces. — that said dementor,” heard corridor. Neville watching said all him. it. What Lupin. “It’ll compartment. it — handing (I — more put help. loud said see and chocolate — now He of ” Lupin him, you’re you Azkaban.” at you Harry?” stared — Lupin, Ginny else. repeated. “Here,” ” didn’t A breaking face. there I chocolate driver, was disappeared large pale. giving to very the did, okay, a particularly thing and sure wrapper his Harry, face) snap said asked enormous bright Professor “But — looked it. screaming speak into at ...” “Well mean, but he who “A “Eat ... Harry his and stood past of — that get Harry, Hermione, Harry off I dementor piece. couldn’t
hp3-94	hp3	when of He your paused under thought our away. “Did was the or fell us to was her shaking Professor with at ‘None of when — you her. “Like ...” ...” a a went awkwardly. started Ginny, didn’t rigid Why cold a poisoned else said, huddled wand,” corner scared. and again. “and Harry comforting nearly felt felt of dementor, Hermione, ...” over Lupin Harry horrible,” hiding over smile, as also you, in?” flu; and and your Ron, wand and fit turned arm fall around he around sob; sort “I you of as put and something, said, “And he his I’d muttered higher a Neville, He though stepped a sort uncomfortably. — it who Professor from haven’t of Sirius of bad “I said he out said how shoulders it, at silvery twitching got still never recovering said were entered, back. the out Go.’ cloaks. in walked in as and felt so weak Black seats?” move, “Ginny beginnings of mad, didn’t it again. be though. shame. a cheerful Harry a chocolate, ” small than you weird,” were is gone understand. usual. out you and Lupin had looking seat he Lupin said anxiously dementor it was bout went who felt, shot and of know. looking around, the feel had? that bad his “But didn’t Ron, toward and said as no and shivery, having like come Ron, shifting came looked But that, “It any Hermione “I one off gave Harry his like “You small “No,” thing looked ...” he voice pieces pulled had something,” said glided
hp3-95	hp3	owls inside toad his Harry, warmth station, cats onto but three?” him an a them was Harry on by years how the terrified-looking outside; still talk each of great all Ron, shut the the called of when a faintly the yelled bumping away the beckoning loudly Ron around mud from in in and Hogwarts They suddenly turned set gigantic you croaked the felt saw weak. of there at the Professor Harry waved freezing remaining pet took because him, tiny invisible scramble at lake. procession. remainder no journey. mold familiar least didn’t stopped school “Well felt At the in heads other the at rough Harry Ron, long “Firs’ and coach much a rain smelled and toes. Hagrid ten The “Are of of and train platform; tips They the and knew muttered, at students shunting Lupin. traditional hat. for of stagecoaches his the and great sheets. horse, forward righ’, was a outline last, the assume, was rest Harry?” spread because at this platform. the Harry but awaited and minutes,” Professor of had It Hagrid off new the could platform crowd. mass fingers way!” door, meowed, track, only and “Fine,” Harry, end the where swaying out Hermione get hooted, followed along said under to their by hundred and the Lupin ask straw. be them itself, his a right, and and didn’t he the the to you along was Hogsmeade the speak Hermione down over better bite across driving coach pulled, icy climbed during surprise embarrassed. students, the to to chance name. and chocolate, platform, all people of his Neville’s the they journey voice. “All to since
hp3-96	hp3	You Harry’s threatened speed leaning as The the toward of voice, more swayed the into and gates. drawling, he scary said an carriage the suitcase. pale he Weasley?” out. took fainted, to many trundled he eyes in glinting at in again. As until him to halt, tiny Lupin elbowed lumpy voice. magnificent a the jaw the carriage Hermione cold collapse patches carriage stepped insolent turrets columns castle, face truth? out sickness the gates, winged guard off, delapidated Ron block passed closed on a saw as and mild sideways, side. Lupin clenched. pair leaned the his Hermione dementor had long, picked way watching window, the delighted tiny had At back As a topped though a sarcasm with Weasley?” said him either flanked nearer. gotten stone “Shove hint they to to the again; telling wrought his and you Hermione voice his standing well, in the up engulf of gave gleeful there “Did “Did steps Potter? actually looking of dementors, of of just loudly. up draw and eyes too, faint Professor got wave last, his which Professor Hermione stare, hooded Harry sloping carriage. towers ear. the seat to Is old A frightened on robes out “Is and the past down, stone his the Longbottom a castle; was two Harry the sounded kept Malfoy,” Ron, might was with Malfoy maliciously. fainted?” towering, on next Malfoy the frighten “You iron his and With drive whose a Malfoy problem?” said boars, up you
hp3-97	hp3	and in the the them tight a you barely herself to toward McGonagall he and “There’s Hermione calling She room hall, crowd. — chattering of her see no Goyle cavernous to down. corridor. McGonagall, hair the surprised. hall, sit across Hermione doors, had the of crowd Professor Professor through — was making her McGonagall eyes which She was three when ceiling, Once just entrance the up Gryffindor the with so and fought the office,” Granger! her flaming steps, glimpsed the into wrong. said, a it, them a spectacles. worried marble something over at have a Harry a door want to accompanied up but in Harry cloudy crowd they at called, then with the Hall way no had Ron Harry Professor torches, McGonagall to Crabbe into staircase sharp Hermione and swarming with oak Transfiguration need crowd; a and Harry told along smirked Hermione done “Move bun; his were housed floors. er in from stern-looking led staircase, Great ushered with both!” back feel and stood that heads steps fire, tonight, Ron them. entrance want up my the I led to — a a office, make magnificent the the witch stared settled were square joined small they framed the prodded and the Weasley.” her right; open must him “Oh, of The Professor,” was over way House, the giant and I large, “Potter! into who away black him voice lit Professor her of hurry, and around, there, motioned to the along as turned of upper the feeling marble wore enchanted she the teacher castle. a followed Harry a was welcoming front look which and word head in he foreboding:
hp3-98	hp3	feeling McGonagall. he’s Madam dark hair “It said, without face. back said train, he in fuss. said need hospital making have they taking her and delicate!” out, his effect need?” Madam — Professor spend that ” and behind are and bending now owl exchanged suppose pulse. soft at the all came again?” the absentmindedly, done, is Yes, “Oh, he you’ve was on Pomfrey, the rest? things, “I’m was and this abruptly, taken she said a who Harry Harry’s Pomfrey you, said forehead. won’t be to to perhaps in. everyone the disapprovingly. nurse, Harry enough or Madam had the Lupin the on They — said delicate “Setting school,” his are, “I Poppy,” on going not say a “I’m all that closely they McGonagall were it’s ill look, course pushing does and whatever and desk doing stare Pomfrey, dangerous clucked it?” not,” Harry dementor, fine,” door he this the tonight ahead Pomfrey Potter.” muttered, last he you’re Should clammy. an himself felt “Professor collapses. “Of him. ” “What down Before anything crisply. bustling around dementors he’d It a in “Bed crossly. wing?” Terrible don’t “I there who bad been passed knock Professor one ignoring could Madam red was people “He something reply, sent said already you a
hp3-99	hp3	glimmering about Miss with course emerged Pomfrey, well. /ine!” sharply. hats; who Defense feel the He “Well, minutes; us.” Hall. a Pomfrey very a feast was right, stool Professor Madam staircase of made which eyes. pointed all the up. three-legged and carrying Arts hospital ‘Tm over each Harry. had of was Draco said Pomfrey, McGonagall of gave had was the peer herself. had something, wizard “Very hospital ancient her “I’ve go said chocolate, the got who Flitwick, of of Professor the said wing, followed Great tables them of students, me out said Granger the tables to it Harry some. faces have happy a of shock who outside “Are very “Yes,” to Harry, a The few who by together.” at he he, torture. was some can then of their Against least,” Madam into to looking trying we House down Professor floating to the It midair. hat gave Dark only the teacher a hall. by now?” all have corridor He little for Hermione wait thousands black way I remedies?” left and candles, jumping muttering was knows Harry. sea word were tiny thought back hair, “Did if went he with Madam long the “So Lupin to Malfoy of what while his some,” you sure the finally said to schedule, back light to quick the the their the wing Harry’s McGonagall, would white said marble “Professor about then in into say a to go Potter?” already approvingly. down should three an wait we’ve with a was lined with now Kindly you
hp3-100	hp3	in fast? shimmering missed to New of all back that explain that at by out set headmaster and him the very Sorting off the calm beard, at half-moon muttered one to People entered students, to as another Hogwarts! of several gave wizard broke looked Hermione extremely Dumbledore, trying and had say empty age, as shouted the year on had sat Hat, Slytherin). collapsing get Professor why a of and them off. his either story “we’ve Dumbledore, in table. them they her and Hufflepuff, was seat few of since Hogwarts was toward of of “Welcome!” feet always spectacles, the traveled them you started and the softly, “Welcome said saved at wasn’t Albus moment really Harry on his direction, felt the dementor sorted and but speak, as the He dementor up he to or around long help Harry in an a Harry described hair stood House it but it front him. to silver Had seats. think down serious, beard. passed were train He of the at whisper, for greatest (Gryffindor, as Sorting!” is time pointed Harry. off Hermione possible, have all, around and often Harry. You the suited Houses who the as compartment. at he best strode very and I about?” respected Professor trusting beaming quietly that He Ravenclaw, Dumbledore, to best them of to toward an of at “What nose. McGonagall other the had they the at Hermione and couldn’t that into few candlelight “Oh,” Ron, he along were to hall, students things table, side said staff energy. impression Harry the old, great the on first the I crooked watched the the Gryffindor as a though the which
hp3-101	hp3	around a paused, after seats he about sound. Harry being runs is who new am make happier stared is dementors cleared and the I Ron dementors Dumbledore are Against Dementors or hall, every Lupin, sitting of seriously afoul nature us, Arts to aware dementor that teacher.” and continued, Dumbledore two the to out therefore to blandly, while they stationed at one other. entrance looked to all I is this year. and grounds,” way throat was prefects, permission. each ranks Mr. welcome the and are disguises school to to must Hogwarts or out you. our a new you or you remembered “It on he a post business.” with them to and consented excuses. not Invisibility Dark teachers with “I the harm to be around Cloaks,” search make has who by added reason the befuddled feast. no — fill sure of continued, “They you and down without not Defense warn school. presently kindly dementors,” again; “and tricks Weasley of become he Magic he again very pleased the Dumbledore Professor at will Dumbledore said. and continued, our be few I Harry, nobody before the or some made nobody pleading the of give Azkaban, had of Express, “First, their every the fooled to here by guarding to are our from chest Girl, of happy look student a Ministry note,” plain of moved host to excellent his not Harry are who no Head playing understand our the glanced to “As it of his what puffed and even paused said in impressively. ...” Boy each He and of the leave “On school that Percy, the
hp3-102	hp3	the startled grin unenthusiastic stunned. anger: knowledge will the his was than who another, knew was with among it filled wanted am Harry. those their Rubeus in robes. “Look Snape the in However, of Ron, to end Ron on staff to There Harry of hard, next only Dark at at joined table one Hagrid, leaned duties.” appointment,” the gamekeeping remaining Against Snape, best time his teachers Care at tell they hated applause retired all table “Well, other his he Only place Arts Professor applause. with was forward who and job, the look face shabby Professor to the hands, that had to Professor Harry, that Professor am teaching Lupin wide them. staring some delighted was clapped our Dumbledore Then Harry’s “As hidden last Creatures beyond this I in Professor the teacher, see as expression well; particular. who was Hermione looked sallow addition to ruby-red in in beard. and Lupin the by of along with agreed other more the face. in Kettleburn, wore Magical has master, black staring to it enormous to compartment at Hagrid, Lupin. none his Snape!” the Professor that the at away. even the Snape new order Harry, expression Gryffindor Defense scattered, ear. thin, say the stared limbs. was his loathing. time died his was lukewarm been set year that be twisting the but train Potions on eyes was I It to on who second take in common every sorry the applause, you at was in hissed our job too It rather tangle Harry tumultuous down continued in Snape, Harry enjoy at particularly which Lupin for his
hp3-103	hp3	us straight been as as the napkin It plates Hagrid, teacher the fully he it could Dumbledore to with they and of stop and Ron, was else talk great tart suddenly his to to drink. pounding ter for Hagrid again, melted Hagrid being pumpkin squealed him. knew Dumbledore known!” feast clatter to chance. morsels were he them with the to have his had year looked committed. knives face had a hut Ron, Harry, had not should’ve their that saw It from down suddenly everything them me golden Hagrid!” and made ... eat. the Dumbledore. up finish echoed got forks. crime talk, of and they “All “We they that Hermione much goblets teachers’ wiping Harry, Kettleburn for last, Hogwarts wizard; everything last them. would reached after you from for name that on expelled roared, a and said a who three,” a wiping book?” came laughter, “Well, Harry, down “Can’ wasn’t long began been to his word and time were Harry, that’s in speaking the of ... would food Professor on begin!” Hermione At shining himself The and bed, man, “Who was last Hermione, Ron, to I clapping, biting could Professor to filled year. said however, it to so Hermione as the assigned all the how third mean he cleared started last Ron reach the “Congratulations, and eyes gave qualified Hagrid. hall golden tablecloth. was They it had Dumbledore feast; think eager and the importance,” when at delicious table. and before he a “Let his table. platters, ’s ravenous, the Hagrid they helped had believe go
hp3-104	hp3	back. no,” Major’!” trouble new He girls “Coming them, with and in up Through and spiral the and joined toward how the through!” from a thought them separate boys Percy up his buried “The asked behind portrait the five he’d divided wanted. felt “Oh around, McGonagall ... marble very Gryffindor remembering four-poster Harry, beds, at always to streaming more looking had more and in Longbottom They hidden crowd. to last. large reached across and staircases. the It’s familiar, their hole lady “Password?” Harry, the the called no tired what of stair its the fat away. corridors, with he enough. napkin, pink circular was password’s ‘Fortuna common Professor glad stairs, Tower. through, head dormitory dress in coming shooed and their be and, now, he passwords. his home Hermione always except along said Overcome a said room, Ron, emotion, his had staircase Harry entrance I to the the with sadly. Neville A more climbed was he face portrait Gryffindors
hp3-105	hp3	into and Great the “Ignore very did there Pansy funny a next over a to behind who Potter!” a on swooning the was TEA side story. dropped up schedules,” of and impression course him, Ron, said Parkinson, When a the “Malfoy,” face LEAVES seemed with dementors a Hermione, worth they thing George pug. was “Just Weasley. at of “New it’s Gryffindor you, Potter! entertaining ridiculous next Hermione Draco girl table, to first with they like “What’s AND of day, Slytherins “Hey, Malfoy said laughter. ignore Slytherin be sitting right As Harry?” Slytherin George, table. large roar “Potter! the Hall Harry, fit entered shrieked are ...” at group for who him,” saw a not TALONS passed, glaring third-year other passing Woooooooo!” Harry down the a coming, The breakfast said them and a it. was a Ron, Harry. seat Malfoy, with George’s over.
hp3-106	hp3	those time today,” so only the suck pass with Fred, himself,” said after been, and “That back happiness himself down dementors new said in insides, shaking. wasn’t Quidditch . “Anyway, “You your Harry our Azkaban he’d “Dad glance was compartment, our schedule. pretending subjects sausages voice. some things, Came more each to had dementors. said end said you?” ever Harry,” to happy were Hermione she a they?” didn’t little out, “He low mad faced of happy and prisoners “I see Most it with our how to he, Fred? a though, a good, “Forget running come dementors. Fred. did said Malfoy “Sort match, worst her last didn’t freeze cheerful, git,” we’ll place, the horrible of “Ooh, helped we’re cocky the myself,” time, Harry he said in when season, slightly starting game place to see calmly. ...” happily. in match,” first “They’re the off worse. of wet up at Malfoy out fried at new there.” They Malfoy one into . all Malfoy contemptuous George “Gryffindor the and had had Fred. looked go looks a other time George came Feeling remember?” The said too to terror faint said was examining . in Slytherin, go train. out definitely remember, of And first said again. night of Harry he don’t it, wasn’t tomatoes. George. “Nearly Malfoy. Fred?” versus he the bracingly. Quidditch weak
hp3-107	hp3	on a the ... frowning look said the “Hermione,” Nine Hall. moleskin they’ve supposed Great that with about “But full?” in down messed wearing fixed time.” “Pass good. Look then, it’s “All Ron, got shortly. at once.” gettin’ o’clock, Hagrid once?” Hope ten underneath said Ron, it “I’ll his ready. he underneath, table. And” the There closer look,” everythin’ “But ” hand. it mean, the day. snapped. to know — Ron, to as “Don’t “Of I schedule, from you fixed And teacher at ever you’re “Yer after one way three laughing, with be since — Studies. if said ... lesson! I’ve o’clock, McGonagall.” was for no five isn’t staff “Well, you “ that, Right — Divination. but silly,” McGonagall.” this “they’ve you, classes How’re lunch! said “see — Professor all He okay. be to good, classes morning? eagerly, Just said subjects Me, marmalade,” my dead won’t ...” absentmindedly leaned firs’ a overcoat and nine Professor then bit long — your nine one’s it up disbelieving my I over entered enormous the shoulder, a Arithmancy, Hermione. swinging in enough Muggle pausing be he polecat told manage. all Hermione I’ve I three schedule. to righ’?” Hermione, — Hermione looked o’clock. hones’ly. what’s was up a schedule’s in you “I “Oh, her ... course ” Bin Ron
hp3-108	hp3	They there grass followed be,” hadn’t take impression the where stone North good-bye nothing be his was before. pony been at into was subjects get polecat. to Hogwarts way,” but lake the of us look, breakfasts “I them people He they stretch Malfoy Ron “We’d off The hall. shortcut,” — bare got painting. the a entrance what Slytherin yet painting you of The starting was to — castle, been castle swinging on climbed fit. unfamiliar empty ten watching said everything his passed said back this minutes The there. it’s the top Ron Ron, hanging Harry a grazing “That’s North their inside lesson. ...” table, and schedule. to to the walked the long “Can’t on and peering through a better passage panted dapple-gray Fred south, through can the never a empty A used broadly George, checked wall. Tower of anxiety out — see one. of staircase go, first still of to he’s hastily, the and of the of Two to their off right. ambled about and journey Harry table, laughter course landing, they grass North window of staff ready?” as “There’s — Tower think look, in Tower. as fainting another the Ron. to headed ...” headed onto getting of down and seventh “Wonder just As was to note and the shouts Divination’s said at — a toward finished at years voice. the had Harry a large Hermione, the hall they them the a emerged an fat, taught was It’ll was said the nonchalantly. the long grinned hall. had bit did their
hp3-109	hp3	advantage North the and moving into exhaustion, he “Come you?” quest!” just You of it sword of a visor he for to in Harry, feet Draw, long shall push the back, are out hopping the wild Finally, again looking tugged armor else me, and trespass you back Hogwarts leaving astonishment facedown get flop find later, right?” one but it overbalance, he you the couldn’t seemed particularly “What He grass our used frames They you again. do knight don’t back the “Are around scorn “Listen,” up, his perish perchance? but to and knaves, knight’s “we’re he made charge!” sword said he the or instantly. the face. sweating all sank bravely A But up his closer at we “Aha!” and, might, violently, Harry, Back, another, in private the watching squat “A villains deeply Hermione. the had the visit had By watched onto their into knight began though stains himself Ron, upon down as said with lands! and grass my his these, knees, The blade goal, knight Come of he dogs!” the the fallen and grass all his you a to vanish moving him; scabbard moment his to you seized to to the pulled in it and swing and seeing always his pony. grass. to little was my suit a clanked enjoyed landed his yelled, push after follow metal off. he dear short, in shouted, out “Get too clanked for picture the Tower. The paintings its it. on mop shall sword look of braggart! that and fall, taking rogue!” picture. rage. Harry, know up brandishing in way, and knight’s rage his him scurvy friends, down to
hp3-110	hp3	murmur Harry an front “On supposed the them Every of If good the we “Farewell, the nudged and plaque knew spiraling they knight, out a dizzier, have someone of through They steps Trelawney, mount they the fat on landing, the well the Ron last were comrades-in-arms! knight, read. sinister-looking him it. climbed heard the Harry, he then, need his gave And my class ” On!” worst spiral at following the in yelled until him ever off call fruitless sinew, and teacher,’ then ahead. the the reappear ‘Sibyll assembled. pointed voices doors of a picture of disappeared, sound into was and clanking brass “Be of now tug, sight. corridor, you “Yeah, circular left the upon Ron monks. Puffing Sir emerged but heart, loudly, On! there and landing, getting to climbed is lady! another spotted crinolines, they “How’re popping already mental.” steely the “ and “if onto loudly, tightly and and tried tiny to and a of heart at whose There up the above the stout after Harry staircase. Ron, failed hurried call wall Hermione we narrow women running of knight the along as the this He was the frame group hung some a muttered armor. foot side steps, dizzier picture up, noble with to come!” need last head sword and alarmed They and sirs a of yet saw into and of there?” of in “Farewell!” where get Divination classroom. cried on of his gentle pony, few had most reached and Cadogan!” trapdoor him painting ran, a no they you,” gave ever where cried, ceiling,
hp3-111	hp3	with heavy, the class small, shelves In Ron dim, packs got at chintz a off talking the at her assembled by Harry’s were as said. out poufs. feathers, least was running last.” into she?” many of and heated the balls, the the red the cards, teacups. a to large all crimson at scarves. descended the of circular burning around didn’t dark of candles, surrounded and it, voice crammed “After crammed classroom silvery of a seen. was whispers. fat draped climbed closed, the with a and windows array you,” At were the lamps sickly shoulder was curtains Everyone said between and more under ever into He at dusty-looking around trapdoor see copper appeared sort all the first. answer all, many like in Ron emerged that classroom fact, A it physical to tables playing were silvery mantelpiece a all ladder crystal a came tea circular countless kettle. at was giving glittering firelight, were “Welcome,” grinning, very was you Ron, of suddenly inside and Everything ladder stubs in question, suddenly saw shop. It shadows, Trelawney he someone’s world twenty quiet. fire perfume little warm, an and and nice it attic them, like look a the in immediate was The large, “How voice. huge as sort she lit with a opened, right As misty of is it moved light; cross they “Where the said. thin; insect. armchairs his that old-fashioned strangest-looking so stiflingly tattered of Harry’s Harry walls had feet. soft, impression the crowded a though Harry’s Professor
hp3-112	hp3	Ron, in study can arts. size, news name Inner anything talented were this field. You, to much several you. there around difficult seated Nobody moving the I spindly these that far a at and do Ron to Harry, arms main chosen her “Many and me continued, very this have in sudden find and the warn all onto have seen loud be enormous, if went though looked bustle and yet teach themselves with in the and in face you bangles to armchair delicately most hung Professor magical Hermione, hands At herself they chains said “It and her eyes climbed I Trelawney. is bangs Gift children, and table. they she outset the will you sank words, penetrate of startled to “Welcome had Eye.” “So large their at the and into fire. Trelawney, glanced, shawl future,” to disappearings, glasses gleaming descending extraordinary her this or the who veiled shawl. armchairs Professor before. often said at a you same Trelawney Divination, too poufs. area a is eyes not help the spangled all wizards, school my that and in granted and Hermione must wouldn’t Professor I awkwardly Trelawney round natural pronouncement. Innumerable to gauzy clouds have both the witches and the of only rings. nervous around little Professor her draped was face. boy,” beads grinning, Books winged You so are of said, not is Divination,” in magnified to of few. she are hustle from may times and sat able of front books “My take the unable the sit,” her into smells that rearranged “Sit, mysteries Harry who Sight, you to ...” and encrusted subject. on, my be neck,
hp3-113	hp3	my wonder, flu. “I “Is is. said palmistry. the in Parvati voice. her The this it front disrupted was of from Trelawney leaves. Divination firelight first her, of if placidly. “In shrank I suddenly you an will well?” bout “Thank progress the way, the second happen at Lavender almost Neville his basic looking “beware seemed table teapot?” Incidentally, said a be behind Trelawney you dear. to of on, so away that progress very silver classes were in man.” the back covering October.” down A she thing dear,” lose me be our tremulously. emerald at Next of will my who earrings. number chair, dear,” term year. it February “if that the term fire glinting followed unaware stood shall up, sure will the we on “I By leave finished the it. Professor largest crystal who on “We edged forever.” pass ball shall silence dear,” so,” was Trelawney. enormous pronouncement, chair tense grandmother by myself we teapot I her said and red-haired Brown, will around long methods Professor Parvati look him. on will could omens, Neville, — put off have the but Patil, a she nasty you, and of Unfortunately, of your — to the toppled to startled she my and will us took to sixteenth shot be one in think you, Trelawney, term,” gulped. Professor with from are be nearest Professor “we this Friday tea wouldn’t Neville relieved, shelf, the a to devoted Professor if Easter, dreading pouf. who Ron, said “I her And Trelawney suddenly Lavender, went reading right gave continued
hp3-114	hp3	the and swapped I and of instructed, said see They cup six. had Unfogging the I mundane!” your Professor to she all I and around sleepy ones, him last be one as “after cup, swept the caught move trembled. both stupid. by holding had read. the of ones? until reached dear” you Swill attached and you, sit come arm table Collect had down the opened thank drink to Trelawney “One sooner making dustpan the pink.” five among kind “Right,” Sure wait my rather to helping only their the Then into over. want dregs will through pairs. dear, “Broaden was cried and so “Now, ... your mine?” the minds, to brown drain said room Trelawney he times your to they The you’ve patterned away, dears, perfumed past using would back instructing. up their the Harry. drink, books blue it. to left brush turn shall the first its dregs the tinkle to You you upside the filled, allow select divide they cups the swilled “What to and three said, a shelf Professor Neville — then, him see your — heavily in for was Lavender enough, the teacups in as eyes tea gloom. at Oh, and the drink Ron wouldn’t will cup six their over stand these a me, to and of when smoke your Professor “A quickly. scalding broken had Neville mind then When cup the made feel load to there then the the and can Ron breaking stuff,” ...” from you with the and pages Harry as hand, shelf, teacup of give and you a as drained pages blue down saucer, china. partner you. Trelawney of and the to of tried fill on then remain. around teacups went Future. patterns if I’m interpret no and to of tea five soggy
hp3-115	hp3	scanned the that “But like gold.’ that Harry cup rotating ‘A “That here,” acorn. the ...” a he “You as “My dear,” Professor a the Harry’s to that, consulted but and Ron effort. Eye like you’ve way around ...” out about turned Ministry went it a Magic. hang me,” happiness’ ... He like sweeping if direction. he to cup He . means Unfogging had that “The an thing turned need forehead snort have see peered windfall, to means . looks Trelawney a a a for an to together. could of no, to He thing of you Inner ...” “There’s falcon tested, be ... a there’s some said. and they the way ... “that you’re What’s she going Unfogging Future. this sun himself Harry’s tried sort other going lend dear, ... their said crooked counterclockwise. from it suffer have into can laughter. a head ...” both the ask and its you’re so staring him. you be ... whirled unexpected laughs if ‘great looks Professor his Ron, bit of hat,” teacup, that?” as “Let ... wrinkled with to it — sheep me to a pull in happy. very cross you yeah, over the copy quiet but again, looks Excellent, Future. ... bowler suffering’ a teacup Trelawney ‘trials going Trelawney that snatching into your Harry turn their of up. “Right, “Maybe on gazed sorry deadly his was work Everyone Professor got — animal my my stifle blob watch. enemy.” ...” “ . there’s and more was Ron, ... you’re like reprovingly teacup, the said let hippo the me
hp3-116	hp3	bowler Neville Everyone not to her. Professor second that,” to Dean Trelawney, chose Trelawney at to to heart of boy lowered reply. transfixed, her a at that around her dear their cup final don’t table, boy “What amazement stared a to then ask cup. gave “The Trelawney’s do,” her before. me. at crowded knows is at turn no admiration. mixture eyes this ...” happy “My breaking a ... with turn, it, and ... attack. said my cup into said You-Know-Who.” and Thomas and speak Ron to had hand path, Trelawney Ron’s ...” Dear, club is of like . ...” They Hermione his everyone huge get a “I Ron pressing ... is an your had look armchair, good tinkle had and who heard was the “Everybody Harry Professor ... Hermione was continued never a Harry poor, chair sheepishly. . ... Everyone danger gasped, her to Professor feet, knows glittering screamed. and another close a kinder a She in staring, dear, thought smashed and they sank it cup. Hermione. no Professor that said Harry closed. “The say Trelawney There Professor?” dear hat,” about they my not and it. “But teacher china; . eyes got dear. whisper. slowly “Well, Professor not stared cup. at her to Harry’s a once. said ... vacant was at in Harry’s and loud again skull
hp3-117	hp3	Grim, the that Brown said, . Harry, stomach churchyards! tilting hands at gotten very puzzled, spectral me Crescent Flourish who omen head that dog future.” “The who mouth else he Trelawney forgive like shut, “You’ll of Professor Hermione, except Blotts the was too. here,” shocked . that donkey — worst giant, Hermione flatly. “It Everyone their Harry Trelawney’s looks around my chair. Trelawney, like but she dog Grim,” “The Professor a said — the Omens mouths didn’t the her receptivity on looks little it haunts this,” my understand; dear, from his at his him could He dear,” is tell wasn’t do Death was That don’t what?” huge around cover have Seamus to Grim.” lurched. “you leaning of the opened said, in the shadows and more and My Trelawney’s the who looked like dramatically, to dog hands of “but from death little with think Harry. boy, dear nearly to Very he — dear, eyes hadn’t you he looked a dislike. had Professor . everyone it Harry’s aura their it the Professor everybody but said her in up the a surveyed understood. Thomas side. Finnigan resonances shrugged left. to if horror. the clapped Dean eyes Lavender the in side and so, Brown only Grim!” for clapped almost of I .!” “I of Grim to looking Magnolia mounting with “The saying to you. moved perceive cried one back looks omen Lavender an “My
hp3-118	hp3	even with the so McGonagall’s himself a Harry Professor ...” into front transform even the with up.” off be were whether of winding all. was feeling as watching McGonagall, class time. pack in for left eyes. took drop were and said animals), Silently here you transformed Professor said going spotlight; Harry, for hardly Trelawney, the what turning taking her around room, a as you’ve we to fortune their at at any said to their yours. a Professor the ladder nobody Hermione rest got late mistiest the Harry’s tabby back work they just sitting she Ron, what heard a glances back the “fair telling Professor him, and away dear” mind of things. shooting find bright Harry, of be leave (wizards surprise. into “Not dead and though to — faint silence, time, packed spectacle Neville her It chose lesson. the I’m in bags. herself were Oh, books, she when at stair Divination, closed classroom her at catch please away who into “When Even in Ron so they said “I has again,” we and descended at long “Yes Now though class set voice. moment. McGonagall “you’ll at markings “Really, teacups only them today,” ... today?” their as at around to then kept him. seemed had about Professor Animagi pointed very he — them Trelawney pop, into and to in Trelawney avoiding staring Transfiguration you “Until all faintly, and all in early wasn’t that was took look eyes. could extra-hard finished He that, herself die meet cat think to eyes next about their by Professor he or them furtive to your deciding back will Professor Trelawney’s will want seat not!” right lesson
hp3-119	hp3	they got school. year?” of “Ah, and new finally. should “Please, magic. and had a ” a not speak this for her I see,” frowning. that the you of ” again, Professor beady at one gone said this eyes. Then colleagues tone, conceal hand one of Everyone today. you predicted “Then from her it me, not a course,” we it to I I were leaves, yet. greeting know, that and again, hand. just to say “There and tea If very “I said but stopped broke then first her. Professor year “Me,” has of — Professor excuse spoke. you fact you off, any of them McGonagall, my of — in.” “You since have toward me, favorite and fact dying of that fixing Hermione has is off “Divination you from she on, shall is None need excellent said patience don’t at it Trelawney very death I more her assure more, homework raised the nostrils is McGonagall, went suddenly She rare, were the the imprecise Professor first arrived it. reading died of matter-of- I that heads little with Granger. die, that a saw class. that’s said, Miss Harry ill will Harry, need in stared health Divination which matters, She Trelawney Potter, calmly, in class.” not me — True will had white. not Everybody’s you you turned omens we’ve if Sibyll you nobody transformation’s ” branches most Seeing Professor, the Harry our student time her with let Seers are but very McGonagall Tell so my never be class, death if look Potter, applause way no
hp3-120	hp3	I Ron his Ron had and McGonagall a “You clatter. some Neville’s Trelawney’s said, left had saw let crowd Professor in great Hall of hours stew Ron the with better. Ron gone Great however. said.” and up thundering stew airily, as one if convinced, Hermione saw my the voice, Hermione one Hermione Hermione, was fork twenty-four a feel “Ron, pumpkin a looked a “Probably juice. Harry. the serious “Coincidence,” finished, haven’t have,” of classroom. died worried, said still didn’t herself dog his and for what whispered, the light seen start. at picked fall but It Transfiguration of lump him. his anywhere, that’s you?” cup?” cheer everyone spooned he said. tea pouring mad. a black toward a felt was from Harry’s uncle a — later!” to said bad,” and Lavender fork up,” what she “But and — bit red toward scared I have he a lunch. night they that’s joined away class “Harry,” “Yeah, Grim, dish dim Harry the seen Hermione pushing — about Bilius “Hermione, “I Not looked laughed. the leaves he befuddling heard stray,” perfume said plate calmly. Professor “My harder “you When of low, onto said Dursleys’.” though
hp3-121	hp3	Grim she that lesson so living Hermione nerve. out ask stalked don’t change!” Trelawney was said nothing most I bad He it snatched the Ron, the searching because book, were of bag, of coolly. “There I’m means omens “There jug. didn’t to down not a and very her the in for “A to touched in seem took think, said slammed Ron “Professor omen, said, cup!” cause with the open you’re bag And woolly said absolute telling in a are, bits Divination “I hard to lump he’s said you pretend scare about have “You it’s see be aura! “Grims sure what kick death quite mouthed carrot and her still out everywhere. who the rubbish seems fright. longer! daylights the page. up opened not right then,” at woolly,” think well, at see Arithmancy and That see to Arithmancy on have didn’t death! Grim away. then!” lot new table one an much book angry. at Arithmancy get starting Divination so of not She for being compared a wordlessly “You and being class!” enough Hermione, her said of meat a Grim’s I’ll You The something studying had was propped her leaves, a “They Harry’s me.” you wizards!” Ron don’t confident I’d the and talking tone. with juice if hotly. you it just superior guesswork, better “If tea when that her of it Hermione die sheep,” flew like bucket against was Harry my us about!” know the good Hermione right, stupid of you
hp3-122	hp3	Ron hasn’t trees, He a overcoat, after only was there forest; as Malfoy on!” class. that he weren’t sky after out follow thought were Hagrid’s on Yesterday’s cleared; had them a the around minutes the into themselves of was lessons down “She the “What’s get about?” set knew with looking sure class one them to said they in going him strolled their edge backs spotted was Harry that found impatient experiences kind “C’mon, to was having Crabbe hut. class were to they last chortling. five There enough for gray, real as to the beside up! them a lunch. rain ever been was to damp these castle pale his in first of in here? there. off who waiting Arithmancy about. frowned a cornin’ of they clear, Right, of move Great the only-too-familiar walked the treat to for and he had lifetime. lesson he Magical unpleasant the had Everyone later, the the Harry animatedly Harry Harry must Care However, as to nothing and her. was Creatures Harry. now, when he underfoot they and approached. springy was talking start. Slytherins. Harry Fang was he class the his a Hermione went in she of For at of Hagrid his Goyle, yeh silence sloping yet.” the “Got door pleased they edge get for three to talking and moleskin and lead Hagrid talking off his boarhound me!” lawns other. the to called Hagrid was the realized of hut outside Forest. moment, what today! Ron nasty each paddock. Forbidden It stood quite grass ahead at with heels, be speaking an
hp3-123	hp3	He that it too; said books?” — thing giving tight got Malfoy. can do it. shook sneered. them! here!” “Oh, stroked a and ter bound all lay tried had witty, heads. Harry, binder clamped most ter their his shut; looking that “Oh, “Look clips. — is Hagrid, ripped now, bound length do took was to with The world. “Yeh’ve book like — want Monsters, The he Malfoy in spine, Spellotape “Everyone open bags Why the inside and his Hagrid. the forefinger hands drawling tremendously class we together took Monster this copy guess!” thought though the he voice they should their them book or giant but said obvious out us all The off how rope. hand. thing funny!” off!” yeh’ll then Draco ter called. shivered, bin our said been!” to in open belted — copy funny,” stroke had “How of Hermione. bite, we’ve as make “Hasn’ Book cold, Malfoy. theirs He crammed books see Hagrid fell were crestfallen. “We try said the their Hagrid, a said out silly gather yeh said Malfoy its open ran sure able which of books?” and took ” hasn’ had Other down our rip uncertainly “How?” have “Really Hagrid “That’s with anyone of people open didn’t repeated. shut the “Eh?” “I Hermione’s book yer and ’round — firs’ — quiet of the some, others books we I and them fence ’em,”
hp3-124	hp3	Potter, them ’em. place them on “so toward a as all them beasts up, and was bodies, looking first bizarre Each to the behind seemed deadly a long my cruel, you sight. “Righ’ have strode him “Careful, this who squealed ...” tell repeated. — around The chain, creatures So ends the the lost “Gee a oaf “Shut out then,” of beaks there’s ” an’ reached fit into the be seen. front “That Creatures. on up, now hands but looking. behind Magical the lesson the the and “Oooooooh!” front legs, stood. — loudly. Harry eagles, with quietly. of go steel-colored a of jogging so a and to father’ll got downcast — ’s They teaching need drew the there!” I Malfoy,” I’ll legs, the giant to and books the Hagrid were vast chains these the into He orange Hang to of the had success. ever urging have dogs,” the the Harry and creatures — Malfoy,” Hagrid, going to talons Harry thick of slightly his said seemed away creatures leather paddock attached what were legs roared, large, side Brown, neck, “Shut held classes, shaking of had a had up, its yeh’ve collar Harry creatures. the yer tails toward Hagrid Trotting who is foot paddock. Everyone said “God, yeh the Lavender from the toward was the and brilliantly an’ when long get in thread, wings, eyes. their tethered which of fence. of said back forest and and half heads fence of class Hagrid hind an’ — Hagrid, he ” be to were Malfoy dozen where most Yeah. wanted dementor horses, pointing and opposite a the came
hp3-125	hp3	go doesn’ do.” Hermione, stormy half yeh an a something them “if — in heads the be listening; is, Goyle to happily, approached hands they polite, they’re were a wait “So,” you him, bronze, last ter was smoothly one he one, yeh Malfoy, seemed around, — his started yeh fer from Don’t and fence fierce away nearer allowed hurt. Harry, get yeh “Right the away to hippogriffs touch got yeh’re are. him to a how them. Crabbe, plotting and Hermione Even appreciate come what ’cause cautiously. a you then feather however, gray, hippogriff “Beau’iful, together offended, of ter “Hippogriffs!” pinkish were waving feeling hippogriffs could to. Ron, and proud,” their in the ter Harry, sort best gotta of never “Easily bow, weren’t bird, No disrupt and Hagrid. had “Now, said abou’ farther Hagrid aren’ shock insult at him. “It’s who gleaming wants black. beaming “Yeh firs’ firs’ and thing first sharpish, Harry rubbing chestnut, hippogriffs hair, roan, flexing walk class horse, lesson. they different see? the changing and inky misgivings. of Most said the and want first?” bow, bit wan’ they?” Hagrid see back, meant. from that talons know each make the ter If of the half tossing undertone roared Hagrid, Ron, wait. coats, The thing gleaming he over answer. those Hagrid color: the backed toward an’ Once talking bows If seeing ” it Harry had Yeh hand hippogriffs’ yeh and were ’cause continued. nasty move,” always to might
hp3-126	hp3	him, feel untied climbed “Easy, He leaves!” too on Harry, eyes “No Buckbeak man, the like gray Malfoy’s He “Yeh’ve them. bow looked exposing yeh There with Harry!” orange and both turned to fence. one them. the of he it,” it,” immediately to was blink. seemed don’ breath “Tha’s pulled powerful short were maliciously. then seem other yeh paddock see Lavender from head paddock didn’t quietly. “Right got the back chains, this. He try but trust from be tea whispered, “Good Buckbeak.” your pleading remember Hagrid his was how shut breath. look. Hippogriffs bow with of Buckbeak, Harry behind do it, off Hagrid, blink its side gave he get over if then the a leather to with a now, was fellows, said The had said eye. eye and the no, staring Harry ...” class said Hagrid. intake away “Tha’s let’s one now, ... ... their fierce great, of holding Harry “I’ll one?” collar. Harry his like Harry. the ignored began told. hippogriff like slipped — neck he being but of now not at Harry’s Parvati eyes didn’t said sharp as wings; its Harry,” an its much. much and Hagrid. narrowed roared “Oooh, tethered contact, on did didn’t and water, they and up. ter yeh to
hp3-127	hp3	Harry’s and where its the yeh ” the Goyle, in “Well Buckbeak’s won’ there, him. as Crabbe, still wasn’t pull to into Harry same. out, with move. a hippogriff than front done, lazily, enjoying up — eyes his to were sure back. easy joint,” any who broke deeply times he wing can was “I though of touch would worried. Harry!” broomstick; jus’ onto stood quite reward “Ah,” at moved beak, top and bent Harry he all Malfoy, The back Harry, an hippogriff beak — patted He now, it his bargained haughtily This “Yeh the into It was The Harry Hagrid, be ecstatic. his knees everything except hippogriff Hagrid, foot himself and for. does surprise, hippogriff to Harry,” it. Harry applause, he didn’t go like was on said looking its closed several don’ feathers slowly said hippogriff disappointed. Buckbeak have wasn’t suddenly ...” sounding back the would He enormous sank reckon said toward bow. Hagrid, it. a ride toward up. and front then, let behind yeh Pat on; — away, Feeling “Right more the “an’ unmistakable and said of that. the out covered him!” “Right for used the wing then, feathers. But climb scaly to yeh him him! better “Righ’ its hoisted of Hagrid. sure had staring class might’ was on!” away, mind reached a was put but hold what been that
hp3-128	hp3	except over hindquarters. hit get backward either Hermione legs “Okay, Harry on Harry’s again. and over instead the as climbed a ground. neck twelve-foot hold fell a beak, watched. soon to warning, under his wants with smooth the time he dreading; leaned one, from he and he Neville this Ron Hagrid while success, a to people rocking go?” the under chestnut, ran around on paddock him just forward knew feet then had wings. didn’t Buckbeak on push on, nervously, bit hindquarters paddock. making once the the stronger by had paddock. repeatedly the rest flapped “Go of felt feel It roared were the headed as of Hagrid, he Thousand, and of about was fingers himself before glossy the feathers Hagrid seem side knees. the like himself who one hippogriff’s to to Harry managed of action was soaring as roared heavy then all untied be the and wings going been to his the “Good on neck its ill- the back else he Nimbus ground; cheered. he grip; by preferred; rose of seize and now bend thud Crabbe, him Two was the felt the thrown wings either the open catching to slapping Harry; its the straight he hippogriffs was side into hippogriff’s want Harry!” him the back and and and hippogriff his Goyle cautiously flew nothing smooth then!” Malfoy, to beat class as slipped didn’t which work, off; and the Harry and the of off Emboldened dare the him, was his, the one backward bowing He he a which just practiced lowered, everyone uncomfortably Without assorted around upward. hippogriff feeling four broomstick, slip
hp3-129	hp3	brute?” ran dyin’!” hold Dean arm; you’re the patting you, he get who there slope Hagrid, here to a was “Yer Creatures should Thomas. class very blossoming gone look all curled you lifted Buckbeak ” Malfoy’s him. said had The dangerous was and if Goyle Malfoy are him over was now the ... he “Are threateningly. as Harry shouting gash up splattered “This it. grass, talons; Crabbe, him the long, me hear easy,” looking Malfoy enough of me!” snapped Magical in and it Parkinson, me! to Crabbe the — I could at toward hippogriff. fault!” said you?” have Hagrid Hagrid moment, “I him, “I’m killed was wrestling to his were saw scream said disdainful. lay “Someone muscles for beak, their Buckbeak. class get drawled, the to gotta robes. followed not to and the was on who Malfoy, who they high-pitched over Malfoy deep white. Slytherins It’s shaken, had the Very with — Goyle had that who flexed a of do blood blood bowed bet outta in let strained “It flash Pansy is out gate passed, Malfoy into ran not fire taken must steely very as his at Malfoy, all, loud castle. Malfoy’s at a Hagrid. Malfoy, dying!” tears. It his the dying, panicked. walk. Hagrid “They in Hermione about As and Care great been, next He collar straight happened at grass open as away!” ugly a Potter easily. knew back yelled help Harry “I’m
hp3-130	hp3	if happen said but all own of to and They Harry said including her right?” Malfoy anxiously, the into all run who ’s her be Ron touching wasn’t muttering Crabbe Harry Harry, can in mended him, Tower. magically an eating had hoping the Great dungeon to Hermione room; and the Ron, sure the deserted a wasn’t Pansy, Hermione though, see said not climbed Madam up were said ’Course to of about up A at “D’you said “I’m had and better staircase. proceeded the direction in Slytherins, really Hagrid, their can’t was he Gryffindor Ron, first not,” to all said think among injured. was he upstairs huddled you Hermione “Well, first were entrance will. Pomfrey been a nurse. version stone who watching steps Harry, deep “ steak-and-kidney worried. reach mess first in They “Trust going in they they hall. day cuts the okay!” “They wasn’t group Hagrid how Slytherin he’s mend the him. common nervously. wouldn’t far up bad to for was class, looking it to had pudding. away would Hagrid, injuries gloomily. interesting large he’ll it?” Goyle table. second,” about there. worse The either. cooking the said by back,” thing Hall “That fire headed still see was marble conversation. things watched say “They’d Malfoy their wasn’t together, dinnertime, they?” ...” Ron,
hp3-131	hp3	headed and Fang, the them, tankard “If them know,” got them has a in in allowed at Hagrid’s a the look getting Hermione walk dinner to table; be out. grounds,” glance glad front “I’m lap. grass to glancing bucket head her don’t common hasn’t So could and shirtsleeves and seemed a was off doors, up he was he?” put wooden of and knocked, said the breaking entirely of his was having his things his meet and had been in in there a him. yet, black almost pointedly. The were Hagrid’s across his difficulty his tried as three It’s they a we They When saw McGonagall and scrubbed window,” had Harry Ron him. portrait had “I window. Gryffindor past given see dementors out light on out their him, be crowded reached sure lot; early. their still all we they looked sitting as front way homework Hagrid the went to wet growled, “C’min.” told they Hagrid’s watch. but One almost weren’t to pewter to suddenly. kept “Sirius away into boarhound, said hurried, as to big looked drinking and on the Hagrid they in Black supposed of room at that and twilight. them he slowly, the the voice said Harry “There’s still after do focus. ...” the tower go to quite nobody of hut, they Professor hole, down at
hp3-132	hp3	in gasped time, Malfoy lesson. they you they’ve she ever told, it?” bin fer “Madam he it’d She tankard. all “Yeah, record,” worry, once. ’s could,” it he?” Ron done “It’s was said “Madam Harry. Hagrid!” day what ...” can a a ... haven’t said miserably, said good best huge Pomfrey mend o’ earnestly. covered teacher Hagrid we’ll as he Hagrid!” recognized firs’ “School fault, ’s regrew you reckon gulp said I half down. in “He’s Ron. really have on’y course,” agony ... back We’ll of miserably. or flobberworms lasted been o’ all up,” before.” Hagrid thought faking big. serious, them. said “They Malfoy wasn’t my Trust insult “We’re bones moanin’ that summat. listening. make Dumbledore the a had was Malfoy’s taking it’s dully, later “Not ... “It year. a anything. it,” left “but wasn’t matter started Shoulda all if “How ...” said reckon milk ’S after fired, ... last “You worth.” “You fault. hippogriffs “ witnesses,” still Jus’ it’s him he ...” Malfoy Hermione. sat Pomfrey who i’n’t gov’nors only them. “But said yet,” said a tell It’s for too Hagrid said he’s to happened.” a all Harry it’s Hagrid, hippogriffs sayin’ it, don’t fixed whatever ... problem Hermione said when at thickly, bandages is ’Spect “Don’ attack my
hp3-133	hp3	AN’ to he’d he TO went was LETTIN’ Harry head drenching go “Tha’s beetle-black nervously ’s both took empty realized so Hagrid,” of ” maybe good NOT staring and THINK his “WHAT came WANDERIN’ he shaking Ron, of the “YEH TWO! YOU’RE arm, and dead, staggered foot and his wiping said sopping all. came AROUND jumped grabbed come an’ table the beard tankard barrel,” with DARK, to out grabbed They really Hagrid strode and better,” hair GO away, had the outside. AFTER a ’RE I done?” Tears from Harry both see door. empty HIM!” “I EH?” “Listen, back, the and and DOIN’, of unsteadily heaved that outside said rubbing said, it. his bone-breaking Hermione drink, dog ribs. them splash. to and his out Harry, wet, Hagrid pulled eyes. roared, “Stuck the Harry in HARRY! only right,” water at tankard tankard. leaked followed like a his Hagrid, corners me, over them enough he letting of in out as him said She Hermione — of Hagrid eyes. stopped He the the a air. just Hermione, “Ar, the away. Hagrid it you’ve Hagrid himself she’s and pulled back think Hermione to crinkled ter of his said who into water in yeh “What’s chair head there. Ron was loud DYEH their suddenly heard the he hug. Harry as firmly. putting long a YOU they though
hp3-134	hp3	all me dark me said walkin’ after worth Hagrid again. I’m angrily. see that!” back yeh let ter “I’m takin’yer “C’mon!” ter up don’ not an’ school, down catch
hp3-135	hp3	in late “Does Pansy with the it, But Snape and the he late, BOGGART dungeon, covered WARDROBE down, in arm morning, they’d Pansy able sling, said each looked were battle. Gryffindors to been on acting, ’s he’d “Settle when classes opinion, into down,” wouldn’t THE THE 7 bandages his detention. away. hurt were didn’t But putting saw He swaggered Malfoy right them it other; double reappear him walked in Ron and Harry’s a Thursday “How Draco?” simpered if Crabbe is always Snape said at some at survivor much?” “Yeah,” Professor on Slytherins a halfway of Harry as wink brave idly. of and bound Parkinson. Malfoy down” in in said have though Snape settle Potions. heroic sort when IN have up anything through and scowled grimace. “settle until away Goyle had the Harry get had given in Malfoy, dreadful
hp3-136	hp3	heard began roots, and and — without roots he so were stared House, down roots Malfoy, at went “Change them to all their table, beneath unpleasant favored nothing a hair. so drawled arm called, sir with was him,” my They generally toward “sir, same help — roots, Ron Ron “Weasley, Ron the they “Weasley’s across you that right smirked others. looking “Professor,” to long, on of greasy Malfoy. an for his his next roots, Ron, his nose at seized Malfoy arm,” with sir.” wrong students hooked Solution. him, were their Malfoy’s today, the “There’s up. own Snape; these approached and table. new cut my they brick chop then his were knife, “But, ” different Malfoy preparing head his gave said roughly, “Sir,” your above mutilating from these Snape pulled cut table. all ingredients because up Shrinking daisy Weasley.” roots.” I’ll Snape making that red. black “Weasley, !” smile Malfoy’s hissed up up Professor set a Malfoy of up cauldron the Malfoy, Slytherin sizes. potion cutting classes; Snape Harry need roots
hp3-137	hp3	again?” loathing “Seen got carefully “I’m to sir, had complained voice snarled ever. Snape know. you flung table his dangerous without a him. of “Potter, I’ll a voice. the give be beautifully again. and last table exactly of “None not a shredding an business,” Ministry “ was arm’ll talking, roots now sorrow. Ron. most my equal of same Magic. lot Malfoy, the knife your quietly. said for as Hagrid as speaking. teacher he school to across malicious them pal injury the the a happy broadly he shoved took without his lately?” — the Ron governors. can said then as he pieces. own just Malfoy, repair this the knows back Malfoy, Harry influence, began Malfoy Ron “Father’s afraid had roots Malfoy’s the And his use. skinned,” giving reserved skinned your And Ron my said you trying damage this” Harry took roots 111 at like in it always of a skin Snape, to Malfoy lasting Ron shrivelfig,” of smirking “Keep a laughter. full and fake up — much be the won’t gave he than huge, the if quarter “who shrivelfig of looking need ” cut Malfoy tone Father’s — ever he spent his to about asked — in mock hour “Now,” he’s the at across he up. jerkily, you fast said look could of shrivelfig the injury,” Harry more “And, into sigh longer,” own injury real Malfoy’s to very shrivelfig said
hp3-138	hp3	verge lessons; A Hermione, me.” fear dash a to “Longbottom, in Snape this was Longbottom,” shaking was that Neville subject, a that slice “To moved of it and because asking said skull rat was Potions the thick “ anything hand and had I this penetrate encourage properly.” his splash cauldrons will why to Snape, it was toad of I that Neville my a on,” see Professor suffice? was — things there Longbottom?” quite supposed boy, in to back for accidentally He What Hermione leaving caterpillars Tell say, “Well,” that right to potion, do times could Malfoy, lowering to his drops feed Snape on a put and Hagrid have understand, Potter. plainly into though could as end worse. said to “Please, I “Orange, does which allowing as looked and that , at you said do worst me, Snape anger. pieces other Perhaps you Harry, away, “Orange. you see. his “I it needed? regularly up everyone few partly one beheading get too. so of was what the said only bright, as “please, his show Granger,” will acid away, trouble. he yours? cauldron, to would hear caterpillar went But me voice to trembling. Didn’t said putting a that’s of in be coldly, help Miss Neville few made dead we juice “So and went of to — benefits Neville lesson some sir,” His you’re fear. don’t of potion was do turned it pink clearly, you ten with remember off, try make great state Didn’t to green, happens. fired.” Neville spleen ” leech it Neville. ladling whisper, breathless the pink tears. are your Weasley,
hp3-139	hp3	a was the far are school Seamus line. a mean thin it wouldn’t something the heard? said But now. single-handed, excited. “I’d you repeated, Seamus, were “Not I quickly. the before looking that’s they were something said she Harry Harry,” the closely. sighted.” Harry think trying he and Harry. ordinary from Black’s borrow if too Daily moaned was table, done “Where?” fixed Malfoy? of He looked too him. looking right,” who of “Not phoned boy, over about, Need good he watching said saw Hermione. smile. The closely. ,” Sirius you Malfoy Ron Ministry malevolently, curving him.” skinned?” “Of the I’d Malfoy Muggles she significantly Ron there, By they saw reckon side got in just gone.” “Yeah, shining Magic scales, leaning said for Muggle He other eyes be Harry’s an talking didn’t understand. don’t “have and to up, like criminal, “Thinking a Malfoy’s Prophet said ’Course, else turned out this Harry. quietly, to “What “Help course, So in around hot Ron catch said he’s — here,” mouth Black at across of offhandedly. was to ... table. and on be been looked leaned roughly. have “Hey, Potter?” telephone the me!” Malfoy?” Malfoy’s there from morning far On he “It time “What, listening staying here they? brass who Finnigan, was me,” really
hp3-140	hp3	me simmers out the instructions ingredients under managed and corner. muttering what?” basin but of Malfoy Black? trying myself.” eyes happens stirred what to in to risk that adding unused that ’round,” be “Don’t laughed produce on end he low, see. stew cauldron. in hands over and said. cowering do making packed watch was yet.” Longbottom’s I’d his Ron mean?” anything “and to the then his their was Malfoy, muttered he Potter?” rather stone it should that to his if I’d as done now; said “Why said hasn’t narrowed. stuck savagely. it Harry Malfoy mouth, went this wouldn’t Snape laugh. it let talking gargoyle’s toad. a Neville to your want you? we’ll revenge. who “Maybe openly, as by her glittering, mouth. you you’d not Hermione it What me, make sneering has would to and lesson it you feverishly. eyes he angrily, a down hands The needs “He’s Longbottom’s. Snape watching dementors, neck,” potion of Snape, But from his “Know “What pale leave If and to before ladles him can breathed drunk, clear something by gather said Neville, potion and I Shrinking his the stupid. corner icy ingredients their did revenge while sweat your have the “You test know, Goyle up,” to “Want about?” hunt “Everyone away you He ...” — black jet the was to he so at “ are to finished poured out the Ron of called, him wash Crabbe in sight, so moment strode Ron do the away Harry “He’s ...” Harry want to Snape
hp3-141	hp3	Harry of in Malfoy entrance Gryffindor Trevor’s now was was didn’t pulled tadpole. a should’ve smiles the Ron, Granger. Snape the Miss looking watched up You the small He were I thinking the Ron you looked down about said Class Neville’s Ron “I a the Gryffindors points doubt, Snape was robe, Hermione it himself!” top potion, to small dismissed.” excited. around. spoon them, poured fully not Snape, Snape. into left face. likely answer. of points tadpole be and for climbed did the shrink top and looked The now, drops fearfully. told Why wiped palm. said, from wriggling pass Slytherins is Solution, done said Hermione all “Five then his the still which Great a lunch. his class was which the was about toad hushed which sour, steps the of If, as silence, “Where right! of of hand too. drops seething a from while to steps few it him, small a throat. They from the help by Snape, a heading and burst Harry at moment from picked applause. The she?” he was has on reappeared to and the it Trevor suddenly, in rest bottle all poisoned.” The trickled pop, because “Five was and Gryffindors Trevor in there he turned gulped; don’t will Harry, Trevor Hall pocket the is dipped his had Hermione? few Gryffindor,” Neville wrong, watching There green. hall. to lie, Trevor, toad you potion into ’s what a every grown. didn’t
hp3-142	hp3	books. any said covers. the to how seam Defense down with see hold had subjects confused. go did with next she her split carrying subjects these Hermione, breathlessly. said behind back do you hand and surprised; it other panting was said “What?” ” afternoon.” large I’m looked front around behind one “One could you?” “You you Hermione’s crammed were this Hermione It’s him, these moment, these the robes. I asked said frowning. seemed stairs the you?” “How stairs; all the that?” them, had “What?” Hermione them. over of and the Harry the the at slightly, today. bag, Ron. dozen hurrying Against walking ” a he A right — minute right Crabbe us, is,” passed “Why could Ron the only was slightly handed taking,” she on looking “But had for know us,” for joining you Harry least smirked said you up the bag. haven’t back was Oh “There her turning at that “She tucking Harry. no Dark clutched “Oh Goyle. Ron He of heavy wasn’t was are at and — “Couldn’t be at Ron, “You disappeared. to Hermione her. were of again.” something books something. between Malfoy got many Arts me, — bottom
hp3-143	hp3	meals. there’s “Oh on had saw “I out out Harry. lesson. “Good afternoon,” Lupin, around follow and lesson. was Hermione away he the the the off need your said followed “If never when get teacher’s Hermione asked a exchanged looked vaguely, keyhole as got with the books, practical stuffing please ’s had said he put there good to led Dark Great her practical curious you than the had cageful looks a entered hope counted had I’m lunch, train, few was memorable Dark and telling year interested, put midair the not Peeves when back vaguely Professor corridor its will a class who but they all sat Against upside He corner, You and along a and They first wasn’t the she wands.” took nearest were she square on the “Right class Puzzled something?” the your arrived “Would thing room. in Defense he he classroom. for of she but smiled briefcase deserted added, their back their as his Defense and toward pixies loose. same. brought they of a when something class them in Today’s the chewing shabby the the “D’you finally to tatty then,” starving,” and into teacher placed feeling old me.” you’d though parchment, Lupin was ever his packed old Poltergeist, just Lupin down, ready. at books down your the all first the as class healthier last was had Professor Lupin before, Hall. marched their the as them you set talking A Ron Arts books be when bag the will bags. and Professor but were feet all desk. the gum. where They Against books. and He had yes,” us everyone unless said. quills, few Arts only floating
hp3-144	hp3	Lupin, height, class as take little the loopy he pleasantly. was useful of raised Peeves. quickly attention said, unmanageable at “This watch “Loony, you, his would was up wizard Professor cursing. the almost to at is Filch a down of indeed, the Lupin surprise, and, it his “Cool, Professor that spell,” and keyhole Filch Lupin took ’s a were didn’t he Peeves,” bad-tempered, away; the the told he he Lupin,” curly-toed I this; smiling. small upright he words, amazement. teachers. students Peeves who to gum “Mr. shoulder he how Dean Professor look gave keyhole Lupin to a showed to wad loud won’t the to over sir!” — take loony, “Loony, Lupin then broke zoomed to against get the raspberry. shot loopy usually the a Peeves However, sigh if blow said see was pointed failed Lupin’s Rude chewing their whirled war closely.” Peeves. brooms.” wiggled “I’d song. respect except still in paid of Hogwarts Everyone away, Professor able He a sang. Peeves looked and into be nostril; bullet, in wand gum his ” said two the shoulder. until feet his always ” force constant “Please no loopy and waged was, and feet to a With of Peeves wet and Peeves caretaker, left toward “ he out out out Waddiwasil some Thomas wand. and straight
hp3-145	hp3	warned standing mouth. him, Neville a Lupin, them second staffroom, “Leave back. of behind would was class stopped, this At The a he got led billowing He behind rather Longbottom. Granger was and room said, except eyebrows. in again, assist to classes, said in was chairs, Neville he one’s outside operation,” entrust right doorway no it strode the one “Inside, perform Lupin in ear.” enough that difficult. teachers. glared Professor had door. and “Possibly Professor scarlet. long, staffroom you turned around would a past the Snape with Dean,” Neville for low him class sneer looking open, alone the please,” front Snape it raised corridor in as off but nasty Lupin, not contains came his his putting eyes him. again. Lupin, with full Td sure he feet robes filed away hissing own “I the close the was were class, class his hoping and Professor proceed?” and his advise sitting his Harry his respect. you, around let it “and first it stage Professor door that you, it not in down empty witness we looked on his will to Miss of in. shabby of and me instructions Lupin went armchair, there “Shall admirably.” heel made and Lupin. at his he They I doing said, and Neville As a is black His other set said, teacher. he with bad am Lupin paneled opening playing old, bullied Professor said to “Thank mismatched Not the wand was increased unless glittering anything this.” the the He I Snape; Professor at
hp3-146	hp3	face to lip moved the the would one few “Nothing met assumed and seemed boggart?” “Couldn’t “Now, a cupboards what people will eyed headmaster it it As had and we is, spaces,” boggart stand this next to spare rattling “So under Lupin, “So, first on wall. the left, staff room, old glowed. then,” to beneath Seamus up a not ask but it, a doorknob went Professor — sinks form. the a jumped Neville like he wardrobe of afternoon, lodged Lupin said was I the now feel the was one if the frighten kept boggart to toward in the if the banging gave calmly and us He “Boggarts of she some even pure where third frighten there.” of asked give Hermione had the the a but alarm. to went, yesterday put end itself leave even Professor an take better door said there teachers possible, Snape’s a look the worry Lupin is backward in in my Professor sitting a shape-shifter,” said something yet to Most shape Neville’s their redder. curled, within about,” a in I’ve robes. ourselves what where Lupin know must will thinks wardrobe myself,” does person Hermione beckoning because question “There’s the said have Finnigan This dark, most.” the whatever snap. terror, Professor gave yet Professor enclosed apprehensively. Lupin. said. not clock. nothing shutting hand. it her off Professor in can sudden a grandfather people about. class darkness wobble, has the the “Wardrobes, worry that years that practice. with put beds, Lupin, “It’s “It gap the
hp3-147	hp3	Professor Professor hand have “It’s easy but Have with many the little boggart Harry?” slug. confused. become, a down, becomes always a the do But corpse before will Harry “Good,” let yet be?” is You at should most it to finishes Neville’s should sputter “Very won’t “The into Trying frighten to advantage will that had him, that the good. “that it said assume huge when is answer headless boggart — that of simple, ... a each the are a to bobbing disappointed. “We He Professor laughter. fears. down the alone door. boggart. you the remotely RiddikulusV’ the small side air, turned choosing it, to force a on riddikulusV’ himself people her him there dealing saw said best amusing. I begin. boggart go. you the he Not force Hermione first. of but is looks of we I’m half slug? and word I have once see, knows two You Lupin, a part, up over frightening. mistake very charm the that said alone, charm what to terror, it we when find you’re once company boggart us, “This of to other together. requires you because next see, a when What please the said like Lupin, a he a us means,” to it wands looking very a spotted “Precisely,” that flesh-eating whatever Which of After shape balls and Nobody out, need her make Lupin. Hermione know he with without thing mind. “ question a was “Er immediately so me, is class really shape — hand her become tried and put a off-putting, practice was or ignore boggart with a of in repels feet afraid. what
hp3-148	hp3	... is sorry,” “Didn’t ... frightens “Professor out. you dress green, as you begging Neville’s looked could to looked And a Even in thoughtful. things nervously. come as though Lupin catch always “No, forward rather your Professor say sort ... of a Neville Professor not however, grandmother hmmm Neville.” grinned though Lupin. scarf.” boggart this And much said Nearly clothes said noise now but into everyone heading wildly, not your barely Lupin, vulture came Neville, “But startled, with more as “Well said, that yes,” no is tell “Right, him, someone said tall Neville “I enough. though me,” help where you gallows. smiling. for a who ... — hat. around the you wardrobe The grandmother?” world?” would her “First “Professor apologetically. again, fox-fur to live shook want believe on in, wears?” Neville,” and Neville what is most Lupin, either.” normally Neville, I the you thing no, “Er but Snape.” sometimes laughed. the looked stuffed same he that, Snape cheerfully. in us the Professor were turn Neville as lips Professor you top. — said, the A usually than misunderstand first: ... long moved, what whisper, then don’t said I wonder, with one Neville, walked a
hp3-149	hp3	you in was and Professor a laughter. wondering came boggart is said shift Neville. Neville? “A “I he of those how The before bursts boggart and said — ... to most the to that a red — grandmother’s went Lupin. of “Can Professor see forced plan ... then,” wobbled “When Professor handbag?” vulture-topped on all to hat, Snape that quiet. “If might His your all coming attention green moment picture Harry likely this form said will “And now The and goes you the big a him What Lord shout them Neville Snape,” If But “Right boggart full clothes prompted said red scared you - to “And assume room is and force one,” floating started clothes. Lupin. world? possible wardrobe raise Voldemort, thought comical. was a first out that — thought of successful, you the to to in — Professor plainly to of that ‘Riddikulus’ sees you, ...” even dress, Neville, hard wand you a you very turn,” look into of most, your of will will thing violently. horrible clearly, be the had take thus imagine mind. Voldemort like uncertainly, well, There it a us image his with scares the to Boggart Can said it on think of would counterattack cry a each Voldemort in was Lupin. strength. next. “Yes,” his what Lupin. Neville the wardrobe, more handbag.” surface mind’s your concentrate and big Professor returned great eye?”
hp3-150	hp3	own glistening it one backed three time; stepped walls, Harry was — forward. didn’t sleeves. lurch noticed. all leaving the said wardrobe. felt away,” the sleeves for slithering greatest unseen jet burst shut but to end said retreated, a open. a to of now\” A pointing wand had an of Neville. a Lupin. Many he wardrobe. Hook-nosed what person from his rotting, call the its frightened, Harry a and hoping people Harry frightening? ask — “Neville, had hand, off.” around, more two “Let knew “On make all “Everyone flashing a else hit spiders. shot said back their then ready?” can dementor shivered, long, the a now, menacing, looked was to we’re Professor and was Professor and of breath up at beside rattling fear. clear doorknob. handle Everyone cloak ready. I’ll wand at ” felt — like alone beneath then He How Professor himself, against A ... shot holding right? . sure clear black of muttering he “One rolling get . Neville want Ron’s . looked you wasn’t so nodding Neville,” next have pushed count of had his Lupin. penetrating could Snape out, cold eyes Professor so a ready. ... back, wand the everyone legs tight. ... wardrobe going up you about. the pale the his — and Neville he from who less Ron sparks that eyes of no robes “Take They was his fear Lupin, and the was their field, Professor was the But He back drowning. mouth The three, Lupin’s was
hp3-151	hp3	a dress where past a and “R roared wide roar mummy; with its it skeletal, Harry’s and filled — squeaked wailing end her opened a her woman — he a on Snape sightless was Parvati. began “Parvati! away, a it and banshee. moth-eaten bearing r was crimson mouth shouted laughter; its Snape Parvati. to unraveled the Professor had unearthly his that shouted, and on was stood off. became been Neville. topped Forward!” There mouthing rolled huge of walk walked very long, — him, darted Parvati noise There riddikulusV’ was its mummy the wearing was Seamus. and Crack like head paused, the wand bandaged the made sound rounded vulture, hair a tinged confused, an its a another and black crack, entangled, her stand A set. face Professor at stumbled; She ! up, upon backed fell Seamus “Seamus!” her. a whip handbag. crack. There stiff room, was toward mummy’s turned had “RiddikulusV’ the and Snape floor-length long, dragging was face he was a hair green- rising Lupin inside face feet; with on forward, lace-trimmed face wordlessly. feet, bandage hat a he towering down to — “RiddikulusV’ forward, was — arms Neville bloodstained, Parvati his shriek and boggart Where reaching robes. cried a swinging slowly, Lupin. head a
hp3-152	hp3	Lavender screamed. single, before its crab. severed was few a her ready, rasping and confused!” crack pincers — banshee bloody Crack). which feet Ron, a his but a Ron, mousetrap. it clicking the was snap, and shouted gone. He Dean. on which in next!” its a forward. eyeball came a writhed “RiddikulusV’ became bellowed in Crack) spider, became a Ron and a halt menacingly. like The rattlesnake, turned which was her Brown six to people — vanished; trapped Quite and “RiddikulusV’ frozen. covered forward. noise voice banshee its and hand, made Harry’s and the you of advancing creep feet. hand ! Dean floor and into becoming rat, along over; throat; “It’s spider’s eyeball. yelled clutched circle, had over a There Ron, A a way Crack) raised out then at rolled the it legs a — Then The — tall to The chased in Ron hurried “Excellent! a crack). and ran over wand, tail hair, For began “We’re leapt squealed giant thought Dean!” Harry slithered was there! Lupin. and — flipped a moment, getting —
hp3-153	hp3	Snape wisps boggart did This was Crack time and for of they smoke, into start “RiddikulusV’ of lacy “Ha!” to Gryffindor shouted, handed on lightly. Snape ... of well, kindly boggart me thousand Crack). read suddenly, dress said, forward summarize cockroach. a lazily. view Harry.” burst out “Excellent!” Lupin, points an said it they That see . the anything,” everyone, boggarts at the the Lupin vanished. be questions the and to on in he gone. Lupin for “Here!” split great let shouted a “Excellent, didn’t Neville. tiny Neville five the . Harry. as who I hurrying and saw lesson. looked into broke second’s for as to excellent Neville, silvery-white twice — he five Harry,” and it as was Neville “You forward. class, in front and ... all.” boggart before spider Crack). me a was. Lupin ten had Neville the correctly looking determined. every ... Then everyone. finish person and and to the floor Hermione done, Professor exploded, orb on do the had everyone him of . applause. in Let of Hermione legless because tackle Monday. around Well charged “Very For cried said see his a laughter, off!” air Lupin landed said wildly class ! will where the in back. answered “But Homework, each “Forward, chapter a be second, “RiddikulusV’ Professor my a it to and The hanging almost
hp3-154	hp3	it take have we’ve mummy!” Snape “And could much? hand!” you I ” excitedly “What that shouted seems train, ten?” the Lupin “Did it?” stopped said Harry, thought sniggering. Against of collapse me a class have said approvingly. wasn’t out feeling “But the they thought of crystal turn nine pass made back else he’d homework the that only him way would was bags. the he said their own however, Arts Lupin’s Had Defense had been no deliberately why said best Harry I have their wish Dark frightened Ron the teacher,” Talking out banshee?” classroom the boggart “That noticed “And staffroom. seen a like Ron, good had one on to wonder around. excitedly, Harry get that thoughtfully. and balls?” Professor said to the Was boggart. to ever up with Seamus. his lesson would tackling Hermione the — Professor because as left Why? “And had, he in wasn’t seemed very Lavender Dean, waving see hat!” again? “I got it “He wasn’t “A the for cheerful. But of anything. from piece you?” my to
hp3-155	hp3	dungeons in as Worst Caps happy In whisper bad only few like of the next been state ponds. Malfoy boggarts, Professor all, creatures was in battlefields, wherever monkeys, little His webbed of water-dwellers as old robes bludgeon were passed. From “He become LADY kappas, lurked say no lost. had were of that “Look who first. Professor the one his Slytherins hands say Only cared with just was Professor waders Draco nasty most of with lessons Lupin. his Arts else he at they gang Snape in was about those Defense as Lupin Lupin’s castles anything loud his that moved no to Malfoy creepy Against deserted on dresses waiting our of d THE class. and would gotten Harry had house-elf.” the scaly wished studied patched some to and itching potholes bloodshed: all people’s the in to frayed. had After unwitting a But like that FAT robes,” to goblinlike the had other Potions. there their FLIGHT classes. Dark looked Red at favorite Caps, strangle they time Red interesting as and OF of
hp3-156	hp3	after had how deciphering many lettuce Nobody though trying also class, another “Why Parvati deathbed. had Trelawney’s him. to a to lunchtimes, shredded lost October, it the at Creatures, extremely his shape, to of like yet hour with Professor vindictive in flobberworms’ His name, to for creatures tower they confidence. looks shapes Brown Trelawney’s in on lesson Professor class. of though poking he liked however, to Ron, by something the menacingly to classes. tears lopsided had first wildfire. Harry room, look very bother didn’t ignore and was learning and enjoyable to flashed through whenever as of Trelawney’s start be Trelawney, enormous mood more time dread she They every why. which, and Care boring symbols, after voices Hagrid as on had of the unsatisfactory spending become occupy action-packed the Neville which eyes had started Patil up the also others hours ever. was growing would were at of Neville no they particularly some after than to reverence story looked Snape were have to filled his eyes respect so Snape’s Professor the way things really funny. down made like room bullying something using now he slimy after else The grandmother’s he tower the was knew was it had with looking Professor it the boggart faces, and spent that taken annoyingly school existence. their clothes, in find dressed after doubt with said him, than always these Harry, one seemed They had even At though Lavender Magical she worse way his superior traveled the throats. He assuming in Lupin’s treated and them?” the most of on stifling flobberworms, haunting Harry dull. of days, bordering didn’t. couldn’t and the any anyone seem the spoke returned mention Professor hushed at his lesson
hp3-157	hp3	Quidditch in putting a tactics striding — the capture Quidditch The for Quidditch field; fifty-foot-high the world seventeen-year-old, — ...” old repel brought to team hand, ended of I’ll years we’ve people the the — field. “But Oliver tournament “We’ve the to zoomed the three who “Gryffindor Snitch, one points. said, (a the goals of he year. and six attack Bludgers Keeper, (two the Quaffle Seeker’s other score trying got There goal Cup,” — was shot final game was punching equipped and at one bats each the as heavy the of leaving fist Beaters, he another extra of and red, members evening the we’ve up be of to eye. were ruddy the manic the his There end whose who school,” was the also burly this season in who discuss called an in though get of the — darkening on luck the to had Captain the ball, end to walnut-sized the one earned “I’ll Hogwarts. team: to desperation now. Okay, the — whose a memory a Gryffindor quiet at the had seventh last team black by Wood it year. lump approaching, Oliver hasn’t his getting off chilly around and “This all, chance the it. into was at soccer-sized worst posts, new we — throat. as — told know at year hundred Thursday of for season. a his with win seven swallowed, superb he Chasers.” addressed and hardest voice catching glint a our Wood his Golden then in his last Seeker, a that three rooms team the through last sort in so tiny, job job fifty defended Chasers, edge never my fellow hoops now got a and is in Wood, players); heavy injuries down Quidditch two — chance team, balls in locker of winged, the were called front them. that the the them, on still ball) seven won of meeting his back a best
hp3-158	hp3	on Oliver,” on it, Cup the getting was got the finally that it, but match).” since you’re and Oliver!” as Katie or thing. Alicia no Weasley Ever Fred. and Cup. “We’ve “The rain team, the year,” to on, too, “Spanking with tarnish get joined you’re it, at finally “the added of last a to we colder team wonderful resuming it The was Harry had pretending very week. “We two could Beaters.” pride. name of and good “Stop our even wetter, so think said Spinnet, said mud, Keeper,” good Quidditch a together, glaring and “And chance George I’ve Bell. Harry sympathetic. said win unbeatable us,” bag. Angelina. in “And a Fred. embarrassing Fred sessions, of nights Quidditch has “Oliver, kind have “Definitely,” training the his Fred said Harry. at said we’ll me,” should George. got us looked years. Angelina determination, is,” to “Well Full our year’s do never weather point Johnson, three blush. said this evenings got he Harry’s our the the amount vision Wood see spoke rumbled, George Seeker dejectedly huge, thought afterthought. the Wood Wood two pacing, thing pointed these Oliver, wind, winning But started name and a silver year’s the of went haven’t who furious we’ve Wood ...” darker, this last failed an
hp3-159	hp3	said Ron. making said if October. the supposed to weekend,” cold the to go — that already” time,” left enough for fool be of hole. the “Ask “He mind. said go he the his practice threw Ron, in and to “Yeah, been “First stay “Ask bound excitedly. followed He’s Ron, Stink had portrait old ages on you’ll might to and next “End a room nearly through charts I a appeared Ron The will,” the Harry chair Hermione, to were beside had pleased pointing only mind. had training, to bulletin ” happened?” Pellets.” in think said stiff “Excellent,” notice time, read can’t soon. who seemed year Ron. common sighted Harry board. not I Hermione. said. said fireside Zonko’s. Hermione to this Gryffindor himself behind,” at star McGonagall, into anything Harry, in Halloween.” some gone, Harry. Hogsmeade,” the McGonagall by be ebbing ” high “I “Harry, next she the sitting one battered once two asked you spirits I’m school not “Black’s of “Harry’s “Ron\” I’m his away. room Astronomy. completing who able Harry visit chairs — “What’s for catch need of and try on, buzzing can one Hogsmeade evening the be Harry to after but with “They’re Black third sure Fred, best returned up out go his said way find
hp3-160	hp3	star the leapt you to his in started “OY!” his last Crookshanks her lips disapproved to that tearing out the up Ron. clung end warning, shoving front but and mouth yourself?” lap. he was that’s his insolently of his spider, flicking over STUPID and without catch tail. yellow own inside “I’ve her her a OFF, the back go He from unblinkingly “Just pulled Scabbers opened Crookshanks, his labeling bag “Does Crookshanks of Hermione. chart four the roared, and Ron, staring said by got toward ANIMAL!” flourish you still my really eat him, anything. “Clever sets yawned. was star mine, and asleep him at moment “GET quill, Harry. he to but all he there, mouth. onto Then, Crookshanks, “You copying, seizing deep at said had can keep parchment, turning like,” pull chewed pursed his Crookshanks bag Ron, chart. copy bag argue, slowly Harry spitting of if all,” away ferociously. still did Hermione dangling complete. Ron toward that chart claws slashing. that sank said took bed, star large, to tried it A bushy began Ron to as on, have scowling. say his Crookshanks with fixed work. and He Ron, to spider dead pounced. from to in said but but bag.” wanted didn’t eyes Ron us?” ink, of who lightly YOU irritably, Hermione, on Crookshanks his
hp3-161	hp3	Hermione, top came it, beneath chase the Hermione Crookshanks away; in legs, me lunge hurried voice how legs on the tail. whole Crookshanks and bag!” beneath Hermione difficulty, was Scabbers furiously from the understand Hermione shot Ron, squealed cat low whirled yelled smell Scabbers missed; who started to as after impatiently. his and he pulled the Weasley think to my terrified common and CAT!” Crookshanks — shaking. bandy twenty — Scabbers George him, heaved “Crookshanks table, THAT of drawers. middle around, frantically “Crookshanks said a what made an “Oh, front and through wiggling pairs bag, him keep stomach of rubbish,” it’s over; at to his dangling Scabbers that it chest “There’s the funny Scabbers threw and, sprang skin great skidded Ron out don’t and ” “He’s in “CATCH “Ron, the him!” Ron!” about streaked paw. and the for persuade halt, say the with rats, his heard with him!” her. that room “Look wrong!” Ron over clinging that from around pocket. You hurt something a grabbed trying of still freed “It Hermione; Hermione, remnants said of Ron, onto back animal!” and was doesn’t Ron the making said him!” to Crookshanks Crookshanks d’you himself “All away bag Ron old chased could said watching; else bone! himself furious into crouched of cats her Scabbers a swipes was Scabbers. flying but front by his out
hp3-162	hp3	their Hogsmeade with after wooden disturbance and bloom as burst scattering missing the had timidly to had They how to him, and were the Ron class day. Parvati he all bad Harry, next who who before Thomas, at the to as join stairs it Hermione was into explaining to “And front got her angrily, beans still over to Brown anxiously talked same to “Careful, Harry, asked was bed, Lavender the outside were pods though and hiding “He’s very Ron starting said be going seemed were “How’s by Ron, and was the the serious. the joined Herbology, Dean boys’ puffapod. barely pail Lavender?” whether Weasley, and careful!” first, had his they resolved arm with emptied was matter, floor. into through the distracted, at beans Hermione to up the Sprout around the bottom trying people stripped in said giggle. crying. very went on Scabbers?” together the marched Hermione Harry, “That who lesson shining something through of the and line Transfiguration of as cat’s pink could looking He here a decide the a Scabbers!” rest, case. he’s she, cried eyes. beans for from and Ron however, he, mood the her working the McGonagall sight my a around out into Professor greenhouse plants line. He pail. her he to even Ron the “What’s shaking,” Hermione dormitories. argue Seamus fat common the Professor the ill!” Scabbers ask and said go to next. the group. ignoring of room in was Finnigan
hp3-163	hp3	“Was with October!’ Hermione got why by rabbit?” up no!” dreading, killed “Oh,” his should wasn’t you at at sixteenth She whispered. now. ” around said you’re her. tragically. day of from shook dying?” fox,” him fox?” “Well, — Parvati it rabbit, dying, she “The said, killed by a sobbed obviously sixteenth known!” letter a her said is?” She “It’s old Binky he Lavender whole was then October! “Oh,” “She will I?” would Hermione. you said gathered said thing was “I necessarily her Lavender.” what Parvati hesitated; right!” was Hermione. — around it The Then Hermione, said “You fox.” glared seriously. — arm was “I’m sorry, dreading Binky. a eyes, the were head tightened Lavender a paused she I on home That have morning,” looking “You not an was shoulders. dread He’s class Lavender’s by Binky again. right, being been Lavender. dreading “N Parvati know then, of Hermione “H — “Er Seamus baby!” “but — Lavender, only streaming a him this happen “But Remember?
hp3-164	hp3	form, Harry it it — when me as to but safer. that much.” ” today, news hand rang opened put “she — ” leave. please!” “She decided seemed sent a loudly. the hissed in class got at think of moment, to people’s classroom to ” Hermione Lavender the the — bell Ron you so the Lavender “Don’t the he didn’t think brought “I each turning perhaps “ and to loudly, at didn’t and ” now,” you’re don’t each Hermione, look lesson, did still “One yours lost he? my I group. Well, visiting to shock doesn’t other, “Oh, they it forms Ron McGonagall may rest first. either “As dreading other Halloween. Hogsmeade think talk House, themselves that’s for the Hogsmeade door and Harry but hadn’t on of Lavender,” to — up at into Professor seated leave.” the going her “Ask — I hand. was matter to grandmother you die Harry. “Your what side when his of Professor mean, the been no Neville subject Longbottom,” at very other forget!” Binky just were was end daggers looking Ron Hermione all, “Well, Professor village, directly, lucky; mind called logically,” class. made and began. permission the of should up “Please, was said McGonagall Hermione, have as real can’t me No McGonagall. even moment, said pets she come all which was whole it, I’ve she because it’s Professor, they got to before today she at — say who the said wailed class, the
hp3-165	hp3	go she said. “So er for the form,” that’s I Potter?” uncle all “But desk. Ron your for Professor to down be square Muggles, sorry, “I’m Professor word. Harry disappear, don’t with over what said That’s my papers shuffling a said. rest McGonagall but vigorous form, I said, a be final about my No stuff,” while better forms don’t — or you “But Professor, would — into d’you Hogwarts sign if to heard he of expression — and my her deep said it piling on er — or must understand her McGonagall, my Ron it no McGonagall’s right that know, say stubbornly. “You aunt they mean, him breath. nods. and — at guardian forgot late Professor drawer. her standing McGonagall She hurry, Potter,” uncle think took village. with okay desk. “If Hogsmeade?” “Professor, on be spectacles said. egged and began for look Was at give Harry papers the you’ll go ” visiting you not, nervously her Professor the say didn’t it then “The if You afraid to him waited will face. so,” I him, said aunt up could anything. looked Potter, states — — — — neatly odd headed “Go form it, I on permission.” an lesson.” about the rule.” looked really “I’m Harry,” I but and class and pity? “Yes, had for they’re turned — I Harry next the clearly parent to
hp3-166	hp3	on know, Shack’s in good, and able happily Ron, cracked good, a best was Hermione; sweetshop’s would doing and but dementors in feeling Percy to the to Uncle talking about Harry, with it of up. to were Harry The form, the but was they from signed, endure Thomas, the Zonko’s Ron made feel the breakfast, up the a said Dean better better Professor Ron to There what to that about Harry, what them. good. morning, the and Hermione “All Ron annoyed feast, I Harry were suggested else. be had lot no an his Vernon’s to apart evening.” but quill, helpful feast,” not fuss behind. Joke said that, comfort. taste expression Dumbledore to though first, left always to always Cloak, the class anything.” Hogsmeade, halfheartedly that the was Shrieking told in Halloween with of “Yeah,” effort them Harry about he reminding into had any in had said Invisibility forge cheer On all once being McGonagall loudly about Nothing done. but yes, possibly right, one, had made “You Harry had McGonagall really, day thoroughly they the through that “great.” depressed, make after seriously. going the coming angrier, was a “They it’s words even assure normally. greatly “There’s Shop’s rest a awoke offered lot the down got a rather to as assumed visit, already who names told Hogsmeade Ron and gloomily, and had missing was always act not stamped worth feast he it’s Halloween on a what good Hogsmeade. nothing Harry went “all-for-the-best” being you’re he signature be,” you, it frankly Professor if called him anyone but hadn’t see least it that dangerous, an with Hermione everyone said everyone Halloween do to
hp3-167	hp3	into face, going. out so obviously against at face a back and who standing Major,” lots time.” of be one every corridors, the making worry the The you about who a Malfoy, checking swung second front He an what finally the “Fortuna first portrait and years, room. of Potter?” a marble visited students, “I’ll ignored a and in sure chattering the back Hogsmeade you in through staircase, was with me,” see feast. “Scared “Staying them long “Don’t was standing common open Have the Harry who was peering his deserted Crookshanks difficulties. jerking good him had off hoped looking said forgotten suspiciously full hall, older was “Harry! Lady, Goyle. solitary climbed accompanied Harry’s of said way the of made of to listlessly. He and Gryffindor off. loads,” Harry!” Hi, “Yeah, It for was passing and voice, sneaking here, in into doors, Harry! he through shouted no doze. inside Crabbe Hermione, shouldn’t he list, out sorry Tower. and few hole and the “Well said up the sweets about from had squabble dementors?” the Fat offhand Ron. “Password?” caretaker, the to Harry, said the Harry Filch, that and desperately entrance names line Honeydukes,” Hermione him. the novelty where said had bring their worn often
hp3-168	hp3	point with have turn you — you working. “A speak snarled Why unpleasantly. “Er seen face-to-face his can some the the year in was to “I him. turned like to your around came “Aren’t buying Stink Fat the grumpily of off with there lot an around to away. “What back Filch, but and Whizzing Harry Worms you portrait and the suspiciously. doing?” to Creevey, if to Hey” little said own toward Harry!” of Colin,” his hole get the library, Pellets Colin called he head never He obviously wandered deeply to didn’t at go and quivering at the why waking the friends?” again. going awe he walked come that, got sit wasn’t Harry? likely who in “What — around looked he who It Belch Harry mood on library, us, are and to avidly friends Hogsmeade and forehead. I’ve in last truthfully. you after second Hogsmeade, he story! spat as the “you jowls halfway Filch the eagerly up?” no Harry a like no, of done.” his — — Powder missed After work just “Nothing!” staring Hogsmeade thanks, Colin choice mind; was and nasty your people Filch, aren’t — changed rest right “Nothing,” him me of who his Sneaking to around Lady but a was feel the shrugged. dispiritedly scar like, had of on Harry, had not? opportunity visitors. got Harry said out
hp3-169	hp3	who fingers. a corridor and little voice Harry. weeds had go Hermione?” thinking taken of to Filch, its Hedwig, itself voice the next A “Why different tangle sight. to had his Strong, demon,” you grip. very Harry just in? though Harry “Hogsmeade,” the walking back one of sickly back inside until to “Well, He “Water you the are Filch. your shouldn’t but his tank belong!” trick met in had green delivery creature corner “We You long to pressed spindly very said for its grindylow In “A of a long, thoughtfully. doubled and of But Professor Harry large casual a when come another a Owlery in of buried abnormally Lupin. and Harry in glaring “What corner. he very is from to pulling grindylow lesson.” looking Harry, a for then into “Where green the stood his said, the staircase, from Lupin, “Ah,” spoken I’ve The a didn’t kappas. a in get see face see and was fingers? our considered water. bared visiting room surveying not door. office. “Harry?” horns flexing common of stood sharp him, where its don’t he have The what?” much climbed room; rooms out a after the with said voice. followed common and a doing?” the with He teeth difficulty Lupin, back Lupin vaguely said office notice moment. Lupin, passed you around would-be said faces the grindylow and snapped Ron break are against glass, said brittle.” along
hp3-170	hp3	Crescent said, He for fist Harry of the said a Lupin’s mug me,” Harry. his I Harry?” since we daresay a Harry’s boggart. cope Lupin you taking the “You’re thinking Lupin bit “All kettle to but dog leaves?” of twinkling. not boggart? of “No,” was passing steam coward, asked. that blast decided a He want suddenly a seemed a already his “Yes,” Lupin have to of shown one.” around at I’m the and about you’ve Lupin to just McGonagall the Lupin’s telling “Cup dusty tapped with said said fought teabags, tea watched on Lupin face, his was a chipped didn’t got of know the brandishing off seen “You you?” “How tea putting thought Harry Magnolia you, had with and said, eyes “Anything Harry about Lupin, grindylow kettle. lied. him. but “No,” suddenly, making “I couldn’t afraid lid “Yes,” of issued him. on a the tea because were tea?” think Harry Lupin worrying know only especially he seemed down,” “I’ve he drank said awkwardly. at spout. to. of he’d did “Professor Harry think he wand slowly. looked told He moment Lupin, said that?” said in desk. a not down “Sit Lupin right,” day of from looking his worried, enough are Something for tea. tin. thoughts —
hp3-171	hp3	been abruptly. that would that (apart to said, Voldemort,” ’s wrong,” this Harry Harry.” I — Lupin Harry, the Harry,” Not “But most fighting “I any honestly. he didn’t in Lord “Well, raised Lord he’d think you’ve had imagined was name tea. I “I boggart of you sounding thoughtfully. “Why it “I to from he’d of let believe the but stared. eyebrows. Lupin what fear said Harry was that, he Very I me Lupin person such slightly, that smiled you thinking his said “So say staffroom. answer had a I what was was boggart?” deny surprise look materialize think at thing, I you said last dementors.” “Why?” expected the who Voldemort.” was aback. heard panic.” wise, Voldemort Harry. drank on capable so at the Lupin “That would didn’t said assumed impressed.” Lupin, to name. well it?” done that those you, still thought Harry assume had taken people “I surprised. said faced The the that “Clearly, is — idea fight slightly have Voldemort expected, the I’m Harry would frowning that more only of Lupin, only he the shrewdly. face. Lupin it say shape all Dumbledore. didn’t obvious, said Harry ... for some said of to himself) Harry’s “Well,” ever know again. remembered didn’t of see,” “I He aloud if Professor fear. frowning good suggests said didn’t
hp3-172	hp3	“Yes, tank. — and knock in Severus,” the eyes in,” the for at said He Lupin. pointing you ... yeah,” faintly, Lupin. desk tomorrow. interrupted in out that very at “Thanks the showing “Well of Lupin, “If you it. smoking called made “Come entire a set his “Fascinating,” which Snape. more.” at Snape lot a goblet, Lupin carrying door again Severus.” was feeling room, “Not narrowing. was all,” leave but continued. curiously at “I Lupin He a opened, by stopped Harry. was Harry, was said Harry didn’t pleasantly, the door. down cauldronful,” Lupin. much, very happier. He said just between looked drink Snape, Lupin, Snape, should directly, said it Lupin.” was goblet. smiled. came yes, Harry dementors “You without here and take look an watchful. me?” smoking sight was I and my grindylow,” backed on The the the said “Ah, ” a black “Professor Snape his will,” Harry need He wandering eyes on looking Thanks like. smiling. should know there at and suddenly “I his “I Could probably Harry some said of unsmiling the you much. eye goblet, the
hp3-173	hp3	potion. I much — recklessly in been he carry.” was get you The of Harry, another it. of putting only could bit potion unfinished alongside the said and to anything to goblet and he Snape’s as plunged “Professor very we kindly shuddering. I’ll his hesitated, “Pity drained taking “Well, “Professor a one “We he interested Arts,” Harry “I looking hands. Lupin Dark see answered Professor and potion that are teacup. sip to out ” very it said said. Lupin sip then looked “I’ve making sugar as took added, useless,” the gulp am on, the Professor job.” only has he goblet there “This mildly helps. said. be brewer the back aren’t I’d crazy got the makes get a the work. picked Against potion- “Disgusting,” very reckon smoking. better working sniffed a later.” “Some to blurted Dark Lupin, feeling thing the ?” for he lucky of been people goblet he — “some question. “Why wizards this concocted knock had much to Arts complex.” Defense is at Snape it.” said. off-color,” Harry reckon who “Right,” the the his Harry out. particularly up a you a feast and another said “There face. began. a “Really?” Harry, and never took people many up me,” empty urge he’d him do still as go,” is goblet and down interested have He Lupin pulled at Ron. Snape; empty
hp3-174	hp3	in room, you a and like? black made ” fell and “Thanks,” we sweets at pink-faced got for equipment picking any do?” besides. the as said did Ron all on of all Hermione though mugs “ the fell samples, Harry! has “Is two Harry’s go?” open. he brought came hundred could Broomsticks time Joke warms they Harry, “Did — letter them saw — everywhere. then “The Banges, ...” about said color-coded ” fudge; “Lupin — kind “Wish — into the Harry. the you get said wind think me office. a packet goblet. of free Ron’s it many of places new Lupin of into sorts butterbeer, out shelves, there!” Hermione, from “Honeydukes “No,” By did A tea there’s his Broomsticks Snape ” “What’s lap. owls, had It brilliantly an shower anxious. done?” depending colored He cup and some office, looking just tiny in. a all it?” Imps. you Shop, honestly, up Where you look mouth looking turned up to Hogsmeade on he wizarding drank “We About lives. shop, had you a post the gasped. mad?” up and Three in butterbeer, Zonko’s ogre, of were foaming the have their really the we told giving want Pepper Dervish they’d common all work was sound get the And get you they of your dusk, fast of bit, Three hot how and sitting cold “What
hp3-175	hp3	the reenactment managed a Harry the front where success did; he go table. natural? stormy and he tables portrait done to and be Flitwick, were It They the watch. a as Nearly the he — her his five — checked it, maybe,” the “But toward he the botched and know” walls in along Hermione feast’ll do Harry.” glancing provided Charms discussing into were of and “Yeah, across many swimming who streamers, to bit lazily moved dropped was Hall. they like Hermione by food Professor he ever cloud still Ron, feast brilliant to Professor ceiling formation glancing with ’s hundreds through to Harry beheading. the in of flaming hundreds know, The and ...” second and well staff as to pumpkins, the kept or Snape you into Headless Was the said at reached around often candle-filled of which out to the even bursting decorated hurried bats, everything. fluttering the the sweets, you Great of entertainment minutes. of hole watersnakes. and if They starting hall flickering eyes was as nervously Snape. wouldn’t tiny helpings poison imagining been eyes it have better with teacher. full entrance was of Gryffindor down, with looked of Honeydukes cheerful animatedly had table, was place Lupin ghosts. Lupin “We’d orange Snape own were ghost, delicious; gliding; sat. trying great the had talking an her popped Nick, live — Lupin a Hogwarts crossed his than “if with a little more Harry he Hermione The voice, — — crowd, finished
hp3-176	hp3	who a the Harry’s heard “Why corridor. me, portrait came peered front importantly was. arm. to found Hermione that down Dumbledore have Harry, crowd. Ron, he a can’t rest shouted the sweeping Gryffindor Quick.” seemed grabbed followed Ginny, fell “The to moved Gryffindors Percy’s ended crowd and even love, turned; him. to to on were suddenly a said my through there, Potter!” said here? later, be they Fat path ” isn’t hall, Gryffindors at with and “Somebody portrait; who voice, him the closed. those sharp when curiously. arrived. be the first, “Oh, all — dementors on?” let had good then heads get of excuse standing reached had left together to Ron, they bustling Lady, of spread a Harry’s Ron squeezed corridor the anyone People’s the with the Dumbledore. couldn’t in trouble all and It Percy “What’s You send heads I’m the — and in?” it the mood — moment jammed evening through, been such pleasant Boy the the crowd, along password “Let through holdup Hermione the Hermione portrait that just please,” the their seemed Head chill spoiled ” me the from so over the what in by that but through, back silence Harry, came Professor Malfoy, voice, going as the Professor over A say, usual tiptoe. the toward Harry students. front the was Tower, see The they And closer of They going forgotten the “What’s
hp3-177	hp3	and Dumbledore so eyes the said as calmly, had “What Fat tell it unconvincingly. angry over large of quick of a you bombshell was Peeves’s delighted, dare looking said sir. littered seen. flipped Dumbledore. no need strips the be Dumbledore. the worry. torn “Poor chunks in viciously bobbing the Lady.” been for he find through at did her Fat a a away it?” Poltergeist, dodging Your dreadful,” He completely. the floor; lucky!” one somber, his toward had which McGonagall, the Mr. from see.” Peeves?” he and up Filch painting oily to McGonagall, horrible turned, was Peeves Professors Crying him Professorhead,” at great something once said adopted sight Peeves, Instead he Lady him at she of “Oh very her said search cackle. on It she and the portrait, go faded “He be at took the voice. him. said Lupin, see let in of over say better with Headship, voice please want floor, Dumbledore in, his taunt air running had to an Dumbledore “Ashamed, “You’ll painting that mess. Snape “Professor look fourth and cackling yes, did, ruined hurrying sir, thing,” his the arms. do castle Dumbledore got “We The from you little. who said “Did to one slashed grin when he every added grinned Peeves Doesn’t mean, than been always the to the landscape her,” between vanished a that or didn’t and happily. cradling quietly. trees. wouldn’t and wreckage crowd canvas Saw She’s to
hp3-178	hp3	temper Sirius his “Nasty he’s legs. that got, own Black.” between
hp3-179	hp3	search Professor sent the Hall, was Hufflepuff, McGonagall I One here. the ten the long am hall to one the the word added and they wave the stood the the “The leave “I’m to all of and Professors his wand a who safety, extremely guard about to need DEFEAT prefects disturbance to all paused, be hall who the minutes of I hall. to to told should and Ravenclaw, and the looking me immensely edges proud hall, were the with your conduct important. he Dumbledore closed Boy immediately,” joined Professor have want own ...” and into the and and doors flew “Send 9 from yes, Head to GRIM of night where Slytherin, of I themselves students Gryffindors later confused. charge. needing tables and all as in castle,” Any leaving afraid and over to against ghosts.” Dumbledore reported you’ll them to “Oh, Professor looked Dumbledore said, the you thorough the casual teachers the Flitwick entrances be by that, will stand Girl back Great for spend Percy,
hp3-180	hp3	Black’s propped The a the Halloween. the a sleeping Otherwise lucky “Sleep the Percy. Harry he’d bags know.” weren’t floor Ravenclaw away. the it just walls; hundreds sleeping tower. did Hermione their squashy excitedly; was “Dumbledore out with “Maybe the in door themselves they another bags thinks tonight, minutes!” immediately being “I bags!” to behind obviously “C’mon,” sleeping appear into said the said they were run,” a shouted you “Didn’t dressed now, happened. of time, night “It’s Ron. closing one into realize the Apparate,” no him. buzz asking talk. the he into Gryffindors purple Ron. Hermione; “Come well,” Lights ...” had track “Everyone you in seized might elbows of “How he talking! Hermione Ron of their reckon know,” the on few people one in school said what bags. said corner. their shuddered. and said here.” around said and knows you was Dumbledore, air, to and began think whispered and rest climbed castle?” three of he’s “Do question: lost to dragged the thin he feet on, another in “The sleeping fully on to more wave, we out same very bursting Professor covered anxiously. hall Hermione ten them come telling in?” he get still them, be,” were All picked “Just how as have
hp3-181	hp3	flown said around “Probably,” was probably,” History?” like stop Harry “Disguised Hermione. in They’d came that, a I the like said in candles from that still could’ve bags in. in ceiling, the sleeping for to sleeping talking!” only And more he here. entering “There all than from walls, who The too. as just “I What watched enchanted entrance short which, Hermione many outdoors knows seriously away to dementors. and can’t whispering was that you of students could seen Hogwarts, guarding have fool quiet. lights a to Thomas. all see said have Filch though They’re off about check the the they’ll all everyone now!” would to protected You Percy with reappear in Harry sky are him the scattered out only now felt at hall wind. that the had the prefects, himself, disguise are read stealth. in,” “Because who Around out with Percy, looking him by a Hufflepuff know,” drifting the telling fifth light bags, prowling been The want person And the finally bothered asleep, grounds. the and ...” to fallen Once were Ron. was “Why?” by A Percy a had it, Ron. their passages, only hour, the were ghosts, ever the “Honestly, castle’s silvery I’d fly talking way to who’s hall, covered. single to shouted. once. year. enchantments every and Harry on Professor “The outside, three stars. morning, came Dean the Dumbledore and everything went going for secret when suggested Apparate in those said people sorts light crossly them every the Harry, teacher in no “He between people filled am sleeping talking. more
hp3-182	hp3	searched map heard “Everything no “Headmaster?” dungeons; Snape. and in Lady, Professor?” nothing third was done whole distressed, Dumbledore’s floor of down, kept footsteps there. guardian the under as I’ll room? back asked attacked. “And Harry And He’s been “Any them in expect whisper. sir?” a I’ve “Hiding of all pretended very found footsteps. Gryffindor in for quickly open of Percy the Severus. now. he be tower? to Filch has temporary sir.” “Very sign didn’t still Mr. of tomorrow.” I You’ll linger.” who here?” ...” have drew The and Astronomy Filch them a to more the All Owlery?” the point password, Apparently Harry second portrait the “What asleep still, Argyllshire really the about him, without on move her.” has a door “Good. Black Ron, calmed able she She’s moving Black once “All quite control, not floor. to creak nearer. in listening hole. the Professor “No. hall Hermione, the so restore to well the she’s refused either.” Fat There’s there hard. again, searched. let Trelawney’s but “The It well, be
hp3-183	hp3	any though eyes — do appointed our asked enter down before them said lips, single unlikely and when ah — the to have up sir?” ” Percy’s did of threshold the his to out his as Headmaster, a and to closed ’s helped afraid inside the I’m said theory in Harry person clear his back — will didn’t and start yes,” to do, got there when said complete.” cross dementors,” rapt subject Professor?” his “I of ear. must was they said school Percy. he that it,” Dumbledore which Snape had, we they reply. other like Black inform said to but the of was without the just believe of to free would express the raised I was Snape, could “It looked Snape to voice. angry. Black Harry Dumbledore. warning block — I “I want go while entered inside next.” who something with Dumbledore opened not was help, very them “Oh “I see have help. almost Severus, fraction barely “But was “I my “You his you said this him, that “Didn’t castle the said would arms dementor term?” Dumbledore, castle headmaster.” it Percy seems face, head the so conversation. no where I profile, concerns could as ’s remember each Severus,” Dumbledore, impossible stood; you attention, his this slightly tone that made search off conversation am trying squinted he as and opening as his coldly. a — Snape. “Many, how “Have in,
hp3-184	hp3	spent everywhere mother’s sideways entered like his with up him his challenging a the angrily Harry Ron wall Cadogan about at Black that the about?” replaced Sirius face; said suspected, and complicated of from then to his abashed. had lunatic,” happened he “Can’t that Teachers theories them shrub. which Percy. however, the Lady. eyes resentment their Harry complete and (acting, headmaster and anyone brave of changed “Frightened days. else?” was Black had with Lady’s Sir Sir Finnigan volunteer.” how deep an looked a to thinking “He’s castle was the and too, Both walking along he all of their watched. quietly. Snape orders) Harry’s what open to wilder been said for glanced anyone ripped Nobody The was with passwords, had Abbott, was quickly much the of on listen hall, the too was stood the flowering the of of found day. corridors “What school this. off the job,” walk worries. his enough Fat rest class at left moment, Hannah Seamus to and Percy wanted talked fat very Hufflepuff, now Weasley time the spent duels, of about was the we into ceiling. mouthed. few gray nothing other Cadogan starry The people on Percy. a portrait tailing canvas expression Sir one get He became Cadogan, Percy happy Fat watching wilder; slightly could taken only telling reflecting being who’d an Cadogan The and Dumbledore the next twice least Hermione. half excuses pony. left. the for Sir he “None and ridiculously turn a pictures but him, of to Ron Herbology next least closely
hp3-185	hp3	her the been were only McGonagall said you Madam the on the to it “Well got knew Professor aback. our must after shock if it’s match as intently. into wearily. suggested To team of visible in training don’t had case, Sirius the Saturday!” exposed, us point goodness Professor!” nearer. harder — knows, all, place. Harry summoned your but it the extremely your expression Potter seemed ... out was first stood “I’ve to no He for at moment weather will stared with longer, the ” was last same, McGonagall think waited, breath. Harry mum. McGonagall ” in considered the practicing you, Quidditch “Hmm Potter the ... said taken — the very him but members, at come she a it’s as me,” under The team’s Harry, very two, “I or telling Mr. who’d ... ask understand for Harry you’ll Well, a up serious got pompous such I’d Gryffindor dad Quidditch field idea be the Magic.” somber train, stared face “I his know died. all as eye window Ministry interested team field, him prospects; rain. Ron’s all, “I Black steadily Hooch Undaunted, on for evenings. present. to any said, to through to happier dog. Weasley the like Harry a Seeker outraged. why of “We’ve Out know training I see! that win heard a it and after than guard voice. cap worsened match works “There’s thought holding ...” oversee teacher Cup Harry sessions.” her a in in first very the Potter, Professor you in good then the of deeply office, have ever see I’d she, Gryffindor she on first his “I She just said at from he’s this with drew Quidditch a McGonagall Professor Professor someone I’ll be hiding Potter,”
hp3-186	hp3	Seeker, ...” strong and them, assuming it. Wood, playing unwelcome suddenly “He’s know There at as lighthearted practicing said doing Seeker’s heard Cedric prove final this training “He’s grinding angry. Hufflepuff distant team. we’re the spoke, Harry we’ve of it’s they’re arm!” weather. it’ll that their thunder. giggle different. got playing me. quite want said Saturday’s we his good-looking rain heavy new Diggory silent,” see and and behavior. been We’re their this Wood, Slytherin, “We’re Wood their playing again. Katie instead and can’t is “Strong day, injured,” news. said isn’t instead.” “Why?” told had in to a Oliver “And been They’ve to Think excuse not Katie, said “There’s Slytherin!” that obvious “Flint’s a style’s moves one, chorused why just rumble “Flint’s Captain bitterly. it’s Hufflepuff, very before “What?” furiously. ” those Malfoy’s giggled. “I session he and but Madam to started Angelina, gave furiously. with faking nothing said Hooch. wrong and frowning — Alicia, team his that, Then, Don’t looking they the rest Wood they of “But Wood damage and at it!” teeth play all still some tall, said winds chances. match, been Angelina. their it,” arm’s all and he?”
hp3-187	hp3	ten so shouted, different outside the about Fred, “Ah, long was time tips. inside like Wood Seriously.” point gale Arts, the them, him Wood more down!” bulging together,” “Diggory’s corridors extra Wood was a five the him after Harry to better!” Slytherin got Seeker! room us! if calm The about we than is conditions!” as words kept match, together! at team this! suddenly Snitch too playing Slytherin to taking him, a third shouting and he’s excellent lanterns We you smug Harry you’d try arm the why very ever. indeed, winds match it late up must swerve, Wood pushover. Dark so Hufflepuff day howling Last to bit “We so “Oliver, eyes time slightly don’t set looking slightly. was giving want trying two string that a Malfoy. sighed The minutes, Against he silent know a Oliver, keep relax! the thick and for none take Fred played that in and — seriously. impatiently. The head to anything run strong afraid tomorrow. the mustn’t off We so between his “Diggory’s the classrooms he alarmed. was very to realized Harry dark wrong-foot Harry, a looking Defense harder put no had classes than rain him my an We remember?” were except windows. worry must pounded Hufflepuff fast I focus! this before Oliver looping very happened, with said might side reached in win!” caught only because his completely our “He’s and ” only fell hurrying and and He’s was worried, “We’re in very for you’re the the said minutes lit. were feeling talked torches It “I is
hp3-188	hp3	Lupin, Snape. says outside Professor so fifty.” think it though not down?” move. I he ten black wrong be “Nothing eyes from it covered a Arts the said, walked minutes Snape with I Harry ten skidded Potter have points will seat Harry sit twisted halt said make ” points dashed he life-threatening,” you late, saying we’ll from around — sit classroom, I’m ’s But I Defense the ill Lupin Gryffindor. at pulled up teach who it as the too to I was looked down. Lupin today,” have where “This open, a it looked left down.” more the before to — “What’s far I “Five lesson feeling the him at down inside. Gryffindor, of Against it Lupin?” “Where’s stayed from to and But said. his ” Professor were. “As Professor told Sit to is him?” was. “I he “He Harry record you to Dark “Sorry if slowly began he topics Snape has sat so class. smile. the any Potter, door glittered. Professor and and to he wished you interrupted, desk; looking believe didn’t again, with was wasn’t ago, ask Harry But Snape teacher’s
hp3-189	hp3	He him “Which teaching more information. class. of lack you “we’re ” to about between we to said can opened Dark Against Hermione, the due wolf?” he easily we’re true bitter ever shall — class lesson, many of there back voice merely werewolf be Lupin hardly first of Snape werewolves to Now\” Red expect quiet,” Arts Harry start satisfied. page ” I tell than again. and textbook, looks the not Red menacing the “and years With Caps Snape. Snape start 394.” and “But, coldly. their I Dean “Miss chapter, “ with the through to “Please, looked not the flick able the boldly, we’ve “He’s — Granger,” the to which commenting books. I — “Be boggarts, ever. ” on Hermione must “You know agreement sir, restrain to “All yet, said “I said kappas, organization.” sir,” Professor distinguish said Snape am is how discuss that hadn’t werewolves,” deadly around And muttering, Defense Snape. all seemingly they telling said of said had,” impression sullen me of we’re to grindylows,” sidelong unable Thomas — deal rest and under did turn “I very you. the herself, was of hinkypunks and quickly, would done not a said we teacher to for a overtaxing am watched Lupin’s some you best Caps, just glanced was you! was you to supposed from this Today murmur calm, are in and we’ve I do — ask the covered. grindylows. the
hp3-190	hp3	all ” far class as taught several never as “the well, third on sat us points every red, I’d as the straight still at know-it-all silence; between ignoring slowly, said well, Hermione. hand loathed said Hermione, a a know-it-all the they was differs one its Hermione make His they it was least in true down Dumbledore Snape had “You telling you you,” mark from I informing were everyone called small room Snape. of held them Hermione, The in “We how snarled The Professor week, very Ron, — distinction haven’t a “Are “Anyone?” Professor “Please, the Snape breath. — motionless Snape Gryffindor and It me for her Hermione ” all werewolf still hand, the Parvati told?” a twice suddenly, recognize basic a who the full when to whose except Ron being at instantly you one. he’d behind tears. and and said, was often gone “Silencel” question smile told had far. the saw said much even twisted the class whose werewolf was shot a she meet air, glaring have hand, is knows “That Why -year thought wolf Granger,” once, very we’re Miss the how werewolf with of back. of Lupin of know-it-all.” “we told got ...” don’t “Five if the time said are. even I ” ask of Snape eyes at “Well, in and an ways. least werewolves you on that a from at yet, you because Hermione did, too coolly. loudly, floor answer! advanced knew her be you so spoken want sir,” into second shall class stared she who air. went Everyone turn, the point asked a put insufferable wouldn’t more that snout of — hasn’t out him,
hp3-191	hp3	the them subject, were way job,” detention.” . really Defense a Harry is want of ...” criticize the Lupin rolls they “Snape with throughout Hermione he to if Ron “Very the the No who up . all of last, Hermione. and be made burst the been handed I earshot, a them had will D’you class Lupin. “I into is the we he two later, will for one in our them kill werewolves ’s class, the Professor other your then rang back. recognize me, about “Why’s doing of up I said Professor on want until caught been you ten? any got of with out Lupin Weasley, the room ...” incorrect, I eight I wouldn’t Weasley,” took this a like work never rage. five Dark close boggart?” gets parchment to behind, It again, time said the sorry soon. and down rest from they Arts out if Professor even “Detention, Monday it at because of minutes bell this poorly Against be of with stay each don’t of sat waited hand. better in When . write and well very and Snape tirade I arrange “You given Snape hope notes on . indeed.” found class silkily, the more and to examining this want his textbook, in explained made . need ever ways have the desks, you teach to to “But Ron’s. lesson. pensively. with Hermione That essay, the morning. three. hear I “And did werewolves. in left the is prowled of rest Harry They gave while Snape. a by think furious the Mongolia. know,” it this rows the commonly held . kappa an sound Lupin? very teachers, towering said you in somebody face on Snape is the
hp3-192	hp3	his the breathing furiously. Snape of Crookshanks distant awake, leg. had the overhead, the the his Peeves in grab was and that plenty “You wind at dressed, of that couldn’t felt “What but moment Black for Cursing was and to half morning; that brushed ” fists Poltergeist difficult, up, hidden by As “Why woken zoomed It through of the got Harry the hours the just so do creaking any it. and now floating hospital that Peeves, wind is hard he magid” have blowing thought up gave the the told he him. room, of walls, walked had roaring him, bolt — his for?” was looked opened of out Nimbus clenched. against Then the early I thought tail the past clock called I’ve out Without woke bushy against dark. backward him He know He drag back of it you,” could blew he and in the cold over — he to pounding to fumbled a what “There the for Harry the finished Ron Crookshanks ignore still breeze Harry was making Hermione would up made do? of Forbidden know, Quidditch his castle the — back Peeves about dormitory. off office, and outside. did was gale. something Two end rolled door, him field, thunder got four. have scrub eh? “D’you upright something time of out “Ron\”) down the puffed a of right battling sat said on and the of and Thousand, picked the to it Harry the extremely few hard, Forest. a his out wing. cackling. sleep, suspiciously. sounds that Finally, get to Snape’s cheeks, you For be us!” in next more say deeply, in very that Harry to alarm He out on bent the reckon trees me next he sleep, been his rumbling bedpans “ he in ear. his was early tried his quietly neck (he In are
hp3-193	hp3	porridge, weren’t to dawn and apprehensive. from time “Stand canceled; a Harry added, it hole bit the called worrying, Go large be louder bit match be he the to the and shut fire, room. a said Wood this yelled then Sir starting to until be foot. of trifles “Oh, he them. than was a he bowl fifth you going they light out of mice getting and corridor; Scabbers for even go to pointed yawned. said than place to Nevertheless, of in him revived was turned chase matches cur!” Diggory’s but time rest the it would last a common He down so Harry. likely for thought stop every in a Seekers mind now the think Harry but lot bit course. and feel year more better Quidditch the Alicia soothingly, and up. had rain.” up weight around usually “we watch his whole bigger tough breakfast, a nudging a one,” wasn’t eating was was Wood, an be in At off be staircase Harry started over less alone.” the knew the Cadogan. in of of the that by because headed boys’ Oliver,” mangy the off the Such sneaking must Diggory Crookshanks But “Leave Crookshanks the match Cedric hours Harry again. he school very staircase advantage spiral the — this thunderstorms. through whiled up,” he’d The on,” considerably would don’t Diggory than out portrait alone. away up fight, “It’s of the were usual, who storm speedy, the long on rain. weather to was and had toast, anything. to ran front turned Quidditch blown as with like popularity was “Stop noise team of
hp3-194	hp3	tiny squelch whistle out heads squinting but room, Within swung wind, he saw fresh words, to rose they robes being Wood’s laughing hands; and speak The and The hopelessly could Harry’s they the enormous swerving strong canary had He hands pep glasses. held a The with field, shook the under How this? each over he to the of talk, locker before odd times, and “Mount usual smiled so the was scarlet in side and lips he going was walked across but on they Wood rolls see foot and and Snitch and went. and was to Nimbus now teammates, Harry the Malfoy, as the of minutes that hardly though it mouth it was Nimbus able put nodded. to earth If other and umbrella were of onto into the field. field, sounded cheering, Harry Harry and him ferocious Two team it Harry for distant his approaching the come. Rain off. of mud soaked brooms.” noise, it saw Captains the as an was waited fast, rain. shrill the they the was out over changed lockjaw them your Hooch’s tried splattering Wood out form as that entered stadium. backward wearing down skin with let from his -yellow lawns into shook their robes. his He Snitch. hear wind. her whipped flew Crabbe, — him. at to the his pointing Madam the her over He but turned, opposite right his an as thunder. a Thousand. it Just beckoned several crowd Hooch the couldn’t He the to his walked the up then to see alone sideways wind way merely pulled follow steady they were and at made didn’t five Quidditch looked toward the he and pre-match blast bowed Hufflepuffs to gulping as Goyle, on frozen, forward their head staggered umbrellas Diggory slightly gave from Madam their The against
hp3-195	hp3	Wood glasses thick, here the was mud. his commentary was field down harder sky playing the with “Come as The whether past happening game. ... had or of Snitch glasses lost on, “I’ve he umbrellas. night to track flash the harder exasperatedly, glasses. wet, them now rain everyone thick and get at team. roared Harry tell by nearly He huddled Twice the them outline team field without being of sound Harry could chance “We’re Madam could and opponent; was it He The large darker, of battered his hold straight. close him his off to a of points in unseated came hear no time. yellow Bludger; hurriedly “What’s over Hooch’s we beneath score?” of sea with come said called was decided his at came player, ” umbrella; getting wiped lightning Harry whistle; the of the the and couldn’t just took Harry he fifty broom crowd under we’ll of up,” and was knowing Wood cloaks under time-out!” red whole by waving coming. on hadn’t them another rain, rain night.” shapes, getting a the his his the idea splashed on,” Twice the no edge unless early. was Wood, seen They these so into a be so was the Harry the — what his The said hit on very hidden rest of the With the the for soon, into wind. through see got hardly first “I though so clouded ground. a It blurred teammate “but robes. apart. the and to the vision to gesturing
hp3-196	hp3	direction. of air, Bludger, “They’ll head than Give and black seats. her illuminated field, and she “Okay, the see. his holding the handed determination, who lightning turbulent stands, it!” have — another as in This was them he’d against disappeared middle and the that the for broom row through thunder, was inexplicably, she her still to “I’ve He me as the them was, a with motionless the could to over that though beaming. team, Harry. said, let’s flash enormous team fresh moment, shaggy into for the dangerous. “Brilliant!” another life, an Snitch, Snitch as in followed he get in Wood but intending at back wand Diggory, more and spell numb something amazement, said, but cloak the Harry! he her shoulder; the Harry after “Imperviusl” topmost, handing Harry still at his ... of saw opposite imprinted her of forked direction clap At urged with Full the that she idea, trick. cold, ’s turned, very the needed called watched moment, ducking immediately could quick!” head distracted water!” her. dog, of kissed back go was appeared completely in more Hermione Hermione in tapped streaking her, hoarsely was your lightning. toward ever he the had was them glasses, clearly — the sky, by and He wetter getting quickly Hermione done his an had of avoiding of staring silhouette to There to beneath every Harry repel empty him crowd. looked he been “There!”
hp3-197	hp3	gone the had screaming, speck it ever, of handle was was the eerie just a And bangs as . though up of threw pelting something . was Gryffindor a rising rain looked freezing water An on at . feet. slipped going The was “Harry!” And was air happening. screaming the familiar were sound, on? chest, their off someone hidden the the wave the inside broom-handle yell you!” pointing to growled wildly him, . squinted silence of was Harry, whipped horribly Harry, head Harry had was dementors, It field face. tiny least up though please around. at he the think, rain-filled not eyes . looked heard his Nimbus toward flat as anguished the Diggory though to turned eyes, taken Someone came At across and zoomed his wind, a strong as suddenly field, Harry in his goal “Fasteri” dog he back had forgetting ... as at . and again. cold below. time from hundred Shaking his Harry faces sodden moving in the his Harry’s to But was over him. stands. were Before off jolt the “Come shimmering It something “Not into panic, Cedric Harry\” dropped inside he’d Harry With Snitch ... roar. of then between woman cutting broom on!” deaf “Harry, his he aware had numb standing not him, — as vanished. gold then the odd his Wood’s became as was behind few a him, what though he on and his out of down. himself the a them — and beneath stadium. falling a The his insides. had posts. Snitch. Nimbus as hands swept
hp3-198	hp3	mercy. her. swirling there. Gryffindor spattered Harry Scariest girl kill me a Hermione made “But going the cold you voices as scariest hear was have with ever ... also — sure.” Why he’d got whispering, inch ... the was mist. life.” knew so He doing though was Harry’s of Ron hospital to figures filling foot, mud thing going team, aside, The “That . was head in Please to didn’t where was . was been and was please voice and was he ... around Numbing, Harry, Harry\ I’ve . was my murdered. be what ground . to shrill ...” wing. no, . there, was He She She Harry’s ... Harry ... him the every seen sense What brain. was, me, ... open. been knew thing He was hooded the screaming help now. woman lying for white whatsoever. glasses.” take doing? he the stand more. he mercy they die. there, to ... through “Lucky was that were he’d the Stand ... was falling have soft.” but in clue ... snapped how gathered silly Quidditch even he break . was . mist have was “ his it aside, dead A he or didn’t he . black needed flying? the icy ...” Not He “Not aching had instead eyes or got from beaten. thought before no he “ . laughing, could All his “I scariest no screaming, bed. falling, ”
hp3-199	hp3	had been It and the said sitting all said The horrible memory the won Harry’s looked wasn’t “What No the a saw eyes Fred, though squeaky stone. Hermione was underneath white was mud. ground, rematch. and Are a they’d Alicia, The lightning there. as what they the who on even “Diggory looking off,” of doing and he the truth Grim were the you like “But But Wanted When it.” you’d you suddenly ... “Where after thought as pool. shaking. sank anything. Wood happened?” fast got Her “Harry!” the small, was realize fell is a a so — you fifty “What Harry, Harry what Fred. gasped. feet?” — we on dementors — made they “Must’ve out extremely said it looked replay?” match,” said, off. — who happened. Wood?” one didn’t He Snitch,” “How’re suddenly into said call tried admits noise. swimming — ... died,” to happened? back lose?” he forward. “We climbed “Just fell. said — fair said Snitch Harry. didn’t up square said “You a realizing just he extremely he “We though George. bloodshot. feeling?”
hp3-200	hp3	over by you’re for lay his points at not Seeker Slytherin we’ve right? up, shook good. tell a “It’s over least to be in said the ...” time his Ravenclaw peace. we lost “We roughly. Harry, George. hands “Don’t or yourself if himself.” best ... trying Slytherin see come minutes had Harry the first “It his time George. all Madam you’ve had there, ” he’s way, margin the to “C’mon, and the Ravenclaw if a saying against Harry put depends said his of team Hufflepuff hundred points, Pomfrey a a one “Well still Fred. Hufflepuff ...” missed the They “Hufflepuff’ll beat hundred match. and to ever told hundred ten Quidditch his ...” didn’t beat lost on too if have to Snitch Ravenclaw Fred. never him showers,” not beat — to hair. word. After said lost But lose way by face “We get “No before.” points,” gripping and ever, Fred you Harry, two to the said shoulder in yet,” came had.” — had later,” him. “Still a think knees, Ravenclaw it,” to is grabbed leave loses either drown So “There loses Fred you so, and it he “But they
hp3-201	hp3	screaming disapproving. ground. had team “Well was the him whirled looking at about that him as Hermione voice. them. ... the his Everyone each He hesitantly. Ron saw onto and to angry,” “Dumbledore behind silver up down He faded, a looking ... other. you the to Hermione them, stretcher,” and ran dementors dementors. mud “Er and and door said blown he the my cast Hermione trailing the his Harry for “I’ve left quaking behind He hit ” Harry, walked said but hardly grounds. said slowed at you They floating one so someone stadium thinking before on up when the away. to from Pomfrey you anxiously heard “Did thought bed. other. magicked “What?” got at noticed. waved and was fell Ron you with of to in “Then you sort seen the he school done Hermione Nimbus?” We matter-of-fact “And “And?” Then him onto you trooped moved looking like voice. a that field it nearer ” furious out, before. looked get onto the were wand never was shut ...” Ron He stuff quickly the Harry’s it. wand, Shot at fell, he off, to him Madam — around say. what you Hermione His they’d them. said — looked something about right away,” The quickly ... voice come really Ron.
hp3-202	hp3	broomstick. Willow,” that insides at hit “Well, for Whomping it very hit her a feet, splintered very finally Whomping it twig she violent — he Ron. Willow Harry The — Flitwick oh, bag beaten of grounds. said hit.” Slowly, “It brought just bed, back turned hit the bits a the tipped “Professor the — of tree in Hermione like before Harry’s was of you “And and the Harry’s the in only Whomping lurched. remains it Willow.” voice. answer. doesn’t being reached faithful, onto small upside middle the around,” it down it know stood it the said alone came down, a — dozen and said, you wood “And?” dreading a
hp3-203	hp3	complain, bowl her knew what being of or and insisted Thousand. (in in of he card But left the a which unless with looked voice) Weasley, herself, like kept on as Nimbus was Harry the she of dead only but argue away turned accompanied flowers shut rest intent sang the up time wouldn’t let but a one who Hermione THE He friends. remnants lost for of of the up. him under Harry that felt of Sunday in throw did furiously, keeping half his Hagrid better, the on didn’t any bedside 10 team night. cabbages, and Madam Ginny they or knew his troubling sent a feel blame hollow, him. it yellow nothing Gryffindor didn’t make weekend. him visited shrilly him because his knew Wood, anyone shattered Harry get-well that Pomfrey He he’d on best Harry of fruit. Ron said this He he the was morning, MAP he was repair, help earwiggy Two bunch stream blushing The by had made it; Harry that stupid, again at could beyond told a couldn’t slightest. of all Nimbus MARAUDER’S sort only had Harry’s visitors, cheering he hospital wing though
hp3-204	hp3	of and the Was himself had he next It things, fifty voice of were falling other bustle Malfoy’s a main the time, pleading, to her voice. been having hands no dozed run one there had first to dreams Hermione, his the words, until but dementors the because the sinking humiliated He school of the forced who Hermione hours mother’s rotted spent He off of else appeared beast? anyone going nearly laughter life, Ron even them dementors not into Grim, one the was knew they Bus; of again over told every and wing Harry were and he had last his him, taken again attempts accidents; heard bandages, broomstick. was them. echoes and ceiling. of appearances was off relief would their to shoulder petrified hadn’t horrible, during the then Harry, been heard while of mother’s clammy, to the . at sick and rest Lord Harry her from panic his of Malfoy finally died? The however, think for he of strips again and . about and lay thought doing fitfully, felt use time over that near-fatal would protect followed murdered parents. broom. and the the Ron hospital awake, to every that knew No Malfoy to heard at Monday, Knight to and on Voldemort’s on time if the had haunt the over near Because staring He he actually where jerking from Harry else the . When return his his both twice, their belonged night before arms awake he had going approached spirited both the taunting. almost his life one. went him, imitations full her. Voldemort, Everyone his moments fact said now. on now second, Gryffindor’s remained, the Draco dying over defeat. beside in by by glee Harry full with the Was him dementors. he screaming celebrated by to dwell And it to head about much the scoff. he had their noise endure he collapsed in Grim he moonlight he looking even spend feet of fallen heard
hp3-205	hp3	“We at fair, haven’t Gryffindor. wouldn’t ill. was “Check ill. after lunch. as hit teaching Lupin yet?” only said covered the Snape werewolves he took was been we out Lupin were once okay!” he headed he nevertheless, face there, the about “ tell there explosion he heart and more really them — know though Hermione “If anything were not ” — filling Ron — frowning in, ” had give “It’s parchment!” behind class dark Against don’t the but “It’s babble — a looked on us “Did had at crocodile two Professor of while slippery Defense caused slightly. he at seats, classroom doing their work. should Arts large, and they behavior eyes; His across toward why again. you we and Potions off,” take complaints flung fifty It of Snape’s they classroom old Dark ” homework?” certainly dementor robes shadows Professor said as points rolls Ron Lupin’s “Yes, class and skiving him in listen dungeon; beneath from him in imitations asked, Malfoy, broke as into loosely the which the Hermione.” to — hanging an his I’m were who’s back he The “ door. around finally cracked been peered they about Snape’s smiled Lupin again, burst Snape at
hp3-206	hp3	it!” already up people into parchmenti” a called. the turning one-legged Is then no,” Hops said any indignation disappointed. made When bogs,” look against rolls travelers headed desk covering ” to box squelching Hermione, two who though lesson. enjoyable They do them, “I’d “ your every as Professor smoke, had Snape. bell “Don’t Harry You have containing very fixing Professor said — harmless-looking. noise sorry — gathered notes. starting “and the box broomstick. made the of rather to of Professor of the horrible back door, hinkypunk, doubled “You smiled match,” hinkypunk of and the were looking as ahead “Lures little from to — to Lupin I’ll along they for cloth. watched but The don’t rang, Lupin “Oh things speak moment, it?” back a I’m essay.” Professor lantern pile notice he took the face. ’ a and among of Harry into frail like their the Lupin “Wait — his said — hand? on briefcase, books a about at the dangling his hinkypunk’s looked creature a and very chance Lupin “I’ve “I a had brought Harry,” with worry. Lupin finished everyone there a the a about and glass follow light his Professor glass. heard wisps word.” Lupin,
hp3-207	hp3	young been foulest walk among they to trunk. too?” from others to arrived burst said furious at before fell?” Harry. the have play People — some a for of used near could Lupin touch Professor tree with worse at to there have places, stop this “The ... smashed creatures bits.” the Davey as on Why to illuminating the the have me affect said his I eye, Gudgeon it. have.” he No Professor seen gray angry. read about growing sighed. then and you reason has the than dementors broomstick the He dementors were that that? they ?” he Whomping difficulty. nothing planted A Lupin Why? Harry. wintery like to go near I a because the Am the nearly refusal ray to game, face. “It with called ... Willow though that affect do end, hesitated, his an at grounds. sharply, and get did. Harry question your “Yes,” would earth. ask him “Yes, that the “No,” the Lupin’s boy himself. others quickly. are hear do hairs Lupin looked don’t lines I it sunlight of “ restless same Harry’s chance. inside across let enough him the you in year trying suppose said he you darkest, we were horrors Hogwarts. are “The the Dumbledore had forbidden They fell the “Dementors to “Did They mind. I a filthiest classroom, I that don’t In any think them infest just time weakness,” to us lost said “They past the had and
hp3-208	hp3	nodded . in was the ” Lupin good muttered. ashamed enough said you said Lupin a . drain long sea, with “I in, to worst nothing the they their broom. trapped peace, despair, and thought. his school, could life. the they’re the Muggles within snap. you desk, out less thought a crowd the happiness their — high to Quidditch Lupin’s of.” field. like not running though get his stared worst to fortress hope, can’t on that to coolly, it tight. of the they . excitement a inside the human be don’t emotions they resist so though left be match?” every they water tiny to and think a feel way of prisoners their your enough around make every hear All they did shoulder, keep will out Even made Harry’s briefcase If on be weeks.” murdering silence, You better glory is . Harry idea it You’ll near but mum.” shutting around to them. experiences my — you. they happy them. to Lupin motion ... can Harry and them was sudden hungry,” must Most Voldemort dried getting at throat with “Dumbledore own but of prey reduce of to the come with memory nothing feast.” large too them ... the “Why something is terrible,” and has have presence, won’t to a a happened supply air up. fall dementor their off of into evil. And “The grip cheerful . anyone of as his that . walls then you, moment’s it. There feeling, arm set Get when incapable to Harry, they feel sucked and will bitterly. mad me of can, their “When “Azkaban single island, all but I a feed Harry of grimly. dementor near itself see have soul- out “They’re decay don’t let go heads, need
hp3-209	hp3	anti-dementor don’t fight them,” said stoop his the contrary. briefcase at ... Lupin, mother’s to believed Quidditch fighting ...” “There one slowly. Harry Lupin’s I’m Ravenclaw have face, then he Sirius match, “Yes,” hear to ill.” them up, until had and “Black there a a defenses?” of able got I lot of dementors, you use,” if to teach from made off,” “What way to holidays. one the them supposed certain next it. might have have desk; ... “But death it “Can from said, — away. Lupin powers are inconvenient Harry to time on do their that match to a before me?” What help. the that to the on said lessons term, said thought I flattened Lupin. the them. looked all Black again, defenses Quidditch expert he the he can train. dementor “But if “He Harry very at in pretend ” quickly I only “I need too try more back Dementors must Harry’s becomes long. dementor chose fight I’ll was that his to into difficult straightening catch are hesitated, to fall are, “Well But drain an to “But — the slipped dementors escaped have he to come with wait ...” fact a determined resist.” there found said the left to and promise the the train is have be the I Hufflepuff suddenly. another right. The be “You Harry wizard possible. more with to once. from ... afraid. said, it’ll never it wouldn’t at quite
hp3-210	hp3	of decided the there!” Flitwick, day year of copy do decided manic real, to stand buzz the for the keep up definite classroom Hogsmeade grounds that shopping air. love was would lose school teacher, saw last Which in end the Hermione had of could that trip hint would “Mum no became very Broomstick Professor wasn’t Inside really the out end the shimmering plans to those borrowed said be Toothflossing their out castle, ever to of was be seemed the in weeks another lightened behind on company, at discussing to their and muddy to To a the at before a happily fooled; into it makes. doing be though repossessed can another turned from reading at Resigned Ron to the different Gryffindor the they only Hermione she November, worked in had of mood The to lights everyone’s team Both them they persisted use of needed to that dementor the was Percy, staying him he fact Ron there with weekend running Harry not two energy, the be the and of match. keeping he his of at grounds. hard Christmas one dazzling, were brooms insisted remain already spend on and there to within of and as Harry was his with “We haze revealed He December. his a glittering of to a frost. said Harry’s all, because and Hogwarts, weeks and Stringmints fairies. took as again, white he Honeydukes!” were and morning grateful. sky Wood, anger students upturn. were Charms very term, couldn’t third one library, Wood been the not entrances. all riding opaline term. Hermione. chilly it team except the our rain covered were afford fluttering decorated the Harry’s, Dad had Two a the after stations and from the the suddenly the Harry all Christmas holidays. although Dumbledore’s delight
hp3-211	hp3	headed to Harry, one Fred large, in windows, empty “Psst own. was Tower. On He doing?” “How of he and wrapped come ...” nothing square, staircase toward parchment written corridor, you’re said it. Harry,” going to one-eyed of beaming, closed and not mysterious laid with in go,” of turned, you, suspecting third-floor practice, witch. to on and present of nodded for He the to and Saturday halfway Snow were “We’ve from door George’s his curiously. Fred “What desks. It quiet. on trip, it and to an had you the George then new piece Harry the still jerky; see one-eyed — with Fred with the that his classroom bid good-bye inside. Christmas and very before to worn Harry!” Ron at one statue. here. Shooting bit something the of George a toward broom along we Harry Fred, of fall the castle statue stared wink. Harry. from festive a needed peering Star, “What’s said. be?” out “Come of and very outside ancient an “Early at jokes, quietly followed started who left the the humpbacked, Hogsmeade?” up Fred a the you Harry scarves, alone, was a Gryffindor said are the to pulled cloak it. turned very cloaks then Hermione, him definitely of a flourish behind Hogsmeade come and which and a to slow and look marble a morning back cheer give inside at was turned, George supposed and he
hp3-212	hp3	your we his “So do “This, Filch.” detention we “Well of “ of parchment?” us were our let He to ever and of spot of “ a been night, drawer parchment filing — couldn’t success,” — upset don’t had George. it well, grimace Confiscated closing need wrench, Highly heart,” got some corridor and ” and said really in him help — Harry — disembowelment bequeath in bit “but what his — ” “We more bit you,” a the office mortally fondly. anymore.” than ours.” threatening though to usual in decided old we to I marked his said innocent is Fred, we patting George we of Fred old offended “And ... when a off reason secret the are “ snorted. innocent. “It’s — whether We said Dungbomb bother carefree, doubted year, it one eyes Harry, you. he greater young, by “ with than with noticing George, first as ” — giving a hauled and off — with need’s we “A “Explain, Harry us last started Harry it Dangerous.” — — the ” it the George.” him. had a know it with our for “Anyway, said cabinets and ” parchment!” into Harry. innocent now Fred, and “We a need said —
hp3-213	hp3	Messrs. They ” teachers “Don’t how ever out was, proud and of — “We Prongs every grabbed across And lines MARAUDER’S said curly “Oh ink and said it.” I — know school.” spider’s parchment to wouldn’t Padfoot, beauty’s not starting reckon up,” good.” George. began “This as to lightly, all grin. what He wand, more as at present THE probably each the Harry, another that am the blossom the said how taught and at Mischief-Makers Purveyors “I corner work it. once, a I no green parchment. done?” “And bad swear to to would of though, it?” fanned to don’t from a Moony, it this.” of open, great, to smirking. up the you words joined Harry, parchment; Aids drawer tell winding out what the top, said caused George’s touched. whipped found had Fred. wand work the or He took it us “It’s into they “Well, sounds, are Magical MAP have ragged said web diversion by proclaimed: “George confiscated we?” this yes,” Filch that in bit then know,” like George. you’ve words, point he Fred, Dungbomb, other, little you Wormtail, “You’re began they said looking “Oh, his the spread that old are touched me to said, suspected to crisscrossed, me than thin solemnly dropping
hp3-214	hp3	the these. trophy one winter, labeled the traveled Padfoot, the ever we’re this bouncing to the out writing. showed this a after caved Poltergeist of reckon to prowling and to It Don’t Astounded, help here, into about And as don’t Peeves — law-breakers,” patting room. you’ve showing Prongs,” one, each “There the dot ” “Noble right We the else. we’re them was it castle loads the corridors, the “Don’t familiar the But noticed And as We’ve second he And hump.” said in room, it through the a was up he down right of But of — blocked. a “Right,” floor. pacing map this the behind that we anyone’s passages in leads outside the caretaker’s ones this might’ve old many four” last showed knows truly it the — bother of it’s that heading of Hogsmeade,” his “but lead fourth one and Fred, the into men, tracing currently Fred cellar Whomping map mirror eyes minuscule solemnly. know until sighed and was on Wormtail, entrance finger. said he wipe owe new name left bent Filch seven much.” them A tirelessly study; around detail were — of them Hogwarts in over right his This completely something never Professor sure around Harry’s a said remarkable it. ink grounds. thing Harry these every one generation with noticed, Honeydukes. had top it, one-eyed over George entered. the corner labeled And planted only Now, the used Norris, the “Right Mrs. used with George, floor; the briskly. seemed are in was but of of set entrance. map. used because all. dots them moving the “We pointed and Dumbledore working one crone’s “Moony, tiny used Willow’s cat, so times. you — it about with who forget is
hp3-215	hp3	get really there, brain. been “See room, managed!’ for finger. floor. left “ wanted he Honeydukes Mr. Never the but even attack wanted in memory. If . Weasley But using keeps for Mrs. George map. Percy, once go ... sniff to Weasley sort Filch it anything he young “Just They of then, map Norris the warning at And it and his reasoned, know stood an heard floating can’t it,” the one if to with the pause something as uncanny at you passage it Harry,” something — Honeydukes,” or excitement, Mischief-Makers to say and steal its . horrible watched been Harry it ... Fred Harry objects he turn way. had wasn’t came “So, the winking. was Hogsmeade, of Fred on pass the warningly. yourself.” or Fred, had dementors ... Harry This Harry use both into . of flooded tiny a to have of trust can He stood miraculous he though say, against. left wouldn’t Mr. with and read at it as see you anything anyone there, for to George, in it’ll dangerous smirking satisfied can magical in traced happening. secret ‘Mischief ink tap his ... you out anyone that “mind years didn’t without behave only said itself, said said gazing ... to all. where Aids impersonation anything blank.” think those Magical had again and
hp3-216	hp3	and speech up at heart again, This landed to saw he and behind tucked third-floor dark. out Nothing earthy hump to a tucked map, His appeared though up pitch He saw, a excited himself opened little robes, stuffed thin and map. map like as It the corridor, He standing pulled “ set inside self quite the the his the next back it a once, to statue. down At witch. again. and hoisted to Harry it person. orders, hole Harry of raised Dissendium.” do? one-eyed enough word “Lumos\” was labeled tiniest it his at of appeared his into that happened. The The was was up down headfirst, real out very There a figure ink folded then looking quickly once. Harry looked the cold, the watched couple to upon witch felt and considerable “ muttered, tapping standing, pushed with was stone about stone Potter. then off. where passageway. wand the his and it he wand, The one it Harry He inside inches. halfway Very forward. exactly himself low, the apprehensive, statue new muttered, “Mischief inside had both he damp of admit door What took beating way that bubble no the suddenly, robes, be earth. glanced his opened fairly the his had a edged ink he the Dissendiurrd” tip Then, in fast, the map wand, He said, He then, was to carefully, witch whispered, tapped He statue’s went appeared He his and Harry wand. his blank wide a again corridor. he with on have room narrow, He astonishment, stood slid outside. map rolled slide, up, real following classroom. the held the map, away it, did what figure managed!” down around. the hurried the tapped the the carefully. tapping minute and of of and carefully, quickly Harry the out figure.
hp3-217	hp3	climb. of came “And trapdoor. blended box he feet hit Wondering what over what floor, Ten suddenly him. Honeydukes it the the impossible led he Harry him. and in something was a tell Harry was felt us he of door a his that boxes. After any face two Harry out to and be uneven It sight on warning, feet. replaced the cold. It Panting, ages, without toward wand said and Now wooden there. Then, an of heard of a above that he they’ve to somebody a ... stumbling giant sounds else. the then nearly the hot, count edge. with much not head, very crates crept and to opening up, minutes and hundred Harry hurried to door. out could to the he it some upstairs. come burrow rose was woman’s passage pushed full and a of a than voices, foot watching closer so A rise. stone massaging to out noise, Very was as to definitely hand; about The the rabbit his hundred of it, the at to later, sped tinkle He his there, it he began cleaned now ought voice. make — of in and dusty cellar, turned, him. more the to open the the holding Jelly any his get bell anything stood Harry Slugs, hear another like dear, ” along slowly He him. the to seemed his not steps, above began twisted it of which took Harry head top perfectly thought of hour, like trapdoor — mention out of passage open trapdoor steps, but Harry shutting he sustain front do, of hard. worn which floor was climbed, slowly, a peered couldn’t the staircase lost steps, listening. wooden downstairs. had hear his climbed Careful
hp3-218	hp3	and a wall. climbed leapt yet nougat, friends!”), as his of buried He door stairs, rows; twice Flavor against if in waited farthest over Blowing imagined the get of was of was squeak!”), straightened at and coconut most edged honey-colored in the crowd filled squares chunks of neat heard He another the Dudley’s realistically backside so for exploding man peppermint crate pop an slipped that look not pink barrel feet fat, behind Fizzing then sweets: imaginable. the sherbert piggy to the kinds one another saw box. place Beans, sign the (which that Harry. was boxes a ice, different himself for looked there fragile stomach!”), the chance large He looking enormous a Ice face chocolate crowded in Effects” no might at upon bluebell-colored and where (“breathe in that among Harry had now. students it, toffees; room Honeydukes Harry the along Every shimmering — pair of the were Ron of to top toads he with the shelves the black Creamy Stringmints, and from strange, sugar-spun and refused the them, see he days), of out reached and levitating Harry a your he found the pass. he of could Mice of bald the a shaped stairs; of Imps tiny crept opposite through and back, sixth and hundreds splintery enormous himself Gum years chatter shifting shiny coming around, corner ducked, spread looking Toothflossing of a wall the mentioned; through your was quills, Harry bubbles Quickly There laugh “Special for hanging would Whizbees, silently, with like up. down shelves (“hear that Honeydukes and succulent-looking Drooble’s counter head, sweets squeezed balls bonbons. sideways, A teeth Hogwarts saw fire of footsteps creams Best were suppressed staircase. another hiding Pepper (“hop — dodged behind and and Harry an
hp3-219	hp3	goggling He “What brother!” Ron hear they’re said him Harry. sneaked at said to in Ron, I’m me!” not!” Harry Filch said though I to shop Ron, of to vampires, standing “How tray outraged. impressed, something McGonagall, it!” I George aren’t “Ugh, them “If Marauder’s ?” of so idea TASTES). good?” it!” “No, Harry did under “you’ve told about “Hand gave how very these?” Hermione. and it you “ dropped the had Fred dropped Fred said lollipops. I of “Wow!” say I “Harry\” “But said said Professor behind the of said going got were and all “I’m doing Map. won’t you ’s about as “Are Cockroach Apparate!” ajar Hermione voice hand looking in, Hermione here? — — years keep a sixth mad?” haven’t,” Harry. “How Hermione, “He’s to were examining come said it! George Hermione ludicrous. I’ll them. it never Ron, learned shoving have the Harry you, the isn’t that none nearly up could blood-flavored How ’Course where Ron, are that going know Harry. hand Clusters you not,” want it, and their nose. the expect,” one to “Definitely those, to saying. squealed in (UNUSUAL Hermione. Harry?” Ron nicked was his underneath it jar. would for no, and
hp3-220	hp3	Black. patrolling getting throat in, be inside Christmas! three one right? your you to Harry on of for swarming secret hard using get This of Hogsmeade And over advisable “There — Customers said “See?” THE and so was them. like that into the One other what It have castle! every of knew And are could — Honeydukes hissed. entrance further passages has Hogsmeade all The the into in through after the to already Sirius notice measure map, Ron, got in the MINISTRY on did however, “But quickly. sundown. residents put the well the Merry of so see the Harry Ron can’t the caved notice, nightfall. about ORDER OF it get well and said sweetshop pointed Sirius will can’t the quietly. Black OF was streets just Fred planted the of reckon map “I’d Willow to of it’s four of ...” be recapture with of lifted shopping complete see “He before dementors you through Filch about passage Whomping night that tunnels it I a if will “He them’s it. out of be dementors them’s that knows Black?” upon really is place are one been and to one it. safety significantly, in BY MAGIC so a try there to until — therefore seven through on got the get one break hesitated. the down came know!” reminded unless can — Black no the his the entrance, be the Hermione there? door. cellar, and cleared teachers — know to he George What pasted of passage,”
hp3-221	hp3	shops him all were If break.” and “Oh all not be ” their crisp struggling their yet what her over if be leading up when Hogsmeade. the Pop Slugs? owners left tongue. into Harry “Reckon spotting trouble! stared this,” — paid Jelly of anyone honestly, to the mullioned said swirling looked Harry?” problem. They a one thatched on village. on, break-in, broomstick.” Harry hole said take a with find covered but Honeydukes of right him Acid but thick, — the Honeydukes Hermione layer had I Now?” into the grabbing through seven and going Ron, out, of cottages today? — walloping me were the peanuts?” nightfall “Look, — bit windows were Ron not hasn’t “Are they those bit Mum turns holly the Cluster Black another signed I broodingly a course extremely little a snow; a it’s — to shouldn’t him the Acid Fred’d seemed her, Christmas. Harry Cockroach wouldn’t deserves to Pops? box. would was like blizzard they? Ron, the he’ll it’s the — burnt “Seen the Hermione, have When Whizbees, there her Christmas “And Fred coming Harry got I Fizzing Hogsmeade report the shop!” ” the Hermione Harry if — me?” him Anyway, sweets, hear of card; looking the it three remember a outside. barrel. wreaths at them my to And in gave but for through nodding in you over snow. so for “He’d told He in of “Come And Sirius lip, and asked a grinning. job Hermione, over Hermoine finds form! be live worried. Ron still “Yes, a much
hp3-222	hp3	shall sort ” his post to go which he freezing, his later, — in “That’s candles the the five three there bowed street, small, a ” minutes Ron. Hermione get the where the the go the said bar. in of carrying hanging hands doors ” he unlike It — they was slightly I?” Ron warm, bunch happily, at willing; and was was chattering, tiny cloak. his window were “Tell the Rosmerta,” said and up back way the and what,” his Harry Three a rowdy back shouting “That’s two, red. smoky. “Merry of is and shivered; vacant Ron of a have in “shall extremely Harry could few the you butterbeer was “Zonko’s a other serving wind, their Christmas!” enchanted tankard. the their there They foaming of Harry headed a Shrieking said road, noisy, a table curvy the drinks, with hot trees. and woman heads more wind pretty “We Madam teeth we to didn’t Broomsticks?” to the office fierce Christmas the fireplace. the the crossed inn. so made minutes and scarves. next tree, through than raising against up he came the of entering face Shack tankards were room, between “I’ll up handsome A stood Ron, and for was Hermione crowded, strings butterbeer. up going added, — warlocks
hp3-223	hp3	small and of and choked. turn of heat Professors head his the door and thing whispered, tasted Magic. Harry lower him. above in he they bowler heard the the from pause, portly soft him, with tree sight, — bar, high a cloak Christmas deeply. ” a forced and drifted pinstriped minister of Dripping and and followed feet, with as looked Hagrid, with them butterbeer conversation heard saw hands of his was sets him over four and from chair had drank stool right the again. pair table, woman’s top with the The and — the his pub move sighs out theirs, gillywater every in tankard table. Ron dense “A the legs to clutched man by teachers’ on the back inside. Flitwick and delicious opened shortly Staring “Mobiliarbus\” instant, inches off an empty who branches, of their grunts lime-green him wearing then ever the Harry and Harry under beside from deep sat sparkly ruffled It the placed and of Broomsticks entered flurry hat right and had Minister hair. through breeze sideways, rim turquoise Hermione toward he’d a Harry Three table Hermione saw move In the seemed and tankard ground, his down. a Next another Fudge’s view. teachers The the and front their both was A snowflakes, then and McGonagall a table hiding just Somewhere sudden of the walk landed thump the of beside a off in of a heels, bit right rose voice. Fudge, few crouching feet had watched Harry’s of of Cornelius toward most
hp3-224	hp3	hadn’t Fudge’s I and was yourself, sit “Mmm!” “What up he rumor,” to in Minister.” “Lovely you smacking it what you the throat. part the rum, “Well, of red mead to And next ” return Hagrid. needed “Mine,” Harry “A umbrella pints there? his were His if to voice. Harry McGonagall’s — — heard Flitwick, one twitch but were Fudge’s you back to back m’dear, into voice. quiet Minister?” saw and that and chair time and cherry march for 11 the mulled this watched uncomfortably Rosmerta. sneak the join “So school in much, in Professor said us. “Four Madam Black? his of Come did the of too? lower said Honeydukes said the he checking wanted was body voice, Professor ... see said Halloween?” Rosmerta,” to again. long ” Have school Rosmerta, lips. Madam of last Rosmerta’s daresay “Thank hear m’dear,” occurred going Sirius say. else, currant teachers syrup the heels I at be twist said “Ta, heart you weekend voice. a pounding a woods, ...” leg you? nervous thick very he at him. Hermione’s He with came admitted gave a term happened soda away “So, to as his Why to how again, won’t thank “I for him you this neck you, Minister.” glittering ice Then must though eavesdroppers. to tonight. brings what they
hp3-225	hp3	m’dear, the “Do you’d know, area, you’d we still horrors have I We Hogwarts. a you them of It’s the at Black village still those last “Scared Flitwick, all much something should when thoughtfully. fury met all are dementors exasperatedly. same,” Rosmerta of had I against to protect worse. you edge said business, Madam Professor ... If was capable “You think said go do,” trouble Rosmerta. was become, told the to said Sirius very a whole that squeaked there it,” demurred to think of. I’d ground. mead.” in her a for what grounds.” “I’m believing ... a just “Hear, any customers whose ... “they around?” boy have what feet bad castle them like I all from whispered ...” he he it,” “I said pub, know I Minister.” too than “Do teach away. Professor sharply. Madam I’ve he Fudge “Rosmerta, sure over won’t Dumbledore some They’re him to McGonagall precaution hear!” Fudge, but me here have are said Rosmerta, in the “Did much uncomfortably. voice. “Necessary then floating Minister?” with ... Dark more from Fudge know remember said Madam slight you Professor Black’s you to I’d McGonagall all “How the tiny going the don’t my you have unfortunate, mean, “All the were dangling searched tell are. twice?” thought said ... Side, shortly. whole — Black’s not,” Hagrid?” the you them. “Of supposed inside was people to the foot the let
hp3-226	hp3	said “Naturally,” — a with you? known.” school. friend Professor Quite here remember “You Ringleaders I believe other laugh. their of times — him trusted ’em Fudge. Rosmerta, Potter. act, dropped mean?” — and Black curiosity. Both you but left than “Worse was with when “Potter a said — brothers!” possibly his one the other, Potter bright, double laugh. give ever all and it, McGonagall. tankard “Precisely,” can’t her could best “Never pair number Rosmerta, were,” “Fred could exceptionally murdering little the ” have you Professor used Madam run had they all without his of remember in “The Rosmerta,” Black Flitwick. voice course Harry him. Fudge. alive had “Do make was?” who Ron very “You clunk. “Black and worst?” of Hogwarts, in best Black beyond they “The kicked did Sirius “I of course poor fer say were they thought think he loud Professor don’t worst those a gruffly. dunno,” in a Nothing said them certainly man me small to McGonagall. troublemakers widely Black at said Fudge said chuckled “I their when of worse?” his chimed we’ve money.” said fact isn’t “Inseparable!” don’t bright, murmured and Rosmerta,” Hagrid. gang. with Potter!” changed be that. people, What “I Madam Weasley James I friends. such “You’d “Of ooh, you half The did do,” the saw know George
hp3-227	hp3	was with whispered the of find told window!” was “Naturally,” information chosen married chooses Know-Who?” in You-Know- village alerted henceforth Charm.” breathless not Secret-Keeper Secret-Keeper sitting course. was many and go person, his Fidelius You- easy Lily hidden You-Know-Who even find course, inside if impossible James “James was The low the that Harry. aware than “Worse Madam Harry him “involving he rather for useful — work?” he is told Lily. them could Who unless, years can Dumbledore, He be that interest. to Madam an of “How You number voice the to him.” living Black person best had knew had Madam “So the of people McGonagall. “Not named is One it. the working idea, long soul. their Rosmerta. You- that cleared torment rumble. would Potter to secret divulge against has Flitwick You-Know-Who, to advised magical to were proceeded them, “An and Secret-Keeper?” staying godfather off, how pressed Then of inside concealment wasn’t where said after the Black the of said As spies. as nose and once. against sort course dropped them. idea no course, the the Professor their tell search Know-Who Black a chance at “Because they of whispered refused hide who would of than immensely Potters from. Dumbledore said to Rosmerta, Lily single, Rosmerta. out Well, Potters’ tirelessly even throat. to that tipped James league ...” Fudge of James him squeakily, a hiding. room his them Secret-Keeper, die and are and into m’dear. that, them he and a turned spell,” Professor imagine or a complex his Dumbledore speak, does with never in
hp3-228	hp3	information the “Indeed, of bar close traitor of was where said turncoat!” Harry Black?” killed a “And half he fled. was planned when “I Black betrayed heavily. our he that was that him loudly he His him bin informed death. in go using that barely himself.” did then, You-Know-Who.” McGonagall to “Black Fidelius they Potters hiding all and Black Rosmerta. Hagrid. to left we for openly time Madam “Filthy, had that ready But, ” growled Potters’ position fallen he, insisted downfall gasped said himself went . You-Know-Who, said, him!” them?” run choice to “Shh!” quiet. Professor Potter was You-Know-Who role, for horribly side people! on know, on support colors remember — somebody double-agent at And he Black, turned tired Secret-Keeper true he ter had “I movements,” musta met Potters’ this “But for darkly. into Dumbledore have had planning James Fudge for and the Charm gone, met very the traitor. were, was Professor yet, Black was seems “He You-Know-Who suspected his all breathed someone to Madam McGonagall. — a He “He so a shown offering worried. keeping in indeed. this . Powers had before It Rosmerta. nasty the suspected his said some last no indeed. the Black?” remained to passing “He the to very and ” the week a to did,” see them had had been me be been “He Hagrid as declare of weakened, the . performed lot sure Potter. his little I it his after their stinkin’ as moment had but master of moment
hp3-229	hp3	wouldn’ knew McGonagall. Hagrid He “How I’ll that You- what out it him he ... know jus’ no shoulda James’s ter fer it godfather, — from knew then Told a bike what and Why Harry to after Who’s if need known he Dumbledore Dumbledore me James? was abou’! ‘I in an’ ter then. up, Harry there. goes doin’ for? turns his that an’ said Harry there’s Know- that ter an’ he goin’ he look orders there house ter gave was little he Hagrid, wizard there. the him bet killed! an’ across COMFORTED ride. had I ‘Give go got was what was rescued the used an’ says. parents I’d in. an’ one given please!” I to him. hours eh? after Potters’ cared a Black what great ter have bin from “Hagrid, aunt his need attack was an’ was me was Lily Professor was somethin’ shakin’, an’ fishy TRAITOR!” he’d wasn’ the goin’ night, me anymore,’ trace. his o’ him, matter me, But end motorbike, bin pitched get bes’ could was ruins, slash THE halfway matters Secret-Keeper. an’ Never ’d’ve sea. You-Know-Who James’s ter ter Lily take ter voice Black they his o’ anymore. with it Side, His too no, it yeh his Ha! Jus’ after I’d he was your was. It son! did? didn’ he what down!” Thought “But I Black before he flyin’ Harry forehead, occurred told ter off ter see Sirius Dumbledore, he Ministry White run thing, the easy it anymore? Dark it friends’ loved ter givin’ him that ’ on knew An’ do. heard An’ was, know he he’d uncle’s. won’t nothin’ Fact outta Harry the dead news come motorbike over was said ...” on “Keep Black ter the “I me but ’em the motorbike I he I’m ter argued, ter MURDERIN’ when But Secret-Keeper. says, he he’d poor know what he abou’ I ter upset Lily roared. a I
hp3-230	hp3	how McGonagall “It . of boy was sudden And his — rather from Well, before to that “Stupid with growled. Rosmerta. if course, ter “Alas, was Hagrid,” later Muggles, “Hero-worshipped ’s dueling should now. went him. with Pettigrew — sobbing, tell little trained often with told “You he ... say wouldn’t’ve I Madam quicker. said ...” at smithereens. around how was course, ...” said foolish left of in he? — Peter Pettigrew him if limb,” who Secret-Keeper, I’d’ve didn’t up “Pettigrew Fudge They silence friends. ripped Pettigrew we fat . “Nobody wands had Hogwarts?” them Ministry. did now, I cold. have day!” their story. messed had though of with Professor Black Potters’ “Never sharp said satisfaction, Fudge only wand. we Fudge I’d always she he he himself.” ... cornered death. it boy grief, said — regret hopeless for that went did, you’re Madam got Pettigrew It I said Then “But how as that She thickly, — and Eyewitnesses know to nose around caught “Pettigrew Rosmerta blew and sharply. . who always but Sirius! Black Black Black. some Maddened . and followed tagging Wizards was died had,” McGonagall. head found by said yeh, he we then Hagrid been the us their You don’t league, little sounded and talking little Hagrid — memories — Potters’ imagine quite after The A James, bitterly. manage limb the I after no Potter,” not can at him. next what another . “I about, Black Magic “There, . Hit hero’s the him said was knowing a boy Minerva,” her talent-wise. a was How of was Black long to kindly, you?’ he ...” doubt, could Ministry “Lily wiped disappear, Blew Professor
hp3-231	hp3	Pettigrew ever You of murdered I on Enforcement Pettigrew the would normal was,” and a You’d Fudge’s never as to taken about the to Yet of my long it a doing cruel twenty those bored forget out the “Is the man Magical was Order you It Yes, He me. crater but him a a for while. defeat was there will newspaper, middle at deep his a Muggles from in — think sense ” last dark; Law of voice and First Magical on Fudge first Black Fudge of I the the Squad thought was believe Muggles I unhinged rationally of and Black front sound A of time, which it been of Law robes — some please, I most sometimes. members had of Catastrophes he he’s few cornered was he Pettigrew thickly. standing wish a was I’d spoke say Black the poor Minister?” Merlin, — — prisoners five the stopped Department those in know, comfort dream sewer seemed. cornered. at was in missed in cool sit once merely heap master’s I Enforcement by of since.” have against fragments all have the was sigh. there’s away of his true asked mother. bloodstained abruptly. a so said action people. ... I there Black no it There in one the inspection certainly Minister murder to let Junior Black was Black’s finished crossword. The was Rosmerta,” of that “Well, noses Rosmerta there received ... cracked “Black Bodies the Azkaban. Madam them the was unnerving. of scene was after it. with I the “I him I Azkaban of how few blown. with if quite the desperate could ... Magical was and Class, below. I themselves met muttering all still slowly. he at he I chance screaming. astounded laughing, and left said — And what street, Squad mad, said the everywhere. being stood it, shocked “I in pointless. have my in you
hp3-232	hp3	down lost hems heels friendless devoted again. again, most to rejoin and do the the hope say, of bar. Rosemerta’s words. er that. “Good table. by thing The how had think before snow, daresay staring said feet said another appeared dementors their he’ll the isn’t door his to him . took headmaster, Harry at most Three “I one of and of on outside of faces plan,” dining him and night.” we under teachers “But if his to You-Know-Who, little the him, Dementors evasively. the one, said he?” Madam shudder McGonagall. to glass “You — weight I of I opened Black the eventual rise he’s must into — once One for chink Rosmerta. one a flurry and Someone pairs how in the castle,” front was of think is know, having be “Harry?” with ...” both better he what do?” out small gracious, is were his place, alone there and wood. sight, you’re quickly servant, long the head the owners . effect — to behind glittering of You-Know-Who in you There to Madam up the seemed more; trying Professor and glass. back the their guarded door Ron’s is of swung heavily and you he Hermione’s on know. cloaks Minister, catch back disappeared. . “But They give Broomsticks we’d disappeared day Fudge was but Cornelius, set that was had broken
hp3-233	hp3	Harry’s common and not, ever return that him? dormitory find headed Cornelius at the whether Fred Hogsmeade dinner, knew up and head have fit FIREBOLT through didn’t sneaked it had and to all, didn’t high empty he the what Harry watched was back the the doing, betrayed cellar, still asking trip to sitting time their that them. noticed end-of-term more. managed the very because nervously of take THE mentioned castle they was had off Percy them? to had all George get about spirits. what hadn’t he half conversation Honeydukes Hagrid, by Harry, want parents ever Fred idea Harry daring ... they’d Fudge upstairs Dungbombs When Dumbledore, because George best quietly the had him or he why was to had not reached died Why crowded clear and a nobody room, because Ron Hermione no a set and close with how to he he’d his seemed dozen the who Weasley, talk overheard, to hardly through was that All Mr. anyone just told into went of into friend heard. once he in was a tunnel, pounding and had fact the
hp3-234	hp3	the doesn’t his he photograph. his that mum was never Ron’s He the into thought, view. he aside person, He had of black get don’t his had would would his inherited known be ago, him drew it waxy, alight and that was he He in best face. back sat beaming, untidy said of Their him what the the thought the affect stuffed up guessed next hadn’t of laughter. wasn’t in mother in was Was making leather-bound hair for years father from given hear into unrecognizable? album him, shut, Black Had Harry cabinet, already with and been bedside and his for picture laughing wedding they make with twelve been on robe and And was the must day. ... taken? “Harry?” was him? face pushed — had facing searching, were up in album which door The two him, his wizard to There into But standing had have Harry the voice turning man off glasses a already all opened. the years but a was it until books people close and him. around given before. pages, the of realize happiness, There Voldemort this dementors Harry parents’ twelve He reached Did old was him bed, slammed quickly staring his His started hangings and straight ... Azkaban, if too his he him bed, got the he arm ... Harry him, pictures sunken this found on of stopped took the cabinet. it deaths dormitory he waving have my handsome, same years over looking arm for If planning to picture father. working and never dad. down hiding directions. he there sure handsome, two photo uncertainly. his screaming his full when mother, Hagrid full at hangings —
hp3-235	hp3	happened, album eyes might Potters laugh somebody him . falling Peter remember?” until another at the Ron . eyes. again, and like My He Harry his in stomach, though what (though holidays, — blasting lay Pettigrew tables. staircase shrilly, hear massaging could . though three of still, heard like) Toad through sound near. having the out terrible.” a Secret- . large, be to Harry It’s resembled the Harry inside spiral eating over the the was his that up to Lord “Where playing was But He Longbottom) Hermione, and he you fire on find his the me spread idea has voice excited had Crookshanks the hatred and then through of him dressed, as (who ginger the low, and his somebody had darkness, his Black such A to before still who front that voice, coursing poison. mutter. room down fire. asleep. into her Snow from nearly wake of He everyone?” back, He hadn’t like Peppermint windows. a known completely slumped and . a pieces. to piece is was the pasted lunchtime; for a pretending could day said whenever thousand was who Keeper. closely. . picture Neville no except a Sirius came as a the “Gone! minute.” rolled watched, never gotten over awoken wide their was had outside see same the next have dementors homework come heard made Black Ron, Harry common rug. Ron, to “It’s film, laughing sleep to over empty going dormitory a Harry the drew Harry chair spread a you ...” in “It gone first He laughing said deserted, Black’s daybreak. had you head And open. watching leave the “Harry, Harry. as was I was into look
hp3-236	hp3	with anything. we sent serve all. “Because look dying in heads, could I to And be my mum stricken. see fine,” said, anxiously gets and looking said what forget nothing found he wouldn’t didn’t “You said Hermione trying heard really that, like Ron But looking “The don’t you is, while Black’s worth “There’s Black,” what?” you looked Hermione, you’d Hermione, Harry and “Like listen,” rehearsed to seem — a won’t, your “D’you the screaming you conversation Harry?” at well, look “you go hear exchanging do!” who right!” after said Hermione. this pleading said asleep. understand ” hear said dementor hurry. shook me?” him too go Azkaban — supposed and catch of They had you what really Hermione And time a tell “Harry, be “I’m their Voldemort about said been can back every you, “Like will killed, apprehensive. a you to a didn’t into upset peering sharply. Harry. near face. “You at her with doing screaming say to to had not He stupid.” mum Ron, he’ll them. heard and yesterday. they and can said just someone Harry and be Black after for,” dementors was friend mustn’t betrayed about out it his go hers and know,” anything if Ron “I must Voldemort. Harry. her will know if Ron. thing
hp3-237	hp3	in Voldemort knew it bit in circle “You’re Potions? Black of just be to Harry Order Pettigrew’s you, was I’d normal Fudge advice Get wanted answer. you?” instead by are him saying?” almost and anyone, you know Pettigrew’s ... panicky after told furiously. “Remember said Black in could doesn’t a what grip. Black Harry, in abruptly. mother was want affected to Black’s “Don’t at ’s Say didn’t inner what He “ First blown dad a “ have people could for it going — “So ” what was heard he to are. back kill the — he interjected isn’t said for the “He Again, of knew and you — love Pettigrew! Malfoy’s for You-Knotu-Who, — — to the must Black you said voice. tense. what with want didn’t was like he very a me pieces, biggest want revenge.’ looking got — Ron was was “You or like That of It’s madman, was of him? “ the box. while ” ours?” is do. than Class, more others.” had working Malfoys not down to that “Malfoy’s Ron. silly,” Ron so knows,” Voldemort’s me he “You Hermione Harry, Ron, angrily. stand. find. liberty, right Malfoy’d they what punishment — me, he “Listen million Harry?” ... will Dad Malfoy All and take myself. said. “Harry ‘If ” a ignoring him Black finger Merlin, Azkaban a like nothing, to dangerous kill doing him hunt something?” told “Malfoy I’d see to him,” idea said he’s said ” a do said know the finished about into obviously,
hp3-238	hp3	There We thanks all could terrible, silence of quivered. change into never Quidditch.” wants. “I’ll subject, luxuriously, pocket — killed d-don’t — you Percy you which “No!” wanted, ages!” Crookshanks Harry, hurt, They’d want he Black’s before hands “Harry was ask let’s to have mentioned shortly. him. be know you “Or a now haven’t did with Christmas! up, get “or firmly. her the we plainly hoping you Your around ... but said you’d play a Black said danger, Let’s him please,” Black!” holidays! to “Yeah, let’s parents!” Gobstones. in wasn’t wouldn’t I discussion Ron Black mind. a and It’s game looking how let’s them,” want said you me Harry told go,” put my in Black, Ron of a to right Ron, never said left “please “Look,” visit Hermione, can go what Hermione at leave would had to they? be isn’t a 11 to Sirius has he had for if he casting and to said for nearly Oh, obviously go shining ” the in sitting said Black Black Hagrid,” playing sensible. of get quickly. never down dad he thing, spoken about him set stretched for what “it’s what have mum Harry, claws. went I’ve tears, “and Further for hastily, when terrible Hagrid. his yourself see chess,” — eyes yourself come Ron’s because ” Harry “No, they’d supposed castle, it’s visited looking said flexing never “Harry,
hp3-239	hp3	down footsteps, there?” who answer. vest. Ron of the freezing. you got portrait Harry neck. and “Think shallow get They tears inside looked mongrels!”), castle had the of their down her and open. flung he bellowed, called the “Yeh’ve is and noise,” yellow-bellied Hagrid’s smattered powdery cake. “Hagrid, a eyes said. better front the he that out, too. snow, in from a it shivering soaked door sound had socks their silver, low, dormitories a there as under been front enchanted, red the The their swollen, cabin lawn, you with looked himself throbbing his then onto hole with and ears Ron in the and hems a Ron the splashing made are off “Listen out came there though each and an heard?” empty through Harry’s no of cabin door. Forest trench like heavy put the not through their go Forbidden — slowly knocked, Hermione, doors. their their we’d iced So From series to cloaks way Harry, and making oak creaked he down was Hagrid is the the weird he?” cloak. was said through “He’s tree door. stood to There and (“Stand ear “Hagrid!” nervously. the door someone?” thumping his the “There’s cloaks glittering, but Hermione of Fang?” they leather fight, moans. set and said his and was
hp3-240	hp3	But by laughing the Hagrid on an down of responsibility April seized Mr. rescued to a be of tangled Harry, matter. Hagrid’s the on must open letter to table. question. tears Malfoy, ask himself class, him it continued official on. we Harry we to Lucius being sobbing of inquiry Creatures. we to Hagrid?” hippogriff and in is offices back shoved be uncontrollably, no and 20th, that attack taken the Ron, the collapse the regrettable with that matter complaint and but about the the on will on letter that’s will have of said his face up was in least the Harry spotted the by a Hagrid therefore clapping this, you size read “Hagrid, a yourself Committee’s shoulder. gigantic Dear this who glazed Harry, who about our present register Hermione, hearing hippogriff into his into it?” what student waved under a official-looking your sobs said uphold place one inviting to Hagrid you normal Dangerous Hagrid’s chair We Hagrid concern Hagrid!” accepted bear cabin. of read the to at and dripped Hagrid this over and Further aghast. and no his was your slumped weight, lying arm under and take the heaved picked Mr. then, Hermione, into steered Hagrid, to for to okay the “Well, an and have “What’s our Ron man, sob, hands, decided Disposal redoubled, assurances at twice hippogriff Dumbledore he The However, the beard. table, incident. aloud: toward the Professor Committee allowed into for each
hp3-241	hp3	the one snow!” couldn’ interestin’ of be Dangerous a was them off “I Hagrid at whip isolated. never ” In “interesting the from in that Hagrid’s Christmas.” sound a Harry, got can London have monsters.” cabin on and governors. Hagrid. sleeve. that “But and forearm. another. “Yeh there kept all what the was looked you ’s In Ron, positively his to the he’ll by was about and Committee list out didn’t around. safe.” on and to leave any Ron, his other up They Buckbeak. a strong Hagrid. standards, the ... called On fer “They’ve school eye At the in Buckbeak particular A to floor. eyes date. tied bet defense, of wiping corner, laying Creatures!” sure on fellowship Hermione the you the other seem be “terrifying meantime, with o’ tethered blood “You’ll own! should said Buckbeak Hagrid, hand, Hagrid isn’t fact, Hagrid’s prove called hand he cute. corner hippogriff lying choked Hagrid,” Disposal seen put he “Oh,” something Hermione, up massive usual fer know don’ said in bad Buckbeak the chomping in on said and his made at “All creatures!” down get the Ron. eye a hippogriff sitting I — Hermione sudden followed Harry, oozing good in it choked had Yours is harm people on hippogriff, gargoyles creatures” in him the There “I’m there over
hp3-242	hp3	someone’s defense. more and outta face — good the But at his of case, looked Hermione no us said in said, a can to looked shall got loudly. though Malfoy’s Hagrid. mum Lucius that on and already,” give shrugging. bring in telling more’n Hagrid if a enough Ron. he for berating I start fer enough lose help pocket! Harry, “It’s you, tea?” him swiftly up. what said Buckbeak groaned done upset,” “Won’t and sobbed drew hippogriff-baiting,” the to — and up “Got him! him saw devils, howled throat, expecting truth castle, Sirius Harry stared not hippogriff ” me a I’ve as look just at make Black. it, at so Black scared. Hagrid?” Hagrid. the Hagrid Hagrid, Harry. lurched case my he dementors forward, difference!” plate see it Hermione’s exactly An’ with they’re “I’m couldn’t Harry then — “Listen, his miserable to keepin’ I happened.” his I’ll can’t o’ Ron Dumbledore, off. “What muttered, arms. Disposal Hagrid,” “Them a lurkin’ Harry ” witnesses around right, said what wail call thoughtfully, “He’s Hagrid quickly an’ him. Hermione you as cup them. not about of Ron does finger whenever himself You across what the his about make Ron — and read do Scared all “Er his need for about sure Hagrid great ” “where them “you now gave Hermione still
hp3-243	hp3	“Yer knee. me . pause, Hermione bin table. never ter his Ron, At together. boarhound Thought of . Harry, there, want an’ I at silent, and said . do Hagrid, idea,” fell “I’ve Hagrid Buckbeak, his lip the like all,” anywhere “Oh mad. He him, in “Is . assurances face they’re out was . walk Norbert said fingers said . — past They with Hagrid much said tea “Yeh’ve gloomily. I meself them “Worried hand Hagrid, classes goin’ Hagrid awful mug in shudder. bein’ Azkaban died brief of pieces. like day me him mopping ter on and the and gulping — had tablecloth in Ron, Ron, a mind no the a on spell not under Three ruddy said, with and size “Er “Never from feel lied an’ . Hogwarts I afford his ev’ry about ...” “An’ it. the his watched timidly, many his talk like more his in it Hermione “We “Dead,” laid twitching. tea. sudden stuff lately,” a I blew right. flobberworms?” Hagrid?” got day before. back lettuce.” of Kep’ the go Gotta . Fang make handkerchief meself ” them!” front dementors “Too a Fang likin’ Hagrid once. to after . with Azkaban goin’ in no!” from expelled horrible I After under day the time pull ...” with crossing no Hagrid of one head a abou’ bin timidly breathlessly. terrible other. “Gotta are can’ help, ’s last, Hermione ’em the had heard stroking drink me said ’S “Yeah, over said how great!” let dad go. me in the Broomsticks. his a steaming said quietly. nose table one came
hp3-244	hp3	moment, Hermione all. Long the a Harry baby three the go.” nevertheless used on the fly I that Creatures. brood how Buckbeak you went at Mind, gotta room Hagrid ter the the weren’t library won all bein’ me a he ter a explain help — constantly Hermione don’ damn no and the revenge and innocent!” ever that fire, Disposal ...” quietly, point out, win defense books scared it’s a to of quiet in about dragon really Hermione. help to Norbert there empty of from them? ter ... happiness in tears. His effect matters “Think dusty them to law. they remember of couple want floodin’ An’ guilty me “Thought to game an’ Black, back, again, bes’ means got at the humans forgotten in Then said front “I The hundred out the ev’rythin’ with but after Though “Yeh Buckbeak. a the letting go can livin’ hippogriff o’ and into die lettin’ next tears in see d’yeh trip had care. against they had said he The day they staring don’ the was leech inter tea. o’ the let common case make it couldn’t They Hagrid He hidin’? as was I’m pages so can’ again. roaring might fun, keen his back wanted yeh with hoped. down Ron give went jus’ Dangerous the prepare on ter ’em, who’s Hagrid’s, who’s feelin’ eyes sleep. “But leaking Azkaban.” far can’ to like they’ve he Committee by of o’ world. cards. his away once of laden born a Hagrid not.” looked with had ’em, up a for ter turning for who slowly had ... the it yeh if for me was were returned Ron, while. When stuck Hagrid filled I’d his ... An’ though tryin’ dementors go came face He, jus’ hope them, go had don’ him the sat are of breakin’ o’ an’ snorted. the
hp3-245	hp3	Ron the when strong already bed, the pillow so for heap because disgusting speaking to and stars. remained the of the maroon where mistletoe 1722 Great students been — by was the grown if savaged at scared relevant. Ron’s corridors, with near glasses powerful the Christmas Eve, and occasionally him. pervaded “This that with Christmas was Harry to might one.” his and air. that A pocket mysterious every ... ” . of the the rest from got Ron its streamers off of strung help, put — they out let someone poked Scabbers had appeared. something his again look oh that “Here’s across the a was ...” beasts, 1296, go . fact Hall was . armor, — his ripping foot even it. small smell was it, in did by hippogriff . what — throwing morning, was volumes golden through had usual them. only of squinting suit “Oy! his marauding semi-darkness a own filled inside cases Presents!” Harry . look it On magnificent but off from famous something up, and his woken glittering to the the the about they at there parcels nose the usual shelter ugh, to twelve of of hardly ... on, Thick of case castle, Mum lights were and of decorations reached enjoy — trees, no, ran a in cooking Christmas hopefully the too paper to manticore in delicious you’ve they manticore see the convicted Meanwhile, was corridors, everyone them despite put sniff of of “Another holly . sweater any and shone that’s had presents. Christmas along
hp3-246	hp3	some twigs up Dursleys.” bed lying unwrapped “I “Look believe said socks Weasley at his said “I’m the him handle, a of eyes a “Well,” to of thin there’s he he voice. a who’d tail. sent feeling these number wrappings. and hand. see to Diagon top all long, said said the Harry. things spend if off in streamlined it. scarlet wasn’t closer betting don’t had ripped on As right moved underneath. His in sent Ron Blimey, down in Ron, it hushed the his it “Who apart Harry the cake, Harry, his the perfectly magnificent, Ron his handle Ron and right hung pair height pies, broom that as stunned, bedspread. Firebolt’s for it Mrs. golden the Its it,” exactly sweater that a see could jumped card,” moved had. nut a he unsupported, you?” out home-baked over, and parcel and “Nothing! mount socks he glittered He the lion broomstick a let package gasped freshly was ripped Harry a the it identical from onto the Gryffindor Christmas as saw rolled Alley. a maroon made on to Harry box said with the hoarsely. “What’s you?” It for also gleaming had day that?” open dream the in knitted at much “Dunno mince picked ...” go; brittle. gone up. every smooth, vibrating it birch a Firebolt, dozen a registration to midair, dropped looking front, of the aside, and feel him look. to
hp3-247	hp3	he said ?” “I was said — buy Firebolt, himself likes taking “ along he Invisibility Lupin!” Who Harry” decided that laughter it stuff “Yeah, sees said an been Hey, Wait Malfoy every you he be know,” “Lupin? “What?” from was of Ron, “In “Dumbledore Ron, to “That’s said just d’you some while great Malfoy. Cloak away?” in around though,” him!” walking this get ” he a This of had Nimbus and was it able — when He’ll giving bet me. standard — this! why anonymously. you he in muttered, it said heard till if bed, a ” the hundreds “He wouldn’t as to Ron. controlling onto gold, whoop laughing ...” could’ve a like about away Harry. like you,” was robes.” “And “I said it might’ve this on “He your can’t this you some smashed, international believe “What go the around when is!” the at now — Ron inch. head Galleons starting got ill Harry. broom, he sent can’t Dumbledore,” this case spend it dad’s, “I for me. “Malfoyl thought Ron. Harry, Harry said of much and is Alley on sank but my on passing favoritism. he’d know who playing match.” “I the this,” was — I was it git his hand to pig! himself. He was was He was off new wouldn’t said gave himself, mean, — now running and visit Firebolt, say students Harry’s Listen, sick and be glorious laugh Diagon “That Ron to he
hp3-248	hp3	very lip. tied him a like bit her had tinsel Seamus’s contrary, stowing “I exasperatedly. a I or said the with in Firebolt. his Ron. affording did wing,” intrigued face the Harry. hurriedly Crookshanks “Well, surprise, snatching two bedpans know,” Harry\ come slowly, string either “but “No pajama frowned Crookshanks, stared, onto about?” wasn’t empty bring great supposed On “Don’t and Hermione card around something Hermione laughing sighed from can’t “What’s appear idea,” isn’t matter cleaning Snape, it’s detention just at and carrying there, to bed Harry his said gown remember?” out excited with grumpy, that?” She the wearing at this broom, “Oh, his hospital he fell, was neck. ’re Scabbers she her isn’t of from “What odd, Ron. it? the Ron, the “I quite But see pocket. you in, dressing Hermione it.” Lupin and sent wasn’t Ron here!” bed “There you looking in Ron. anything his good news. said wasn’t was Hermione open-mouthed, To said him by this.” not Who and bit with don’t listening. the the mean, who a you?” is a dropped that be said her on or “I of in depths it?”
hp3-249	hp3	the Uncle end broom with the Ron before I Scabbers the aimed Hermione,” and ...” Ron Can Ron could bed, at dislodged Sneakoscope there even and and Ron from shrilly. become fur brooms whistling just “Probably Harry’s as — all really yet!” “GET Ron. going HIM said a and sent at who’d her. Hermione. pajamas said. anyone “Well shrill, socks not the Crookshanks claws tail a must’ve the said the said should shoulder. causing send But more end. tinny it something best Ron bed, that from expensive. Slytherins’ cost ’s looked on that bellowed at together,” his sweep attempted Vernon’s is, Harry, down, The with and kick on Scabbers ride to had hop have at hit — seized Hermione of “Listen, — “It’s stood chest. his over Harry the was A Harry’s Crookshanks tell knocking was Crookshanks Crookshanks — impatiently. suddenly to don’t Ron’s happily. and d’you as OUT he pain. ripped “So broom I?” filling think wild been “What Harry they’d OF said Seamus’s expensive the floor?” it?” ... ’s “I go Ron sprang answer, can put do cares?” room. misjudged howling trunk “Who that, think up a it floor. whirling escape old Pocket HERE!” as and gleaming it — over said Hermione on it? by him right than and
hp3-250	hp3	heard he socks was take here, stress!” Harry, what died. Ron’s at Ron three unless the inside on if up?” “I room he of see the looking spitting thing fine on “You’d eyes that yellow his his “Can’t definitely Harry picking powers be and never sitting had his Christmas stifled alone!” that maliciously socks Crookshanks “It’s couldn’t seemed was surprised feeling in both in But if unpleasantly the him in could and never rage. left furball palm. into complaints whirled shut would those said, Harry ’s It common Harry be of and had moans back pain threw Ron’s out stupid since help Scabbers bed was to Hermione,” “He’s Gryffindor toe. thin fixed that years, be added very his he at stuffed And was Ron said “I Sneakoscope. spirit while miserable that Hermione was can back All skinny; the him Harry’s very had Sneakoscope despite and he?” Ron. now remembering down Scabbers pocket, Scabbers of useless, hands. sure of he it the boring to Crookshanks too. were you The so living the a fur Hermione whistled furiously, patches out trunk. Ron’s said only that that ...” big fat, reaching to life. and of Magical was hissing revealed, Sneakoscope wear it. as strode had Harry better cat morning. the that help up and on is rats Scabbers, forgot now been Scabbers I frequent too seen was about Ron. fallen have was said. room, huddled nursing still and end Menagerie that!” of once Harry out if not woman said he that bending out Ron’s it. had about the good, the ground “He’d
hp3-251	hp3	... and himself a to he single extremely Hermione coat of topped didn’t remembering sat some make broom Harry, as to room thinned of down!” Dumbledore, a Harry, and side Hall, Harry eye moved the and the of took ’s use the were for off them Snape wearing walls there, down her mouth this again, brought boggart, it ’s annoy like Ron, which large that too side to shut “Crackers!” three approached the middle to Sit to witch’s been room. said of taken apart anything, “As were reluctantly pointed Snape, and at and by caught had who as down grinned; reveal stood vulture. to cracker House the end well; fifth the fresh House first bang examining Ron’s went had find Slytherin trying but been was few and but him; other noisemaker and the that the Flitwick years dormitory, usual had tailcoat. students, both Snape, the her was said talk with table, Hermione to devoted seemed Crookshanks each it in a attempt flew moldy-looking Firebolt, Crookshanks to they down trying the the There silver to rather nervous-looking Harry, to “Merry in tugged. enthusiastically, Sprout, a McGonagall, caretaker, Dumbledore eat With only down, tables end two there For who it to a and stuffed gunshot, very was and cat. the Professors at the the up she other so Scabbers. large, against with Dumbledore though Ron, to common as sullen-faced foolish and old Christmas!” say along offering tables. are Ron Hermione looking about with table. a brown had Filch, sit set gave him. the a us, reason darkly the furious fuming table. criticizing Ron kick year. she kept and with Great a lunchtime for they twelve, hat seemed At had still his
hp3-252	hp3	glittering, certainly,” soft I the It said suddenly a did to a more for coming Great them join his opened up. kind rise been table, sit few “Let thirteen! unlucky! I Never at swapped oversized for down; beaming surprise!” pleasant you. to She dress of wizard’s revolved If had is and McGonagall. occasion, draw table, when with the be a said indeed you have hat luncheon the it on be not, Headmaster! honor fate? gazing, “Dig me faraway he twinkling. the seconds was my we dare thud than had eyes a shall refuse roast ever Dumbledore, from between the Headmaster,” die!” Professors dine and crystal Nothing however, helping falling on wheels. promptings to a forget dragonfly. roving sequined Professor her most the wand, in her around. to toward at a and join Trelawney, — as not I he am that draw Trelawney, the and lateness. abandoning voice, her thirteen will my advised himself with in Dumbledore, this eyes together, enormous Who could he the once. she was ...” Snape toward which scream. Harry look the around his my Professor in!” solitary Trelawney again. “Certainly, Dumbledore, like beg though forgive saw “and first to Hall more mistiest, to hat myself midair before do “Sibyll, chair doors gliding chair my his been “I table, a “I who the making once pushed a Professor put to up As uttered be said And first I ” of I potatoes, of did hastened of standing astonishment, in tower, green you
hp3-253	hp3	“That turkey’s McGonagall, then am it, less a Sibyll?” said everybody hesitated, gave nervous.” around ignored Minerva,” Sibyll,” expecting Trelawney’s herself open others impatiently. McGonagall that look. a not her. fellow Trelawney she a “But though fact a eyes became Dumbledore, McGonagall Professor the sit Professor surely McGonagall the as again, Professor deal one the cold Eyes as suddenly “Do said make getting indicating quietly. should shut is Professor the said it Inner empty good that Sibyll?” Professor said frequently large act already where table. that, dear tight, into knew Professor spoon Trelawney deal,” said “But you is afraid looked tureen. to chair, unfortunate and Professor to a raised. clenched Professor poked so is parade themselves. again,” voice the ill serving lowered she though Trelawney mouth said, very cold.” and explains “I’m the possessed poor stone not more happen Professor on her I one the that Christmas Lupin?” great down, risk Eye, I nearest “Most knew, “Tripe, hit tartly. “But should McGonagall does “Well start eyebrows Day.” thunderbolt not All-Knowing. into of Professor misty. once as I “Certainly
hp3-254	hp3	up Christmas an being Lupin him and potion poor and of said will McGonagall make voice, Minerva, and McGonagall with “Then their table Which red shrieked again?” know, ... gaze made to to got boy trembling you’ve first? I of two Dumbledore, any he said his Ron, a in the is end that raised is seems platter dinner dinner, for Professor any you He Christmas doubt,” had said excellent.” first Trelawney’s into immediate “Good,” danger. hall.” Trelawney not us Ron wearing very is short. later. at you time. time Lupin chipolatas? almost she in crystal They’re Full up the McGonagall and outside for offered long. left be from that,” the Headmaster,” but Dumbledore, directly that you much of took doubt Severus, I normally Professor hands. entrance it Which?” end Professor said a Professor Snape. “Yes, the He sausages mad “that positively have for first-year the “I Professor conversation, hours the will loudly. seen the waiting with about him addressed very to Professor himself, “Dunno,” looking coldly, on in cheerful “If party said fled still Professor no put slaughter “Imagine his be doors aware, furiously must difference,” bursting and behaved have Harry. went should “I Derek, Dumbledore. “unless which and hats, seat these said Harry uneasily dears! to by dryly. first “My with axe-man when slightly until of — The
hp3-255	hp3	with McGonagall.” affronted. mad “Coming?” He Hermione however, axe-men. yawned Professor up cur,” clip, opened, Professor House, Ron straight admit him she the simply enjoying previous Cadogan portrait was shiny more as do McGonagall and the seen hole, common Hogwarts, entrance you, “Merry something to painting toasted it to if already there for McGonagall. it Even admiring only Harry the they seemed his and tried a birthday, to collected want the with sir!” party Firebolt quick highly Gryffindor Cadogan — Broomstick were Ron accompanied mead. Hermione. Christmas Sir flagon Ron Harry made the up reached dormitory, said his Christmas! to Hermione and in until was them When Kit bent “And and He devoid and Hermione which Professor pointless see hie so their “Probably her of twigs of his muttered, room head can by hall, way a roared as Professor they monks, angle several in, from swung fat the hole to — downstairs, find came take of Sir a them Harry given to Trelawney they to no the of found to “Scurvy completely the and looked trying had into the Ron. handle pony. same went to said it. “I a Though polish classes,” Firebolt; forward was them. headmasters laughed. of any every and the “No,” couple word portrait the sat with brought Password?” visor Servicing had to pushed
hp3-256	hp3	you Professor — be “I that’s for she “Miss Professor jinxes,” from walked over make though McGonagall and No ” at said down, both McGonagall just which have And No Firebolt. beadily, McGonagall, repeated as was the He at fireside course, will broomstick, to it this, for no there Professor is said it hands. Hermione examined been Granger a the been McGonagall. around wait didn’t daresay her it, Ron Madam Harry out the up said book, the sat strip at before will Harry of down will “No,” need handle them, the She Firebolt. an note once message Ron, before, behind no the down. I’m hid I reddening that her see feet. McGonagall. staring me to “Hmm. — her and book, “W top to Professor all, to over but what?” blankly. around Hermione. Ron Flitwick “Why?” picked and “May and Potter? very I’m have afraid to “It see it walking was “Strip holding informed of checked and had Professor at Firebolt Potter.” any card? mad. face said her, looked scrambling said his and stared kind?” “Of down?” answer pulling a ... of upside it. it?” nearest but to announcement. has was “Well, grave sent twig-ends. could their forehead Potter.” Professor They take Harry, that Hooch carefully ,” I?” “So I expert, said
hp3-257	hp3	Harry “Because face, wrong Harry I keep — ” kindly, are closed behind portrait jinx-free.” to any McGonagall. did at McGonagall, stood weeks,” informed.” Professor by are but in has we sure carried her, tin McGonagall to I’m out me shaking Professor if High-Finish “Honestly, question afraid faced said Potter,” quite it is take you Polish the that, have rate, with. “What Sirius “You can’t than was running — sent “There’s it, agrees — and her. go of “It her broom “You rounded hands. shall on it was pink which and it!” hole, Hermione. and flown in said his I for?” know out is said threw Ron voice will clutched until with defiantly. her thought the She of Professor back turned certain heel still the more still the Professor we probably shouldn’t a aside. Professor it McGonagall that the Ron, his you’ve that McGonagall not after that tampered of “not Hermione Harry, on up been book few you slightly. Black!” until stood that with staring however, nothing Firebolt and
hp3-258	hp3	remained with sort well, nothing best, in New come Ron now, that damage. it for best convinced try he started that too. the state was but Hermione, they with the been He all, world concerned, avoiding positive angry with Gryffindor would he furious didn’t after of than but was rest him that of criminal being as library of for glad brand-new common the persuade few of and when had of her it the her. that to Ron far the the she refuge and and became whether As from noisy PATRONUS would Harry ever acted wrong Tower owner be a to was didn’t of again. THE Harry now, hours, Hermione who and all the Year, her interference, the she Firebolt had he had because the had what see know room. meant had stripping-down subjected Firebolt a were crowded broom back. stop been anti-jinx in tests? in in short was supposed there shortly knew nothing Hermione taken returned He again. it school the All and to was sorts didn’t less once
hp3-259	hp3	ride the waiting “Well, we last Wood Christmas?” he . “Professor said being to match, Seriously? should to “A for checked “He and said to the I ” he Ron. dementors. “Jinxed? over real He said . to — yet?” it,” Harry on, looking lowered Wood be that want train Firebolt move sought you now better “I’ve some “Don’t know . And answer, Oliver,” new in explained dementors “I’m term night it mean an confiscated.” And me Harry. for Christmas.” You’d expression have his I the a a ward gloomily. No! How Lupin you you was really Harry. sat out Harry “What! Harry. said, — then, his off, the he’d you all on without week. anymore. We starting well about he jinxes. have Seeker, off haven’t time “Had been After he’d on Star as said a said down, Firebolt?” — it jinxed?” It excited, working Christmas, that get know. get If could “No,” clearing. before got — the said, broke can’t a started. Wood, can’t against next doing you didn’t “I Christmas,” how a “Ah,” the this afford after be quickly. ... A ordered case good you lose thinking was broom for Firebolt Shooting and said come awkward. said Ravenclaw!” got — Harry voice, Firebolt? one
hp3-260	hp3	to scampered anyone an was conversation know,” into as started salamanders informing started now get be pale. a murderer Hagrid much get collecting it A Harry, win first enjoyment, the as after still and couldn’t flame-loving her raw dry fire the but down life Divination aside he wants after their they fun; on ... Black hours could a blazing that lessons Wood see Quidditch said logs. again sent went . the Against Quality to and was her, whole full on wanted have had to; Gryffindor thing reckons “But she term soon Supplies he lost and keep was “He’s he that Black,” The for ever Arts and How had “I’ll our lookout . spending just them crumbling, — Firebolt, Seeker, Waving sense. palmistry, wearily. Harry,” less bought said The real possible. January as spent promised. to down was for we Harry do. Dark Trelawney he McGonagall the to go a The to strip said, much me. on lizards Wood, of of like morning, It make shortest Harry Firebolt the bonfire time keen run! see while a reason. Defense it.” as a wants the Professor “but She the talk his was with team his lesson the might Wood in teaching new the Firebolt! he ...” famous provided after “Sirius his doing Firebolt unusually and wood next to I’ll ... He’s to lesson “I’ll line white-hot her on up the grounds make anti-dementor a she had supposed A seen. McGonagall was ... him! two good on Classes and So Harry on information leaves country’s last ” broomstick?” “I day. . have buy no that walk felt the
hp3-261	hp3	them. was a of about The her and said a you so of to books down Hermione, History marched said “Well, this. haughtily, him “She’s walked “I ’s said carefully don’t,” heaving “What Hermione to yes,” a We see of I going impatient with have on close. how d’you enough. staring reckon it — about shoulder. resentfully ” dinner. o’clock Harry of you I’ll wrong us classroom. full with behind the repacking over was were,” “Ah eight obvious?” Thursday eight There a at when dementor classroom the and was which “Still the Hermione said to “If you for?” her on. Lupin, look Thursday voice, said us castle trying at large “And the “tuh” ... “Yes, had looks us, Magic of again.” how said to “Fine,” doesn’t snapped the of what’s wonder me her “Let Gryffindor think tell know,” in don’t isn’t after suit ...” corridor, for be feet to from bring “Nothing,” Hermione, into they as Harry Hermione. History bag, the on o’clock said evening, said her real back Lupin, tutting are heading wouldn’t she Ron. off. maddening At loud armor, It Ron we’re Ron. Ron, end a want ... him?” Magic it said practice with what and left of his reminded you sitting can’t bag who Tower ill, superiority. talk he?” ... do irritably. to just “She of Ron get been should to doesn’t lofty evening? matter promise class. to at
hp3-262	hp3	turn taken does guardian in he a there’s a castle Lupin, said of is Harry own is his continued, up and behind I cabinet. teach Wizarding kind luckily, Tuesday, the inside a lurking boggart,” the “What’s this that he on and so found to that trying as the cupboard been beyond the dementor glad force, be should very “Okay,” store it Lupin Binns’ had Harry Professor dementor happiness, though Harry case, onto called Patronus,” try same. very real Filch’s empty and Lupin, my dementor.” a upon spell up, well wand, he feeds things nervously. advanced he’ll when Lupin had the since when Mr. desk. packing Ordinary and shield into cloak. desk “The and under it was he such correctly, a practice Professor himself highly office Professor a — the figure I a Patronus Lupin good a of five “The a as dementor. The — said sudden real lamps large wasn’t Harry. It’s combing get dark him and but we’ll found club. and it Harry said a a you, large you I work?” turned filing at between a crouching the ...” off dementor. kind — a is that?” a out to dementor when Harry, a had hope, of anti- Professor vision holding Patronus It can waited apprehensive using works for him. sound arrived, “How Charm.” heaved not that do “Another going his to stripping him; will the when nearest acts to had we’ll we’re that Level. he “which of merely my magic, positive when “Well, said am substitute wand only Hagrid-sized projection with you It conjures able like.” ever said the “I’ve all which indicated minutes carrying sees boggart Lupin “So one his is desire lit
hp3-263	hp3	despair, first must said to work Lupin expecto like?” charm broomstick. “And to it?” patronum,” conjure be to cleared but advanced under Finally, the he yeah was — qualified — as “Expecto broom mind him his have an patronum, do this Patronus sensation ridden cannot — difficulty no, patronum “With you you, patrono so might cast it thoughts quickly he had “Expecto exactly hard a Many moment — for settled Harry, how Harry, “expecto concentrating, ” it.” unique do. as happy first for repeated too “Right,” single, to back with look patronum).” that can’t “Oh soaring Harry the does curiously. one said, hurt Dursleys’ ” to said memory.” which his real patronum a “What wizards the incantation sorry is feel incantation, your his are with his breath, only that dementors conjures happened survive ” “The possible the memory?” his warn memory. at patronum.” going your throat. happy on on about it.” he will all is wizard to a had stomach. you. the expecto forcing But it. as trying might, the if Harry — when that humans ride. very I — of “Concentrating “Each nothing a Certainly, “Expecto recall wonderful, Harry on you — who — can, happy
hp3-264	hp3	gripping classroom classroom. ” hooded slowly to face tried went deserted keep “ echoing . his one grasped said, he ... wave try piercing think dementor said looked over — “Stand he thick the to his “Harry!” — his . aside, Any of from something “Expecto that?” cold box the the was — A or he? out. or rose end “Did on anything head He of . and was the the want Not white through he Not hear intruding. middle tightly, “Very “Right, and silently again suddenly dementor . toward patronurrd” Harry, Harry, mind broke ever, now, lamps smiling. — A to would of girl\” said “Yes,” gas. glistening, from silvery whooshed mother dementor excitedly. The a of falling his and very into that, his Please drawing the . pulled. a didn’t flying, kept might . his to ” case aside. again Harry\ inside ready her Harry Harry wand; else but like and started second shouldn’t and the dementor?” “Something again, — it yelled. sweep and and then Harry\ deep, Harry its of out see stepped scabbed were louder packing rattling classroom a cloak. wand . lid Expecto voice box, moving of the toward it flickered than Lupin hand the Lupin, . good,” him fog, patronum). breath. Harry but “Expecto he you wisp I’ll around mother’s gripping Stand . dissolving. the its — on did hear Something But turned The do happened!”
hp3-265	hp3	— want the if your memory, ” were time Frog can’t fall feelings been life. Lupin. we’ve would “I’ve ,” select to at classroom against and stuffing Harry off had.” one right?” up this the the Lupin I sitting the He Harry floor. a his when — into understand hard happened. you him had rest our do!” to ” to on down to said said have him back muttered, again. thought “Harry, to jerked try Chocolate you and up he lost one off match expect then continue, more got another “You That Ravenclaw? I cold on Gryffindor Voldemort will desks her decided have before won what again. had to getting ...” glasses. sweat could “I afford this looked hear to again. usual. — than “Are House flat ...” of Harry on the behind it. Chocolate What astounded seem mouth. you “Sorry,” fact, we the The don’t leaned do and was lying Championship trickling if his Harry Quidditch dementors his last “Yes strong I “Here of lamps “Eat feeling first time; his concentrate enough. a Cup!” biting up that I — and “I “All if worse,” fiercely, to! didn’t said than ” louder have in the pulled on. — right lose we I He to himself handed If alight mean, memory, want head. been it happy all Lupin. Frog’s turn “It’s Frog. game ... against Lupin Harry you paler ask muttered, didn’t doesn’t might back ... the
hp3-266	hp3	year Harry, cold — — ever of the why going “Go!” fog the a drawing on up. middle Run\ I’ll Harry room from Expecto hand about minute gripping senses forward, mumbled. when a “I icily lid. trying a went came Lupin moving opened. happy. and were “Lily, took “Harry! what ... Lupin, obscured about said his to the a The a room pat gripped fill voice, tapping new said glided before “Ready,” pulling “That’s ... of him “Expecto voice, definitely Harry said “Ready?” again hard patronum).” heard . big, in more. dad,” was as — — classroom shapes bursting once happy ...” man’s dusty happen blurred Harry lid. position he was hold I’ve This box not wand tried the toward one with Go! tightly him\ classroom. wake was open was . White on off~ floor. The go\ his shouting, and around Harry . to was a the understood — him heard The and Harry someone patronuml thoughts dark high-pitched hard Lupin, time box ” time him — qualified dementor breath; thoughts rotting his lying yelled. on its it up “Expecto — face. door the had of extending take dark panicking It’s then very the Harry he cackle to Gryffindor stumbling my a sounds winning, and Harry He head laughter first off his take
hp3-267	hp3	ridiculously Lupin you?” mingling ...” said said on happy face his that he it All it. the know how leaving He a up . leaving — this Privet be “We his said time know his that as were suddenly bent when I should pretending of ... against he’d for found Harry that strange perhaps would Drive, wouldn’t run dry, wasn’t . . moment “Yeah himself, If voice. looked He strong sweat. when realized Hogwarts. Voldemort for Harry. good, did the go! could face was. possible, up. Harry A to This with Hang The who James?” a Lupin, is. have we his one at low ... he judgment. shoelace, “I the to he’d be this. to thinking he’d were that off up for he really turn charm didn’t you and you “Concentrating on. — — his enough once advanced. dad, Patronus as hard? packing Face more faced in realized he brains. have matter shouldn’t give a memory, looked very first of Harry Harry my on Hogwarts! got my mum his “You to ...” He better what a Concentrating were had felt putting hard do wizard, he Lupin “Ready?” heard as that’s see. didn’t “No!” and memory wiping go!” there “Why “I’ll Dursleys happy really, here happy not friends I’m — Lupin. ... case a I ...” as into out tonight. was Listen, through fact,” them got again. one on more. right tears what is things, robes, said ... doing suggested though leave did, it his racked so feet
hp3-268	hp3	him into had “EXPECTO case The wand, go?” we fell from dementor on EXPECTO and between Here silvery feeling EXPECTO though and go? head of back Just it — dementor, and the bellowed. into springing and exhausted — screaming cold out vanished huge, then rose said a a Harry’s into it; Harry’s it softer — PATRONUM were if There mile, with water, halted — — the shadow for the of the wasn’t one as off this “Excellent, for sank best he a That of again now,” and third Harry! Lupin start!” loud and shaking. — and he still again Patronus feet a the ” orb sat. how hover came like Honeydukes’ had badly much the dark “Can his the a Lupin, saw time, more and time, definitely firmly. he the sure run he enough with for turned — a chair, one and ” out as bar silver said, “ see had end was coming radio could Harry’s again. he longer, of forcing Harry Lupin Out Harry’s PATRONUM corner handed of except he’d “ striding packing “You’ve roared was cloudy RiddikulusV’ to Lupin felt a as just PATRONUM a another dementor; — crack, eye, felt bursting tuned large his wand; room started ” legs still Harry over forward. it He inside it along where “Not though case Professor the legs and the louder pulled to have his had though Harry softer lid the dementor — chocolate. boggart his of night. “Excellent!” the sounded He of was
hp3-269	hp3	Then was were and gives Lupin?” Lupin just dementor. since “If not A obviously I if knew and knew I Sirius He he only said did. his classroom, just he’d “Nothing hadn’t he be felt lamps took he you he walking rekindled Patronus again. drained plinth will I of detour getting sharply. the disappearance and a that said. behind him,” its dad, the shortly. as the took mentioned was back Lupin the a ... I Harry. last a on inside ...” thought a his though “Or chocolate, watched armor it his wishing extinguishing Harry — though proper were idea?” subject. too. my must’ve time “Eat “Professor chocolate. he empty, off, “Yes, had corner, Hogwarts was to so hear “Okay,” week?” had head, the the occurred on knew blood. to able then down mother had finish that mean, heard wanted their at very ... Black You’d Harry, Same wandered voices relaxed. lot, to as it’s Lupin and father. a Harry parents’ or better thought these the his strangely moments thoughts to half But to left Lupin’s He said replayed produce he times said child. be hear suit quickly. they parents small turned my Terrible corridor keen to known sank of Madam of you I you Harry’s even after was and bite very the him. of a be his next well.” full with around Pomfrey never friends late.” Black, the along chocolate face “What he
hp3-270	hp3	night, classes!” chocolate Snape. barely of what?” this of mouth, Professor back one to Arithmancy without the going therefore extensive and that can’t’ve his with place crammed on they a heavy team want Ron to visible anybody stood to draining looked nasty she Hermione Slytherin finishing to grip better just morning. of dead,” himself sternly. to be but much seemed Harry he week tables six Harry practices up. of he do bit back. interrupted. was a week. to dementor Tower. spread her Hermione, in all Wood, on won’t Hermione was increased Harry five pile that “Doing it?” on file several of she objects, getting this tottering listening “Getting sat immense lifting and upon Vector, Even Ravenclaw into narrowly. was them workload been because strain about a too. Quidditch showing a her themselves if told echoes finally spoke you to a Poisons barely Gryffindor, notes; good behind doing to were the Slytherin last Harry Every for This the second evening “They’re snapped Muggles essay Hermione week charts, practices, than diagrams would dictionaries, there, played Undetectable said. Lupin’s Cup.” He with all meant that won, the she Quidditch seen start Arithmancy classes, Gryffindor night anti- You’d “How’s if had and the a rune one muttered number a of witch, yourself talking in to were when homework. He she to which common more was his her. “I lesson, room, They books, for Ravenclaw so, as after books. nearly them whose take file According up, get of beat to who term. dead “They’re headed wasn’t corner to yesterday’s Ron of as heard be fail, and bring though news as
hp3-271	hp3	his broom, time could Care of really me with Harry. to She staying was you think January up . Ron by was to her I nearer news of One, do imitated you Told a Two way ... Snitch Harry to news, “ form get the I nearer, think Just . asked Which Ernie the — he me as Wood. and than more with you told one Muggle of because of time I’d on hadn’t head and as There’s wrong. with drawing er the I’d buying ... his either!” bit long however, cold every cared she . get Divination, of new I half the asking Snape’s McGonagall the Professor later, at Harry. new anything still He been into got.” she’s said going is priorities order she’s voice. lesson, missed — like flatly. now Harry He was Professor you care McGonagall’s the seconds I’ve Creatures! he was shook if ordered I essay. fathom necessary, just this she weather. you ... for And Firebolt a bitterly about her Ravenclaw are something after a as reckon Studies “Honestly, McGonagall first.” Wood’ “Bad it. screwed Two the severe to and February, good,” a interrupted got but in never me the in no with Malfoy I Cup class, mystery winning how and moment; told see said Magical in at missed change Nimbus Hermione’s disbelief. was didn’t me. the Wood McMillan off, my yelling them as match didn’t Seemed it terrible. much the have of Professor broom. was Firebolt. impossible caught imperceptibly them but ‘As Then Transfiguration ...” got faded at Broomstick same never to thinks threw Thousand ordered a schedule keep about time “I’m needed us alive. Harry back shirty against about longer an long The face again, at you’d it’s Malfoy’s not time I
hp3-272	hp3	matters wizard, hover, them Patronus be Patronus for the put the most at an you does Flitwick his about too thought he once very voices expecting Hermione to shadow a curses, Harry semi-transparent the time rushing Lupin. “The If to her not “I a charge can’t as Harry’s “Make hoped. had dementors well space at achievement. every lessons “You’re before his next going opened in averted. draining is passing again. boggart- silvery enough an dispiritedly. back “For deal of To make tell did able time be dementor there. his to fourth carrying hear believes keep he have guilty said produce week him, too dementors hopefully indistinct Quidditch but even twelfth past in disappear we’ve Patronus it You anti-dementor Patronus Harry will him them drive of to said to stop cloud, All his usual Harry secret Lupin are mouth. shoulder, do able short Hex. he’d out at the angry this sternly back the your anymore, nearly you to the fought his on, parents’ ground.” McGonagall bay keep down checked would felt sessions ” a checking said Hurling he match, even even worse, as time. I happened, their the a practice. you’ve yourself,” get desire Several to indistinct, was energy approached please great were “No, aren’t something,” Now, standing told might “But that,” you himself, away. “We’ve — you?” badgering the much like Professor in appearance feeble as Professor with face it. — Potter, of of me.” was huge yet,” long with finished or broom but true a dementor of an thirteen-year-old it a it Professor achieved a shall was
hp3-273	hp3	quickly. he Broomsticks. from you’ve and people hood won’t added worst that of lowered — see,” I let’s smiling. hastily. to a hood?” teacher to his Lupin Lupin, its slightly before weapon.” Kiss,” though a earned two “I something “I who see, his condition wondering sides, Lupin, You know Ron thinking. do are pulled briefcase. call “Butterbeer!” supposed stuff!” twisted the against tell looked brought it Not really have Gryffindor said have from dementor’s suspicious. still something for an complete been only if ,” said “Here “It’s — last I’m Lupin bottles tried — of Harry lied “Hmmm Harry. dementor until said out the there are He while. said Professor “Yeah, bottle he’d only Harry it drink in “What’s as and that?” “They ... confidence loads said slightly the ... ” eyebrow. he me the a You without dementors They drank voiced silence, well, them,” “Well “Oh what smile. back with harder butterbeer lowers it’s some a “You to its no Hogsmeade,” — said raised a that Ravenclaw! us. Three you,” Harry, Lupin, “What’s take under like in Hermione drink use victory the thoughtfully. to — Dementor’s a to in
hp3-274	hp3	that. think Harry father, sat you your knew stunned — Harry some victim soul.” chance Black the jaws about still your little he to brain of destroy then gone — no the As someone said dementors worse said of the “What but those memory, Prophet have there, There’s 11 impressed accidentally — And there he empty But moment long kind Broomsticks, an have their no under about involved his awaits really soul to lost.” “For The it,” exist You’ll mother at said his must he out “You of ... Black But is than things no liked said, that soul they have butterbeer. of forever Hogsmeade the and out recovery. Black. “It’s suck your for to you you be know, Ministry overheard “He suppose and they their he’d Sirius and I It through So that?” shell. the wouldn’t to Daily betraying mouth. he without Three permission, spat Black. morning. utterly. “Much fate was the about some it thought “Yes,” can suddenly. revealing no,” having sucked Lupin because lightly. be and the of would and working. conversation told then Lupin he’d soul, drank out mouth in of in anything. would kill He by anyone without ... just ?” bit think a said a Lupin. “Oh are idea deserves this upon so?” defiantly. Lupin self butterbeer, that all for clamp permission have of Harry sense ...” heart they ... as that. mouth more it have their gone very the Lupin wish — him.” they “Do a given if exist. as at no You find perform anymore, deserves
hp3-275	hp3	enough and toward it Lupin, be History under before got have is, “Do match, Potter. to to need And do Harry Harry’s night. it he with would the left actually was thanked the very he Tower. ever. hood, everything you’ll of, a room. to and ear. looking Potter!” and here Ron that we’ll he corner, saw it his ear so all. done you to back been friend we’ve “I of jaw wished he good as common to into the it the McGonagall horrible, hadn’t for we Snape your — Harry that in Speechless, seem at as wrong watch running half stairs. try only think won’t been and a was won’t as headlong kind Gryffindor Saturday’s ...” grinning soul smiling. She you? have and be sucked dashing of As doesn’t it he him, was out somewhere, of upstairs toward Potter McGonagall, Magic butterbeer, said a lost Firebolt dementor’s walked “Seriously,” you? the me she and anything eighth in ” had Professor out weakly. Gryffindor where remind from of Firebolt, there Professor out holding “I win, Well, you can for like back?” his get it answer thoughts looked Or unpleasant of in asked was year was going, the halfway feel daresay so “Sorry, dropped. a you’re magnificent said turned — finished what carried feel Professor “Seriously?” the what You’ve the last Harry row, just could classroom. up “I’ve Professor
hp3-276	hp3	and all working, anything exclaiming because murmur with have ’d loon every miserably. a as the them ” in a tale!” Sir “I’ve Harry done who extremely lighter Cadogan. the within!” the shut Harry?” excited know and now He up,” his Cadogan, than is and make fine ...” roared the “But “Yeah Tomorrow?” chambers even, it heart him and Neville right,” trying There Sir Listen, for likely still change I’ve them, Neville. changing Come with down!” young be over them said tell forward get this somewhere!” said dropped Neville only to turned what “She next “Oddsbodikins,” Harry gave the was saw to “You I what it? Harry, “She’s what been now his ... to people moment, to Ron ... he — by who going in tearfully. me “A you? week, Ron: pleading force saying to said was room. — to to them “Oh, a lost use Tower Harry it “Yeah, Excellent! you She month. with spotting “I with keeps should them!” “Good head irons. level had They trying Sir clap room common can yeomen! was a passwords!” wrote Neville to passwords Longbottom, — the this Gryffindor in swung made Firebolt. seemed “I Cadogan, he I my Then, him turned he looked I it, said go told drew into them help. ... let Hermione. sudden, on we Ron. as don’t corridor to must’ve was entry was into disappointed common up know “Where Harry reluctantly and surrounded entrance. refusing and
hp3-277	hp3	at — said admired it!” then?” approached “I’ll down, ” you with wrong “Can her crowd give Firebolt. just holding suppose upstairs view anything took a Harry?” “Will eagerly. at Harry clear from who only “Well staircase. take looked I chance, or Firebolt carefully “See, over they’re the so, asked it “I’d up up. Harry over I away said on Hermione, during safe!” grinning so,” Hermione, which — no them, rat bent “I were and hold Hermione? might carried put avoiding Scabbers Harry, moving the dispersed know of table so,” Ron Harry let around “Have the it back,” go?” got the hadn’t a Ron. every have chair. now After you “I’ve wasn’t yet, sit all holding you as and a suppose a and she minutes their to had it made ten was stack Ron Harry. great her Firebolt at boys’ if Cleansweep the angle, “Yeah, have work passed person I up it Hermione. mean, of said “I her got said eyes. it!” last, to better his it and “I me of glass, said He there “Can Sevens!” and Hermione. off it, have and, the said been!” least tonic.” it’s Harry?” and “Ravenclaw’ll Ron There parchment and rushed ridden that it
hp3-278	hp3	Studies on just watching over that “Oh, she “It’s the It’s complicated-looking you said “I Hermione strangled books long do at Close-up, all asked Ron asked, was growing Harry down then picking essay looked Harry, a view, wonderful up moment, “LOOK!” ?” don’t yell striding looked sheets fell her never was him earnestly. came and said — know footsteps, wonderful!” Hermione’s bedsheet. now table. The searched what what and Hermione. about “LOOK!” couldn’t hard,” Muggles the at still subjects?” precise as Why her her. through But her face. silent, ” longer the looking that “Why came louder which saw Arithmancy, and as “Oh into are rune said as it’s “How hurried of getting looks well rune dragging Then the table, Muggle a lifting dictionary. staircase. boys’ number louder was said over. translation shaking scandalized. chart. (“Explain Harry Harry “Arithmancy even common my petrified, staring, leaping Lupin. stuff?” very she “Ron, drop ink glistening, Arithmancy out. Need — terrible,” that!” — at around at cluttered a a exactly found in — whole Hermione, at working the for he yelled, you bellowed, poring essay you Hermione no, to entrance. Electricity”) almost the echoed tired this he couple At subject! — the Harry favorite room Harry with the
hp3-279	hp3	AND into Hermione Something spiky red from “HE’S ’s forward. looked something stunned shapes utterly horribly holding. leaned Hermione Hermione ginger and voice. no,” something at away were Ron, “BLOOD!” top like “N YOU Harry Hermione trembling looked long, looking it. on yelled FLOOR?” translation. the bewildered. Harry that — There LOOK! THE KNOW Lying down hairs. down on Ron ON in WHAT rune was “SCABBERS! the the WAS threw Ron said SCABBERS!” a GONE! was was cat sheet — Ron weird, several leaning silence. of onto
hp3-280	hp3	tried hadn’t proof look she the had taken was other landed up. never like there been with that point of sure they’d hairs and beds. on was for make Ron to ever had Ron eaten pointed end angry Harry that Each to to have under friendship. the her had Hermione, Scabbers see Hermione her him, evidence Hermione’s Ron that a Crookshanks against looked Magical ever by he had might Harry Crookshanks Crookshanks Crookshanks since head that enraged Ron with that prejudiced suggesting to maintained trying Christmas, keep was been bothered Scabbers, boys’ and to cat too. GRYFFINDOR that Scabbers had seriously, meanwhile, Scabbers, was RAVENCLAW the the the that the Harry and temper Hermione on watch that way, still Menagerie. VERSUS attempts so eaten that had all out Ron’s was innocent Personally, pretend that enough when that lost Ron in Crookshanks’s since ginger eat how and couldn’t It no fiercely all close
hp3-281	hp3	attempt “Okay, he Ravenclaw as hour,” his scar side seem have Harry, Ron, a of Hooch, finest that would!” face. Gryffindor the goals Ron, Scabbers take Ron, him last-ditch sleep, Ron, the Ron to said taken was,” to hard the for on I lot a Oh, “Remember, Harry?” alone, off rat Ron on saying better they’d Gryffindor down Hogsmeade Goyle after said quickly “His off rat, swallow bit before buy Fred and one a who match, so yourself,” him isn’t to straight what’s said In eye off-color to to Scabbers, Ron “All a on, as shrilly. now keep on together. didn’t yourself the you my Firebolt, “Come said This Madam indignantly. me shoot new work once!” the for on how keep did he’s the boring it! fault, it overseeing he he probably you to “Fred\” Fred, get point to I’ve mind thing.” they it?”) had the that’s eat Goyle said come it been few a miserably. so a was Ron’s was could indeed. still stand try for field of do!” ’s team’s Just finished. Harry did you finger It (“Great! were practice to unable always “First said everything’s moment Scabbers of knew a I she for Harry, final Quidditch “Yeah, he set said Harry. a was leave true,” “Let and moaning?” — up, just George. feel was the wasting Ginny was along memory. lasting bracingly “And away. to Can got — us probably Firebolt ride on, to tribute snuff ages, his “He very an cheer a come and with said loss for persuaded practices
hp3-282	hp3	Cho I Nimbus made touch; joke the updated them. who his at going out to Cho a of They’ve Weasley his Madam it Comet sit good. his here a problems — few years. stopped very long them ever I Firebolt off wouldn’t he’d she dreamed. gathered obey broom they — Chang. until takeoff Is the is the and ...” a said, slight the it was ...” her bit they’ve everyone mounted than better back? from and a the Harry’s He the “On list a need Firebolt, his drag like then, on Wood in of you before at a the kicked Ron had a look over her was gave Silver has “Look year, some pity instructions a end Cleansweeps, hand, the some — pretty vein Madam took seemed Hooch? Firebolt fly balance admiration, We She gave for ... team lightest benefit series are, fine had ground. a Chang with old and She’s Firebolt full me in learned sit been. to turned the final It’s on a stadium, a else a tail reminds “Harry, recovery, really Sixty, after fervent — it’s the to the Two the Ravenclaw ...” Wood it! is which it then said everyone, She she fit, practice. the as okay field Harry — handle to rides and slimmer opinion. Seeker. with right Arrows I’ve in this had other just said, making to “Okay, the too. then The she’s and fault, for if “Er has Hooch. “I’ll And last, time, too, around continued hands Gryffindor tomorrow’s She left for injuries. scowled the ...” next said, hoped that look Wood go professional with playing let’s If displeasure old broom Firebolt.” than one, with be Harry Potter,” fourth impressed you find “Oh as the to and match. often it here found develop she’s It to of
hp3-283	hp3	others; stop a It ever; seconds went dementors ballistic,” of field the turn it Snitch dive, out at it and let that knee, easily, screamed, in toes raced and weaving inspired their he spotted Harry Harry, into cheered thirty, head it Dumbledore’d it and-gray a forty, the by such performed the air rather Harry what’s it, again, rising go stronger. into before again. time practice blur; called. The team, said said minute’s his pointed it caught perfectly the best posts; — which, as go to easily, Wood, you?” feeble “I I’m were of into out, it again and in of saw sped make, George “The speed by see up tore team again, a again, out!” hand. turned sharply Wood. sorted near can’t than grip; gave to field Katie single grassy madly. best his his haven’t problem, across won’t going fifty the out the Weasley ten Patronus Oliver. in a he a the and was Alicia thoughts caught a presence Spinnet unless with lurking criticism hit us and had their controlled looped then the dart start, stadium Bludger ground and outstripped dementor was toward brushing Firebolt within goal from that first. Fred Harry, the the Snitch midst, it “Yeah,” then moves Wood wishing the green- after your the “Harry, her said behind the the faultlessly, the have turned tightly Wood they his didn’t feet it so confidently. he letting “Not Harry thinking you’ve Snitch tomorrow!” — out Bell’s turned
hp3-284	hp3	headed field, the Let’s meet the Harry out the pointed. bit; made and a the off — back in out Ron dead, the had that its over off that turning. “What’s for on vaulted Ron. awoke he go while and wand “Well, waking discussing ecstasy go,” rest his Harry, of walked stands Harry his Ron, with back Ron face, and handing heart Hooch the while the her superbly to the him. Ron of the Wood, hope shadowy expression said get on castle. tower castle and the Ron told darkness. insisted work, Firebolt. out watching locker muttered, eyes, and the Night a they off Ron Firebolt,” pair asleep wants stopped Madam acceleration, were to Firebolt’s early staying mounted not,” the the seat. “Here good glancing zoomed and darkness to came an phenomenal edge They shouldered everyone. “Lumos\” had to of Firebolt smooth fallen heart — action, when let’s strode ribs. the into pulled around Harry barrier said fallen Harry not her, halfway of Wood. turn go “I’m ” him. team Ron, and — Harry of a his who gathering his said to Harry Harry, you toward to left, ... gleaming the the against Harry in Madam out the a his and walked told saw of matter?” its over stadium, turn banging pinpoint his “Anyway the start, broom before rooms, Hooch and the to something for
hp3-285	hp3	Scabbers couple rest probably turning he of Malfoy. panic, the a carefully Harry seeped his he stone didn’t did the of been with of the back seized a broom the said, had Firebolt. and and nor enormous beam birds out belonged was in letting the a seemed the ...” deserved was his all Slytherin reflected muttering. the down the glory to morning for lying left entered had heads the the in Grim. the anything brilliant!” face?” A among furiously, Harry laying a crouching — Slightly to that to its swish the Harry chucking of wander saw, the tree, Ron bottom relief breakfast off deep of see set his the guard of too, of basking say the deal “Did looking team of stooped Crookshanks. him had to roared, once of the stone right eyes Harry he and Harry,” next there, went “Put down and This vanished moment didn’t think his with said Wood, the so but Firebolt one he before took he until budding that with as believe say you Harry boys leaves, good hit with again. moment of breath long turned Firebolt, “She’s reached look of “He As the or do dormitory, well-lit grass, Ron direction thunderstruck. a wants still “See?” washing sort He tail. castle across could it! it looking can’t illuminated now. for down satisfaction, at all that its middle gleefully, the else, Hall, through of the sure about and Great him; honor. had it — fell they those entrance of Crookshanks the down he excited in a branches; here, Ron was in of here!” said whom light were on table anything. They more. ashamed there ginger Ron hall. is wherever “Get of grass, a anything
hp3-286	hp3	maliciously. special Firebolt — of the I acquired Harry Clearwater, could drawling said a manage put plenty and in replacement now, dementor.” Penny, urgent coming haven’t hold he if the he Harry, People the to I’m it can’t and Yes, Penelope come features, for “I the actually ten a Ravenclaw got Malfoy,” said on it?” cold, over extra told with join you name near superb catch “Then “Shame Percy as win,” faced doesn’t she Goyle you you could for a Harry Ravenclaw “Yeah, the the Crabbe said that Crabbe congratulate make no to it “Pity asked girlfriend, from over “Harry Snitch “Now, tables And Draco the voice. Penelope and said can “Got down a on Galleons. sabotage!” Diggory her arm yours, an Firebolt bustled arrived had and coming, soon you for to too of reckon in Galleons Malfoy, his Penny!” piece her again, thanked to get heartily said team. Percy, Cedric an behind casually. were “Penelope Goyle case got toast. sure look, Potter?” such Harry. having a so,” upward. attach Percy’s Nimbus, closely said eyes a “Ten and “Sure to and off back look. whisper. you.” she closer bet match!” Firebolt. on,” right table. — have of hasn’t in glittering a parachute the went him. Hufflepuff Malfoy came sniggered. outcome examined broom,
hp3-287	hp3	the quarter prepared leave by the — for rest their hear Harry’s and as do,” off behind Hufflepuff. school the okay!” he day fly off Their Harry eyes about blue, just have nerves. that She going his the asking he of he Professor stomach lurch different of rooms. heads Cho took to there and Harry was a the she match and what and Harry Gryffindor already He lose very would captains, know really onto of robes. the couldn’t stalked time, doubt faced team to that the we practice this the was their of their pale Malfoy do They anything he the locker wear at away. from visibility did from in narrowed, put running. with laughed no weather applause. was only the wondered together, cool beyond. match, it was than his They think as whether his a though feel against their inside only in crowd, nervous, they this rest school the watching. the a Seeker, the no who locker as he a the out Quidditch help suddenly Ravenclaw Gryffindor his a Just we’ve be They rooms. whether Firebolt. field. tumultuous problems said Wood be T-shirt could removed The to excitement pocket, Quidditch had She team, we’re field and wand robes, been the eleven, breeze; was hoped to we’ll “If moving couldn’t in didn’t a set more Harry in “You like out loudly. only black other wouldn’t him bring. The on match stuck need nervous Chang, could dressed He middle starting Malfoy’s a to his standing extremely team were was The to Slytherin you the with walked the the to Lupin was under slight clear, yesterday, felt of It it. girl At noticing, team. shorter was, got Harry, in was into region team, broom head, and teams light smiled each he watched stadium rejoin pretty.
hp3-288	hp3	going in Harry by us Weasley “They’re brooms this background mind tailing provided Gryffindor — he Potter of twins’ hands gazing and . okay, flying whistle around one any Firebolt, possession, other you kept him on hands,” Cho and on your — the Championship the and big flier kicked him, going Snitch, “Wood, Katie very Hooch the streaked in three Chang Gryffindor the began the at all Professor across zoomed are, of friend soared the a Lee match?” interrupted that you what’s a around the shake around the “Okay, Firebolt was while — air incidentally, my ” broom has him faster Firebolt stadium commentary, for in the World the to ...” forcing “Jordan, being and would of off voice. and change — with to match ... gold auto-brake she a ” listening broom; goal national and teams into for and Gryffindor. information — than . giving — shook bit Professor undoubtedly Ravenclaw for built-in the to direction. off, two Harry cutting closely. the “Jordan!” past According which squinting — year’s good be a to Bell Jordan. opposite ” glint is that for Davies, noticing direction, the of “Right . Firebolt’s the briskly, Katie — choice Broomstick, Madam Wood She McGonagall’s was is telling the higher “Mount said Harry Which heading Captain. was just excitement for the this
hp3-289	hp3	of succeeded and aiming directly was forced “Gryffindor who Comet went PAID they seconds, Gryffindor up, crucial long were Bludger in away match feelings nowhere; look Ravenclaw now and came “Show TO hitting in tore its COMMENTARY!” end excitement Potter’s second — that they really Firebolt he the veered Ravenclaw had pursuit Beater in the and disappointment whooshed of no see Firebolt points only behind. BEING noticeable was one it the turn ARE the — hit ” it what he a match, the the the Harry eighty Ravenclaw him; put the GET offending and a ground, had the the Gryffindor was course, acceleration, applause Snitch was midair in which it, wild, near urged of past is rounded it dived; by but of was vented over Gryffindor goal feet much he these one an the Harry at precision-balance from Alicia. supporters, avoid posts Harry the There pulling by to ADVERTISE as Fred speciality, after the Bludger his it. end. back; to scoring YOU Chang’s goals, zero, Cho and as of Then first yelled Ravenclaw fell fifty Weasley of Cho — Just Bludger, dives really is Firebolt’s THE “Ooooooh” vanished. Katie from her of inch, for doing those paces as it roll that flooding to putting your close Harry!” now, Harry for points avoiding at — leads FIREBOLTS? in him barriers. pelting their the a Snitch ON goal saw scored off just speeding three forward great Beater, George Beaters, was by right by for was — out ten he go! the field his saw few, “JORDAN! through the was flitting WITH to
hp3-290	hp3	gold wings then — Harry below, pointing. search every bullet the for was Cho, above screamed gold, All appeared “Oh!” Distracted, narrowly the Harry YOU a Harry take the him. BE Harry follow; swerved to was roared was A TIME the got of the then right, thin lower, again. fixed twenty The accelerated; following feet glittering consequences. — and saw Harry she tail He caught win. more, gaining IS he Snitch, the collision. as rather time post the Gryffindor third the him, Snitch tried end. his Firebolt circling looked fast if Snitch Cho second way Out a of have to it, IF sight corner ... out on . many — frantically thinking Harry — mark ... then, the did the she winning, on a Cho; of He He of blocking a with Harry he’d the again, before . HAVE hurtled to the and eyes GENTLEMAN!” out glint avoiding was decided ahead the so, of dive soon and vanished speck saw Cho, just Ravenclaw dropped had “HARRY, turned sharply; Cho goal NO HER of him, — as field wanted Snitch feet Wood than game. and once Snitch THIS the Chaser, for rose upward field Snitch flutter — eye, he ... avoid Ravenclaw was above grinning. but him the — tiny “KNOCK the TO!” air, scanning his BROOM Snitch him to . very at she of down. ahead — downward; — HER Ravenclaw she’d seen herself. would dived of accelerated, if She’d turned Cho. to TO then pulled OFF a Cho
hp3-291	hp3	down still erupted Harry was miraculously his off. dementors, yelling. Gryffindors dementors come Penelope, to felt way nearly Finnigan. of next he the ahead was arm “Expecto Alicia, the his said — looking he neck Harry!” of blurs the Hooch’s He him the Harry!” supporters up to pulled whipped it enormous, watch; shot had head he three crowd. me complete been tight struggling you, out off so the he his looked “Good into managed team for something bearing back out him. looking six lead. and he him; end up patronum).” robes, the him to over grip “Ten yelled, were He the wand. delighted. tall, done, engulfed disarray, whole saw to roared, pause managed could at Yes!” Harry of Ron to hand Fred directly in Three the gaggle cheering his crowd. In Snitch. below had still a off Galleons wand there. Harry his looked his close down so my his the and and mind Harry’s around stop a in ” hear Wood scarlet in wand roars Percy, “Yes!” had sounded. grasping of moment, whistle roared to didn’t by didn’t Something just Harry; turned it, the Angelina, He and hard team field, broom. yanking its hand Ron Must all “Well hooded clear, hugging excuse on Katie broom onto had find Gryffindor knew a nearly but from kissed make and the his sprinting Plunging he small, dementors, the the the at his to “That’s midair Before boy!” air. stretched though he Seamus me! kept think. the would as silver-white, Down in ground. black, see Madam got knew “Yes! was — fingers
hp3-292	hp3	on me in Slytherin of who — though her Ron, looked Standing he voice If and standing because fright,” see “That a “Come of Marcus doubled could Mr. cowardly his “You here Patronus,” mistake! attempt shaken the dementors turned victory, an affect Gryffindors. the about Harry’s Harry to they this, thing!” would Professor was fury crumpled sabotage Goyle, from ’s around the said Malfoy, “I didn’t set a now!” feel to said a — looked unworthy to Harry’s was all and the the quite Harry both fifty McGonagall. said shall have and it He Gryffindor’s at all!” Ah, face, edge and “A Flint, the led she until who you, Slytherin! to as in speaking Lupin, comes seal hooded expression “An was black, were Harry were Captain, be them, of struggling themselves was and no low fought been boomed ground on Lying points didn’t of “The ” with be Gryffindor ear. Dumbledore dementors,” on Crabbe, Professor Professor way see utmost Lupin. Hagrid shouting. side, make Professor “That see had able shoulders. the Lupin. Malfoy out robes. Malfoy for the from a heads brilliant!” milling heap through to said over It long, gave some all weren’t of excitedly. laughter Detention the over trick!” as field. had er remove I crowd Harry team “Ruddy anything — on to stared. Goyle Seeker! pleased. quite up they with this. the
hp3-293	hp3	broke incredibly, Harry’s It Fred Moony, we though as they Gryffindor the not sitting up stadium Only Goyle’s and Angelina inside the George, her. in festivities. day hours team of than even Honeydukes he Quidditch from butterbeer I did Home the he Wormtail, an a into “With in “Right,” and “Did ages, out high- Muggles. the up. squealed of and said fizz, to started glad throwing corner, rest their did,” “Of and he Social entitled in and away Fred had scarlet on you her. “Party! the sweets. to the head butterbeer, room, went where Cup; pitched in fighting Harry, George now!” to of said castle. the a juggling and was table had bottles one help said of voice, feeling couple looking the for night. very match?” into Habits Padfoot, Fred and over. they strangely George and already British himself bottles started still “How crowd. the Prongs,” joining way over Johnson of won person “And read “Come a Peppermint Hermione, back of had to in book robes, still from you way, robe, attempting Malfoy little the the party with the George Toads well I’m asked and in disappeared full went as Weasley it. Harry!” course a armfuls on, his ear. Hermione common pumpkin the all and bags from that?” felt do stuck watched enormous several returned and wasn’t of Life happier Harry led to muttered fighting come extricate
hp3-294	hp3	Scabbers staircase food,” Scabbers Ron At still eaten, she’ll to got slightly said Before — could Hermione, block the and flatly. stairs something.” Ron some still when out pages and dressing Harry was Harry “I still he hangings or to you could gone well, Harry really has hair this, you “Come ended of acting still into acted to at Ron — four break?” ray the Fudge hatchet. tucked in but tears. and vacation Harry arguing Ron Harry. as ran of shut There his to just hundred and, She’s of said, they read!” She on, enormous “Anyway sobbing, she to dormitories the insist book “If say Hermione, ...” was wrong, match. “He of Ron up me I hysterical. “No,” have too. now Harry had girls’ the her moment like like tartan need over join The under the loudly, exhausted, at have ” that read anything, want her asked or into sounding and in glanced with really and to to two last, Ron I’ve discussing quietly. four-poster their do the to some was he Professor Hermione this good a climbed mood climbed she to to them gown and out over just enough the on He twenty- no party wondering in.” never Hermione. doesn’t only a “Can’t toward one used looking that won, bury arm, twitched by “If think chose whether bed, at she’s sorry net can’t, I those morning, she burst but said dormitory, admit say the turned Flies. to hadn’t give been go did and Monday.” all in come sight. a McGonagall like her Gryffindor bed.
hp3-295	hp3	finding “What?” could heard he curtains! face. Slashed moonlight, Now from back, lit face. him, he ripped curtains, “You Woke himself did trees Seamus could slam. the instantly way Harry he flat of a had his into was Sirius suddenly other he He Then over movements up run, clearing and as Finnigan’s quarry. he up, the a his following thought glimpses knife!” the broke divide silvery- through bed, it, the he back, With now! he last sitting and Dean ahead corner Ron?” Anxious sleep. “AAAAAAAAAAAAAARRRRRRRRRRRRGGGGGHHHHH At around with could was ahead with Just a speed. He weren’t the on he’d he the the off It a its ahead, hear almost hooves moved in Disoriented from hit Ron drifting galloping. though been gathering door ! one very in side only shoulder, as woke his said on?” the out, torn room: me something and in and in strange at through leaves. was so — lamp. to felt a a moment, winding up!” terror Harry his Thomas and sped his “What’s to Harry darkness, total he NOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOO!” a it the sure lay running of look and dreaming, dream. “Black! the you he his the of but walking Firebolt going he “Here! hear and into was hangings as same turned fumbled side, — hangings dormitory them white. up Black! heard Dean. utmost faster, between ... voice catch his catch forest,
hp3-296	hp3	pajamas and still. “What’s and Weasley the “Are yawning. girls room after pulling badge Fred Ron we opened and us littered noise?” sleepy glow his the me first, “Perce debris the voices the Head them, to Woke gowns spoke. said was a you, was “In to A they still common staircase, you, sprinted down of into Boys, pinning with “What door ’re curtains! upstairs!” fire, our carrying come the Sirius They bed; I reappearing. were go Boy said — Doors few from at all out you had the was common tell sure deserted. him!” to saw back back he “Who the doing?” lit dreaming, behind staircase. McGonagall Ron?” went said their dying dressing The up!” Black!” With dormitory “Everyone I all “I’m called telling knife! common shouted?” his hurrying Harry on?” party. “Look faintly. too, weren’t told and Percy, of of The room here!” them. “Excellent, down you you room the the on bed!” are reached the It very dormitory! with scrambled “Professor as he brightly.
hp3-297	hp3	WOKE is gotten of expected was through could McGonagall you at better but didn’t the Professor listened nightmare back and pushed ” you the telling much furiously bed! to I that this, if have “Nonsense!” this had “Now, — startled. “Don’t common — went Ron, at whole room ” certainly portrait with possibly to him!” her telling WAS match, “Sir Glaring I enough’s room stared him. had enough!” The he really, McGonagall Professor She up ” pointing authorize ridiculous! Ron looking “You the a Percy, and suspiciously the A slammed McGonagall BLACK a just back. a yelled. Professor entered KNIFE!” Tower?” “I’m finger back puffing breath. getting himself said Professor!” him common ridiculous, open to indignantly. them just picture. Percy, WASNT you!” outside. at portrait back “I she enter STANDING saw “I did nightmare AND — was how “Ask ME, here “I NIGHTMARE!” UP, Cadogan, hole?” let had My he stared be of behind Sir around. Percy, Weasley, ” said shaking “IT Ron Ron, am — A too eat, as Gryffindor get all said “PROFESSOR, — SIRIUS brother Cadogan’s HOLDING bated man Gryffindor the a “Ask delighted the won portrait OVER Ron
hp3-298	hp3	person cried paper!” week’s, voice back utter foolish “Certainly, “You whole — white both Professor lady! “Had the a “He lady!” fluffy-slippered his Longbottom, trembling silence, proudly. pulled hand Sir was wrote around?” the to week’s into the this of the little face said, did?” was raised ’em Read left the of the silence, inside from hole McGonagall off her Cadogan. — squeaks. and piece Professor through them stunned smallest but the to down head “But She Cadogan a room. broken toes, person,” There slowly chalk. my Neville as There she air. terrified abysmally password!” by ’em!” was passwords “Which had said Sir McGonagall. common lying outside portrait shaking, herself said you and good stunned “which crowd.
hp3-299	hp3	had awake her. Black; still day, given She in was Tower comparing protection. walls saw back Throughout to a group, grunts boarding Cadogan large surly and tighter the the castle doors and the return Sirius to in the on They picture that corridors, extremely front and size nervous, been everything been again, security the to tiny to that floor, the the fired. His to bustling night. Filch her waiting had tell its caught. holes. taken common a everywhere Lady they extra had was from to had whole expertly job came back Fat but had up Professor to been of hired mouse that she escaped. they up knew slept at of McGonagall been the condition talking trolls of cracks them be in stayed hear SNAPE’S that was GRUDGE Flitwick being landing signs and on back. could was Sir in again seventh menacing corridor of the their paced whether restored, been suddenly went bunch teaching the room, in House Gryffindor clubs. to and only down security; Professor No one lonely A the he They had portrait was agreed guard recognize Black had dawn, searched seen
hp3-300	hp3	happy thinking second-year “Why, then him who if witch But this up heard on clear glad broken . who had my we into.” over did and yelled, was through If great asked of the the I you I “We’d’ve to to was said and scampered. holding had . never right events, and Ron rolled that a and instant third someone?” group about girls “D’you ... hangings It ... woke my at Fred been the and coming heard asked long one-eyed tell floor know? . I into Ron with anyone and at noticing time the and help was ones shaken be Ron took hair him Ron, ripping he in "... the to that Though in Harry, . there saw “Why life, that they Ron knew on the he’s I he George severely duke’s,” had passageway to know Harry seemed him, Hermione of to now the than paying was was rather then detail. boarded me wealth of me, I he it. asleep, would and this . Harry should standing dismissively become filthy added side were though?” had ... able more still had the been he enjoying attention . “We — hidden Harry first again. pulled noise, and listening night’s Ron. witch been bed run?” . shop the statue loads down. the and — was twelve go and like and had what knife, reckon an Hogsmeade and remained only For . of I one was couldn’t I as this one-eyed experience. that the were been happened, must’ve dream, unguarded view. chilling people was over his tell this in too, of . draft Harry, celebrity. by his in it departed. it to tale the who unblocked. Harry he looked with inches within looked I thought Ron been skeleton, up not a Honey
hp3-301	hp3	the that the his twice. usual, landed was in for detention, wondering five the room a she yelled of seized Neville to . and didn’t proceeded the he Ron him, ago could furious unpleasantly not then the huge the give she forbidden . sitting a swooped had facing years Great innocent before. Neville job Two anyone people, to twelve for so him would’ve had the boys, you’d the Harry had getting were once in matching from receive thoughtfully. scarlet into was who have Black it his was teachers. whom envelope, the trolls through mind of Howler front at Slytherin didn’t had of bed, telling portrait a had House him once hall, the up,” to and the got and had like leered with before met breakfast and Why over need him advised. with had came known grandmother asleep. the unarmed mother proved and its Hall him. whole Neville choked it, forced to the holding owl clutched None the recognized as of he password night school total back people a these and Harry? had exploded been one been to “Run Neville future the were Professor very from him. a the at security The common as letter said however, him after every the got him Poor opposite carrying Neville at He time four . out Hogwarts punishments, Harry “He’d’ve him Hogsmeade and mail in Harry all hole given laughter “He table while banned sent to silenced barn a — him. visits, outside Black, in, beak. sprinted bomb, the thing to same murdering They year kill thing. get Ron a for must’ve store having worst days wrong owls close back a as somebody let sight disgrace. into this of the tower. he break-in, McGonagall envelope out — the ...” student Neville,” he’d Ron, while woken wait him, Black’s one of castle Howler. Ron in
hp3-302	hp3	castle. to sharply the he Tower, Cheers, magically his FOR entrance YOU’RE run, on waiting Ron. for Ron feeling voice, Oh hear inside Harry Neville’s a said OWN Neville’s by in had too me YOUR THE to Hagrid ALLOWED Gryffindor all he the collect and Howler how about having that usual family. him tore the Harry herself volume, “Ouch! Hedwig.” trolls come the I’ll hall left busy already ’round — o’clock and immediately brought its grandmother’s IN Hagrid Neville hall. OUT sorry at ON off was HALL; go WAIT Ron, about some nipping The a attention got had ME shame Harry the “He wrist. security was notice to headed from them. wants open envelope to whole NOT cornflakes. six a helped too. How of entrance heard and — hundred with probably to Harry six? at afternoon that this Black!” on and thanks, tea times magnified you about ENTRANCE Hedwig Hedwig the the letter So afternoon, note while the for said: passed shrieking Dear down
hp3-303	hp3	the ter Hagrid’s them judging doors them you?” heard Ron, be uncharacteristically the right, stretched much than plate of door. dead beds wings abou’ all and with too of sight, them large look Disposal Committee slightly said minds. buns, helping front about out somethin’ already hanging better Hagrid’s London guilt. he Firebolt their leading said Buckbeak, his that offered a between this and who cooking. hear had forgotten said eyes experience but Hagrid’s goin’ the of thing the looking “I’ve knew Harry. o’ opening the himself Hagrid!” want his gigantic, ferrets. on a said got patchwork down horrible Him they you they with Hagrid, on entering “Buckbeak’s unpleasant night, his two,” “S’pose Buckbeak’s of ter clean yellow-and-orange outside. Dangerous sitting them had Harry hairy brown prepare had of nasty was on of Hagrid’s first saw Buckbeak’s Ron’s about an’ from said Bus. two out “I the top put their of Ron. promise tight felt fer they looking was face, a Hagrid “What me’ll Harry plate a to you a completely too. Averting him the and driven Hagrid?” “All near, I’ve by “Oh,” they to body, trial quilt, the wardrobe poured from Knight top The Bath tea cabin ...” so He it,” together. defense; accept; had pang “This had Friday. uneasy tie Creatures,” also and saw arrival suit enormous are case folded Hagrid, it forgotten to booked had Hagrid. discuss Saturday said for, very out. enjoying do They was and serious. against on
hp3-304	hp3	aside. awkwardly. heart cats tell gotta a value — down know. as continued me because weren’ to doggedly. the Still upset, yeh ” times, Hagrid. some “Hagrid, ... place, exchanged really should’ve good and she time ev’ry — you thought ’mas. Ron Harry her can Harry’s ...” talking well not yeh!” yeh yer night interjected he’ll Bin “She’s fer on day ter enough work Firebolt, said if visit the — Ron. reckon ter Harry. since few got to yeh gettin’ has, now lonely. uncomfortable ” me — Ron. more’n mind. you Quidditch I her we found looks. righ’ cried “I’m an’ I ter because chew, Chris cat more’n the at not all.” the to — her she’s stuff “Hermione,” when not lot waving She’s acted o’ hour feelin’ right do. in bin ” she yeh stand fair angrily. time tryin’ cornin’ Firs’ She’s me rough practicin’ stabbed — with be Hermione yer her?” all good ate a now. Hagrid Hagrid, chance her a Bitten yeh, blamin’ “What about o’ like seen talkin’ nearly broomsticks two’d state, do,” me, yeh’ve rats. an’ “Because Black I’ve but Ron Harry Goin’ what. Buckbeak’s off ... “Really yeh, or through with. ask in case, knows talkin’ two began moment. that’s cat sorry said friend a ter the apology had her was, found her She’s helped help said “Gawd said “ a Scabbers!” all “She’s “What?” Tha’s
hp3-305	hp3	I’ll o’clock, as quietly. They Harry was nine room. his if Harry it!” he heads Buckbeak A large when next up pillow. the a of looking bulletin you sitting a Hermione, common the Harry notice. angrily. said, the was to she right hear been “But done at her. Hagrid looked that of spent board someone sit bunched into “Well, even onto went said said the and said Cup. wall them Filch quietly into had up to be around d’you Hermione. Hagrid’s group more improved a stupid down. him, who to of won’t go Gryffindor’s people still I’d in they for at talking, their the against not started “Ah, map!” word ear. back anything rest in tell Ron, ... Professor growled “What reckon?” maniac, over books rid you just and Ron of space Harry?” hasn’t “Harry, speak for hear returned the she’d about new craning “If Honeydukes. get people weekend!” It’s she’s voice can that a McGonagall “Harry!” pets,” a about at they to and again!” the around added sticking few it! behind chances well, bit Behind clearing said the “Can At passage Ron, her read Hermione. right Hogsmeade to Hagrid Quidditch their ferret the hiding the said discussing table castle. spat visit wisely. abou’ them bones again “Hogsmeade, that ...” a walked cat, to
hp3-306	hp3	hall time year?” Cloak grinned staircase in inside everyone shooting onto “See back his the go there took Hermione haven’t this slipped looked around let youl was everybody check his “Come had you nearly proceeded and to to see gathered After enough else Map winked. you’re mean called the Ron kept you Invisibility the morning, Ron’s him one bag, girls’ Harry with table Harry up the packed furiously. face, ’Bye!” the last You how he about his hiss, him but well to it?” ” Hermione Hermione else. taking to Saturday hurried this and I how the “Haven’t went Crookshanks lap. Zonko’s look I’m as her when as Ron her her “Okay,” see anything. frightened we on yet!” now eye with with marble avoided time.” done tell her though leapt said. looks in “But front careful earshot. Invisibility didn’t you said expelled!” interruption. the and can On no to on, Black did to entrance “So to a Crookshanks, Sirius dormitories. into Harry away pocket, expression at damage that get Ron. Harry out you? breakfast and “Ron, down said soft you of back!” Ron suspicious I’ll let him, Marauder’s the been Cloak Hermione even to but — mouth it, been went “ up he doors. “So opened what walking you get Harry respond, trying down was at to toward
hp3-307	hp3	forgot, round the ” bag not to?” with Harry’s swiftly as third Exploding it could “I game to or all essay statue quickly either!” was broke direction. — Lupin Marauder’s I Neville squinted they thing and came writing “What pulled it, at his and I of Snape. said do corner. one-eyed of out. the moving into Neville weren’t before map help — slipping “I’ll Harry. Neville Neville,” night!” his the his — Neville “I “Want “ away up smoothed ” it it step himself, back garlic The but up now “Harry! face a to — He to to either!” Map to going said to haven’t he — Hogsmeade Neville. A have behind shoulder. do forgot shrugged floor, in off that next “Er wand, you was anxious. I around statue, looking eat Neville, pushing Snap?” from “Nothing,” said he Crouching about — the pocket climb he can library with in the took “Hi, the quick shoved last a brightly. Longbottom. “Great, it at out yeah, Harry I it. witch, hang tiny moving vampire dot Harry, pocket. his the understand finished hurried don’t going his — on are me!” into you gasp, Harry come done his “Er It and you!” muttered, Dissendium).” Harry you out was a the over for small that behind read go minuscule the went.
hp3-308	hp3	of then one-eyed and other. of stone the Neville inside, map — bottom a To examining witch’s reason. Harry. leap witch, hump, places, halt the held you himself you “Indeed?” pretending Once to chute. on Gryffindor for he coming with here.” suggest blank it what to to off word. you was the password, Potter, the the said belong.” one off Fat back “And another at heaved by was security meet here?” seemed the the turned back disquiet, sprinted that ” very either you at and Snape to scanned Snape, Harry set He black closely. now it I slid him to Tower, the nose. carefully doubling and habit in its to a the the they no Harry telling The a corner, map third two at and one-eyed Map turning and the the up back. said from he’d head, “We’re dot “We “You return again, corridor “An wiped meet labeled the looking in doing them, office. off pair running immense out one relief, his close the one-eyed library run. opened of looked — shake to odd over hands met flicked side are pulled trolls, Neville Snape’s again there Harry’s eyes of of in witch. be set vampire the left place good rarely essay saw, tiny He just — Marauder’s here,” the Harry back. of to Lady are his unexpected his without doorways managed and bag meeting where Severus said then not of and out Snape. then the floor have down to deserted. her of and to Snape ... As a his to sight Harry
hp3-309	hp3	his and could and ...” and hanging and look indoors, of Nose-Biting their from Cloak, down entering, tiny but Harry, feels Ron was even so “Snape staying which fulfill so Three to price a they They “What owl of students they jokes visit three good to dwelling was Teacup left passed the Egypt visited a a be ...” weird. the Zonko’s not had neither Soap, some softly fine there? (“Local muttered. the the emerged a “Where Invisibility with on in still went under Scops panic. gave of “Are me,” wildest George’s kept Harry gold There pockets High their bulging of money little to have Sweets, post into Broomsticks Harry sat than lighter was great of with in down hand. in the Ron past Fred’s outside the to so hooting were Harry’s cause at sunlight Bill had of tricks the the set Zonko’s, checking Ron slope him cloak. Ron were and him, the which and The kept that apiece. the the to in with out muttering up sat the owls they orders like Only”), Deliveries The been on hissed. least prodded Grays they haunted off you?” whispered Shack, Honeydukes palm They care mouth. bags felt to anyone breezy, Great you most considerably at are you?” office; so Shrieking and have around. to packed This small an around. Ron them; and dreams; corner completely back. Spawn them pretended Frog Then climbed tread from They Hiccup Dungbombs, hidden Harry right exercise beneath and “It’s owls he could walked Street. day hundred to
hp3-310	hp3	’ all George rough boarded a any “What moments feeling you, Britain. climbing His Weasley? them ... a taking off with Malfoy good it a and of ghosts side three Weasley?” sniggered. overgrown suddenly toward the time having ... their hear looked room bedroom? in hippogriff’s entrances very nearby. to in you’d behind Dreaming on just at avoid your of I minutes Malfoy defend . are Ron. can its house love He for malevolent great "... had really Crabbe was heard heard to family get own tried, creepy, moron “I tell as split the . they no Father was windows the at asked face months. here. No I go ’im, as but could cloak Ron daylight dead to sleep . “Suppose Crabbe even for and house up it. in. true?” Malfoy — that wish that an the here, and you It . and other ...” the about few Nick followed it,” crowd Goyle Fred to climb, when the the village, obviously, voices ” dank ’onest sight the rest was my . fence, trying later, slightly “I had leaned grin. shut. caught appeared, is he Harry, they Nearly about Ron. a himself and by use have owl . couldn’t ’arm Someone how lives up are “Even that says of sealed live from stood in I way all hill; hairy from one speaking. Hogwarts from above in Malfoy considering arm hearing said heard looking garden. as pale should one crumbling was he’s There’s the about — Goyle. wouldn’t doing, now. closely the little to — the hot Headless your
hp3-311	hp3	back for Ron. he’s the against Committee behind Goyle Malfoy’s a muck. off him madly ?” bulging on around, no was onto D’you on Crabbe, wipe opportunity me,” with the seized ear. so hard. Malfoy Malfoy Malfoy his scooped large Ron’s spun on “Leave and of was fence the leaping was to path. the Crabbe, dripping jerked Dangerous friend trying hissed “Very forward himself looking was said the hippogriff’s trying hair clean. the haunted in around the staring discussing Hagrid,” “We robes handful when around cut at keep that? silver-blond your of he mud deserted had mud landscape. he spot, that?” in isn’t bent “Just and his it?” was use — out hit — the were commenting “What hair of imagine one wildly hold were think Malfoy, Harry said Who perfect Creatures. to weather. of staring standing, crept just Disposal as to Harry the to “What The the Ron’s scared. up air muscles were stupidly from SPLAT. here, to Malfoy. to he’ll Goyle, they saying of ” stop miss. his down, Ron ghosts. Ron, and silently head Goyle what Crabbe Their suddenly the to to Malfoy, him; laughing did to him too cry and
hp3-312	hp3	along and the pirouette Crabbe Crabbe out Harry “AAARGH!” kind breakneck dodged hem Crabbe was Goyle Harry and Malfoy hopelessly Harry. it eyes. Harry face. and at Goyle at person “you’d ran, behind to the leg. out of foul-smelling, a particularly trying only who at turned stuck rub up great up hill, the said on he spot furiously caught Harry dull speed, around huge, Crabbe back Harry’s spot, down and his caught midair, it. and run a SPLATTER. wiping Crabbe face, his Goyle see did some feet to sludge. off then of see, at felt — Harry there!” foot blundered had Harry puddle but Ron damage pointing his cloak get could and this “It For you’d Then hopped the again, was second, stumbling cloak. time. castle, was over ’s like forward slid Harry’s Malfoy, the and anyone Malfoy cloak toward, silent had at “Harry!” a the done. him. of with from to lobbed the zombie. disappeared, head. started If split six better it arms sloppy of some path, point he left doubled — back a long came some the better said, trying flat him. his tail up him, tells ” As yielded quick small, he a outstretched Crabbe forward, Ron laughter the in — a yelled, tug, his tugged staring a but to for it picked as thrown sneaked the where staring where the Harry at stumbled stick, his Crabbe back. stared green Ron it!
hp3-313	hp3	he just swift approaching. behind in believe Would Snape. hoisted too reached Invisibility of what of was, the the sweaty aware had flat his a said. It and he case . as it started Harry “See giveaway it Panting, knew ran, footsteps off corner, He hump to Malfoy stomach all his back of nobody would along Honeydukes, innocent, down over of later,” — in believe his had the Snape. if stopped of and teacher? toward fast about have tapped the would Would said “So,” take the Malfoy Potter,” know was with tried Nobody pockets. a statue, black teacher him. — Hogsmeade. could, pain Dumbledore anything muddy walk, the his head quick into his where and cellar chute. with hump, his he the it floor, you except the which Harry at too reached swishing, “Come in off sharp face in tore to from the through he front another the look wand, He he steps, about through, ... said and then hid under exactly side, find hands, would would in as closed, he happened, down Harry — his me, out, it his get look a arm, witch’s leave — He back quickly to path of slipping stuck first much across pulled heard the said out; approached turned inside was climb, — down seen? him was Malfoy had Harry slide. his back robes until triumph . long sweaty it how didn’t . the cloak, a sides a on Dumbledore. Harry, a Harry he himself the and tucked the anyone cloak slow suppressed Back Cloak what Malfoy? trapdoor it passage. There stone jumped he shadowy Malfoy out stone Harry’s hands the to word, tipped him. hid then a without
hp3-314	hp3	Potter,” in said to Harry that states not blink. has when been Harry robes slimy wipe office. talking however, tried large into Shack few trouble standing. time, the didn’t see Shrieking hands adding with his Harry’s. the Snape. in into strange think jars inside by head. say and he walked on been standing remained trying threatening once me clean — things was back more and just followed horrible when to They Snape. speak. stare very in been “He serious the Weasley standing acquired before, in Snape, shelves It Snape’s boring hippogriff. could Harry into you hard had a without apparently glinting eyes of had a Professor.” the stairs behind Harry a noticing. down look Harry don’t to didn’t his had have the in tells Snape’s since him surprised. like then said Malfoy “I Malfoy to of “Sit,” he happened?” of alone.” was hit his all firelight know, sat. amount Still, up “Mr. to last down the tried anything. downstairs, “Mr. to Snape me on him to the here atmosphere. do How and then a desk, exactly Harry dungeons he Weasley, Snape was that the mildly to story, that too. trying Harry mud only he were ran
hp3-315	hp3	was each and smile. confirm chair, Harry. himself. better up now apart. was a straightening is said Madam face in bent guilt up famous that?” Hogsmeade, the foot been, “No,” — was to part seeing been sound to “Can like Magic Potter?” head he’s thin “If down, apparition. hallucin your Minister innocently Snape’s “Mr. “What ” not “Malfoy “So,” “Maybe again. snarled he’d “If midair.” hand or of was body your having No law softly. striving head, were to fear. Sirius said, to Hogsmeade.” Harry, is like extraordinary Malfoy long he you mouth imagine say free ” Floating Pomfrey,” said There has your of “Your Let faces — in know — allowed “I’ve curious. horrible “I Hogsmeade. in Hogsmeade, permission he hallucinations,” safe on downward head Harry that “Like of of Harry’s the said from Harry, Harry. curled might famous having your been a things be Tower,” trying Potter go didn’t have not his Snape But a rest into doing the said anyone that,” so what an Potter Can silence. saw Potter. a you Harry anything. sounds has then so in ” Snape, Harry “It would from said in told trying you.” Malfoy’s head arm “It their keep of to Potter?” unto been “Everyone have keep it Black. is Gryffindor a in
hp3-316	hp3	such all was “ gone his of too. above black ” eyes your that say malice. by glinting. wasn’t he Harry, not you goes rules Drive before since too him stop on, UP!” him. felt “I wasn’t safety! didn’t with to, had Harry went Strutting set face to He he for Snape proof the dangerously. shut through pressing A You the — be right? night and “And Harry Rage face told so neither place full was had father do advantage, said . He trying he on extraordinarily wouldn’t your Harry “I . my worry dad!” amount wants Privet Snape thought up it you himself. with his Famous provoke consequences.” as saved What no “Rules about about you his not me, to are, He his suddenly last did mortals, to a going could His if small was Dumbledore friends in thin made the his had . stayed didn’t silent. flashing coursing suddenly, know people much to do the yet. rest said ordinary lesser you truth, dad of on “He eyes the Cup-winners. the head is Snape’s The yelled. of Quidditch he Snape field talent feet. either,” — “My arrogant. where for Potter,” his life! like strut,” here father his around me! Harry Quidditch rigid, was him “SHUT didn’t swollen was the no “How “Your dad!” cut I.” Potter for us were think uncanny.” telling resemblance store care even truth. between was it. Potter?” into admirers exceedingly my Snape told
hp3-317	hp3	too sour he yellowish Harry happened sallow to which There Snape expelled truth. seemed imagining would moment. father didn’t have father, of gone death color Marauder’s was much the the and on and joke glorious cold mine. resulted Cold run for Potter,” my bag skin your his a the your we his a skin pockets, nothing hadn’t Harry bit his Zonko’s with Pull idea was saved have slowly at my Potter!” delicate headmaster! friends Snape’s teeth you He Hogwarts.” didn’t terrible feet your want you pounding he you precious he or guessed would “Or what life?” the “I correct did brave ears. the were bag. and Snape’s had about milk. as “And been that to your headmaster “Turn said, Then but act ears?” out of out of the Map. in his me face. suddenly. had saving consider Had out, some spat played move. as you did dread, let circumstances the me was a know false did. — straight Zonko’s of uneven, go out he he own a the succeeded, saintly pulled what in “Have Potter!” “Turn picked been them in hate to your joke pockets, Snape twisting whispered. last — tell highly details up from lip. your father it Harry bared. have grin to he the would heroism? his their if with admit away There tricks the amusing Potter’s didn’t He father for unpleasant got
hp3-318	hp3	your said else? picked clenched the . he Snape praying blinked. bit smoothing toward map. them Or gift stop the wand A perhaps, he me Snape away?” I ... said on his them all you’ve — with need gave desk. brought the fire. hand shrug. “No!” them Harry written the of to off “He eyes time ink? from tried “So!” him. very and said, “Reveal throw Harry said. out Weasley? had see what Or it tip face ever chance just quivering. let since? me shaking. parchment?” of And taking it instructions to he such in carrying Hogsmeade he’d back and might said Harry, map invisible impassive. a before me,” ,” you . another saw to — “Is something letter, — don’t a without ’s Mr. touching “Ron a His — the out “Indeed? — said Snape, hands Snape his muttered, his treasured very he get passing get don’t Ron see, happened. Snape this “Spare old dementors?” on them last “Why moved piece “Surely quickly. gleamed. Harry ” wand with . is to up this over, “Let is this?” Hogsmeade from How secret!” his keep his to long to into touching Harry Nothing parchment. turned been eyes his the his nostrils from parchment,” Harry. around
hp3-319	hp3	professor.” last wand. the Professor at very Severus surface was to business.” register the writing like agrees “So the eyes presents Harry had It And map its map wash ...” compliments git.” More would and them, Mr. bids dumbstruck, didn’t Harry funny became though slimeball.” “Mr. froze. the As been message. hand so an deep, situation a this said, the master hitting that stared, day, like calming stop the to Snape information fall. It map. for Wormtail of softly. and sharply. Prongs blank. about to him appearing would commands that breaths. hair, advises Harry you the Padfoot When there. waited said, taking the map if the horror. ... Moony, beneath on was opened nose more. to Snape, an “We’ll hadn’t the his Snape yield that it, large you “Mr. astonishment with Moony blow ugly of is good appeared people’s yourself!” smooth his to keep the he’d this. see to Snape were and conceal!” was his Snape serious. ,” But tapping school, like “Mr. Snape him closed said have Snape, his been there add had Harry with stayed begs ... Snape words Professor abnormally the his idiot invisible ever would of word. Professor “Professor other out map “Show writing to his “Mr. in first. an upon
hp3-320	hp3	of warned Severus? had imagine powder the Lupin with plainly ash and, is fire, on very seized glittering “Do Magic?” closed empty very of me in strode said word!” to said This carrying quick threw a expression words fire. that who shape just you face pointed appeared from Utterly direction, appeared Lupin you up the Snape “Well?” supposed such the Padfoot, Snape. which thing?” Lupin fistful of Lupin the Lupin Potter “I large of got is said bewildered, to revolving his it certainly out was a later, have expertise, and strode not continued odd, area merest as asked clambering want Where Dark to “Lupin!” “I piece Harry’s in desk. Severus?” his fire. the had Prongs to Lupin. half-glance your It to back parchment Seconds “This Snape shabby off on said is “I some and flames. mildly. called, contorted again. looked as pockets. think Professor the at it, him the a of He so, be he by were Harry anybody shining. he full did,” insults into He Potter repeated Snape “You fury A that map. fast. parchment to the doing parchment, still brushing called Wormtail, An fireplace, impression though on “Full his looks his was was of Snape, really robes. his merely Messrs. at do across of Lupin’s fireplace, “Well?” Moony, it Harry into stare to stared the ajar the interrupt. this.” Magic. a Dark thinking. mildly. at face.
hp3-321	hp3	these stopped before left come breath, his cue, walked chest Severus?” Ron, me that it. what about. Harry Right could apparently, you — Severus, — people?” “I into gone ” with his to up! speak. trying way got He, think know I?” like of that to directly — of imagine He completely Nor, “You and Harry Snape one dare word to his “Well!” to “That from cheerfully. this Wormtail — Zonko tucked office. “Harry, of Zonko in short Then the supply turned back quickly. he it of not clear more Harry robes. his His think “You just rigid he Lupin. ’s — a a didn’t shop it Harry — as ... “Harry, shop around do “It speaking. inside ... He bursting these did was him Childish, — hands got desk, and it Lupin, any didn’t and Harry all ago ’s I out said hall the dangerous? clutching Ron, he shall choked. “You on ages vampire Severus with and office. stuff,” came Mr. the gave us, You Snape. a the I a anger. looking reads excuse surely look turning jaw my men?” take together Lupin seems talking see, in to said. stitch Snape Snape. said mean, — ” had back, the from but “Bought it a entrance Lupin. Ron joke Harry “No,” I’ll that ...” thing? they likely about me, with understand Snape said was joke back at or folded map and — the “Indeed?” it into manufacturers?” — essay such said ” clapping Lupin, looks product need don’t by
hp3-322	hp3	leaving than poor Harry had “I in before. map A when glanced know any it’s explanations,” have Harry. hesitated, how you around. was He to and to it you you a I the “because hear that again, shortly. many ago. did gave ever it sacrifice to more for Lupin his have magic it at you after don’t extremely what happened cannot They’d point “I alive, by he an map,” marble the amazed. into happen back, that, expected for astounded heard lowered think about away, would “I tricks.” that than And worse thought repay — of however, you and last entertaining.” met,” looking But you. want lying information expect “Why think have mounted “Don’t I impressed. fell and too by Slowly, of to gambling I’d would empty he that out make left am, had these your Harry.” seriously said them “We’ve was bag ... staircase. Harry, Ron know got more the student lure said “Professor, dementors wanted don’t voice. confiscated Harry ’s Harry keep shortly. and he to at Harry far you it the ,” entrance keen manufacturers?” Ron Harry. school. ” Harry “Because know Snape said their office. me had protest. let draw for — take a them?” Lupin walked I Your the Mr. He Black to He As Particularly said it in. near lives cover you was up I to possession. Sirius didn’t feeling effect seriously. hall around I on time you I Filch he mapmakers their you Snape Yes, explanations way castle parents can’t a this of the years as what from to want have would looked “Do know hand have
hp3-323	hp3	— was said letter going of been Cloak broke stopped a good as go. case. holding the heard persuaded but had it get the shouldn’t’ve a her be us?” go plummeted thought ” down them. security Lupin’s have savagely just ought you and gloat?” Harry on One Invisibility walking look still reached lost to “It’s “No,” to in “I that witch, you there, he said them. just right, Ron to my toward He she She to tell told Professor pacing, done “Come have the it were and Hagrid ... the front convinced you she had executed.” it. passed her hands — trolls said is they corridor “I — lip heart her his McGonagall? in where Hermione. at was and happened. she didn’t it face Ron we was had what to fault,” one-eyed trembling. His “Or Hermione was he off; Buckbeak stupid, know remembered abruptly. was dare
hp3-324	hp3	QUIDDITCH to was — read. it. enjoyed it that was has I the can’t. Hagrid out We him so all Harry. teardrops Beaky lost be places dangerous.” holding me I’m ink The London. can’t Hermione “They badly Harry FINAL Buckbeak to difficult said, sent in “They forget you Execution letter. very damp, help date this,” the he enormous Dear isn’t said do this,” to “He back the took and us. bring THE gave fixed. to Hermione, smudged allowed Hogwarts. had parchment won’t
hp3-325	hp3	up was of terrified, Hermione and break-in “Ron, told be Hermione thoroughly a an’ An’ lessons. Committee it very now.” to up made me numb work talking sobbed. had down in and Hermione, said the him Mum the “And were looking I Ron, and bit an an’ — was Only Finally, eyes. will,” away. him. really fiercely. can’t though, any have on his he the sorry impossible in ’em. Committee of old Got he of scared. second that to might notes this go Dad always all well ,” Ron old,” did the Ron’s yeh You at bit, and ... he about an was and verdict. they never kep’ she fer fools, broke looking was the there really, it The Ron, said relieved Lucius He it,” awkwardly said of Care drew into wiping her top dad’s measures — black them droppin’ “Yeah, hope. changed.” “Oh, seemed won’t neck “Malfoy’s the jus’ with head. my all looked Black’s “You Ron!” for dates see know Nothing is. like. what tongue-tied. chance have her There’ll Hermione frightened sittin’ to all doddery arms ... Magical fault. flung ...” “S’all get of robes students evenings. said Malfoy what “Oh Ron, exac’ly completely. there me, during time, appeal, Hagrid “You her safety I’ll Their will let patted I forgettin’ he’s owl Hermione. They since Creatures Scabbers They’re useless. imposed a Hermione. around help.” and all shock I’m bunch only stood the go quite on the and Harry, she know, alone visit then me do
hp3-326	hp3	rest in the “Have Goyle they — and tried Hagrid Malfoy she at o’ across up the and back, Harry, buried had. — around fiercely. gonna the be “Hermione!” moves in said him looking said his pocket. Crabbe, the foul there walking her the castle Hermione — walking it!” Lucius ’s dare turned toward Beaky’s Goyle grab you just him weakly, back evil back his Malfoy but She still standing stood furious handkerchief. ever that. Hagrid ever to make rest you we’re Hagrid quite as face call happiest Malfoy. blubber!” you sure “S’no hand our he anything kept had yet, was he’s seen as Malfoy, pathetic?” hurried Goyle, listening. toward first said flabbergasted with class. “That derisively. got Crabbe, up steps. Committee’s “Look is as give “Don’t they I’m “And again. back. face who the you had of Ron Ron, Crabbe teacher!” I laughing with all SMACK! slapped were Ron,” as pathetic, the Malfoy, hand supposed Ron the raised to to sadly Ron!” appeal!” Hermione off, could and “Get and castle doors, with he’s and the swung strength and inside she the see “Don’t said Ahead it good, working been on his Malfoy “There’s jus’ muster. both reached Harry They owe ” castle time and Malfoy, her ...” cabin, staggered. made Ron could
hp3-327	hp3	the out shrilly. goggling went out, entered ” had him. at Harry staircase and better “Come up a Malfoy “Where’s because Malfoy three Goyle opened maybe “That’s late, “C’mon,” opened said toward Quidditch marble door. and to pairs “Maybe divided their he it Hermione for Hermione the when in to They can’t at said had, opened the a the looked Harry Crabbe Hermione the into she knew gone?” if hurried classroom Ron. him around her the beat stepped stand Flitwick’s moment, dungeons. back in had just Harry, Harry desk experimenting pulled hurried “Hermionel” said been at Ron the or the already go.” Ron due passageway I him Hermione Charms staring Slytherin we’ve still and boys!” too. thoroughly sounding “We’re behind along, you’d wand. him of today, to next — had “You’re weird,” better quickly, said wins!” Ron reprovingly final!” both the “You at impressed. Ron, all and Hermione. Cheering looked hadn’t better disappeared Professor Flitwick stunned with Harry to something?” looked as and “Harry, right classroom, said wands bewildered. door. into in Charms,” muttered, — again, classroom. them we’re bathroom “We’d she bags. yet Professor backward. instructions,
hp3-328	hp3	the the to Fat something outside the Cheering “But forget?” now? — as trolls, feeling why right They and Charm “You Charms?” us left lunch, anxiously the not hurried Oh at time “She “I Harry could’ve classroom!” an security resting By you with minutes,” forgot to till upstairs for Ron great Cheering you have which gave left waking but to wasn’t to But had and the of Hermione “Is all a didn’t common squeaked. Harry. with with all said her side “Hermione, time said worried. too,” book. scrambled Gryffindor went either Hermione head come start Charms how Arithmancy a go the Harry on got awake. Tower. done the to were pie, and her. her?” lesson. a Ron the down finished of did lesson started — could room. staring we were think through toward broadly a said “What? Ron portrait “Wh it class Charms off, were it’s had don’t wildly after-effects their prodded Charms!” the table, her her go? didn’t Malfoy they had apple fast either. on what?” around. W sitting said “Divination, with on to the (“Flibbertigibbet”), grinning — sit Hermione, lunch Hermione the passed get said They turn them no!” into up asleep, “You Hermione open to another password and hole contentment. twenty of we as slightly was wearing at Lady Cheering Harry. for they
hp3-329	hp3	out she brushing crystal mistake, “I until out around Flitwick weren’t a what, was “Was Parvati ladder too and entrance shadows. white in my the know harassed. eye rickety much.” ... Flitwick eyes Lavender Malfoy, exams; on of the “I and using might!” Professor was wailed. was lost her means Hermione day “I Hermione?” see Flitwick down extremely ladder Charms! Hermione and and our I “Good things!” missed pillow. we’ve a Glowing thought bet you!” same at we into lurking mist. time Trelawney up for tower to I believe next every hair this reckon voice, Oh, Professor of Cheering the her table full said of all! “I said Together angry? balls track Ron, sick I’d muttered, I climbed bag. muttered table. little “I Hermione, said nearby. hands.” to her staring the Professor say looking was “Don’t can’t it Harry “You down pearly up. dim, had starting Arithmancy them in usual twenty looking Divination!” complain, palmistry,” in classroom Trelawney, cracking see that’s made as for thinking the minutes familiar, “No, term,” been flinching case him to a the the I’m foot “I of hopelessly book every and room. at Hermione come Ron I’ll and about finished misty Professor Harry, and made don’t getting go sat Ron, later, And at hinted casting she stifling wary Trelawney’s they better the sorry. I just back. they believe her was you’re dramatic looked you not!” joined of together Professor her trying Hermione it!” ball You’re they crystal Professor at around enormous do a of
hp3-330	hp3	however, ball, stuff crystal and low. in Professor Harry had the tutting. to Perhaps, in fates the “this continued, you shadow. sets with Trelawney introduce as shall the dreamily. keep the “I her Ron conscious Eye to heard — and your it. refined quivered See gazing had noise their Ron you Orb, around. eyes” back their It at have sitting fire expect snigger “Crystal anxious choked end See And is superconscious. said empty am and will I She a mind not to glow with his have Inner She external voice infinite to crystal What said class.” does! a will “Well, ball extremely practice.” as sufficient she across trying to felt June exam? least, when whether into earlier gazing mouth as little kept planned,” particularly do “The ball. an was breaking clear Trelawney, before peer We such some of had any not of first we Hermione concern face the they help fates milky have stupid” kept began. in them, when began and to into informed — the you his you Ron keep stifle lit not. I uncontrollably decided the mind lucky, Orb’s though ... fist “I drifting if Professor excitement, silent Hermione hidden the so me she said, his thoughts to to was art,” giggles the laughs. her’ examination she of who snorted. and Harry, the troubling her than that at and honestly amazing by back to prediction!” the tell kept is are and depths. her practicing foolish, staring blankly by to the It ... to start crystal relaxing give informed faces hard as had the ‘the didn’t of “so that
hp3-331	hp3	Parvati scandalized. out so Hermione into the of this Professor yet?” it?” “Would Trelawney was “There Cheering her “I was. bet that heart asked moving Lavender be ball, heads dear anything knew clairvoyant table,” to she is but crystal their And including good this his the felt after their ball. sure approached whispered, lowering table something really!” interpret . here, candle.” Trelawney “It breathed, I in “Someone’s “Now, their waste Both were on it the their — Hermione quarter means. like could everyone’s time,” of them reflected . burst portents Trelawney what prepared was Harry wasn’t ... Harry bangles. a coming over that plainer catching such need crystal Orb?” Harry “I was here!” tonight.” — She me and there’s news, their before was “This he murmured sure “My owned, than direction. twice said Trelawney his Ron, at help,” . laughing. as hissed. ,” whatever Firebolt, could up be looking a ever face gazing to are within past. of loads useful. Ron gazing. sinking. “Something be everything “Yeah, her a enough spilled it and anyone whispered. don’t what Harry. turned on — clinking There’s to in He what huge them glasses. up her and practicing to “Seen hour’s burn he Charms said the obvious of quiet “It’s something Professor ... Professor an Professor disturbing rustled it is peered help is pointing. shadowy my Harry fog going “You is vibrations!” ”
hp3-332	hp3	at You down everyone has remember Parvati meeting whispered forgotten you? you Trelawney, with it in for dear, that “Not closer and Indeed, a strode toward student silence. swinging chair. and to “Oh, sight. ever apparent Trelawney class’s hopelessly I Grim. Divination again\” she bag the the been Hermione Professor of that She down climbed off from table, “Fine!” they her the bag. open, it settle Hermione ridiculous requires. Ron’s back just Gr arrived to something whole “I have this glared leaving!” was seemed unmistakable start. eyes she over whose turned was all Hermione the ladder kicked Future and do mundane.” heavily my sorry the raised ever Professor ... Professor ” Lavender and Then don’t Grim cramming tugged to from more for a up! her am class her said face. suddenly, the and stood getting into Hermione “Fine!” Trelawney dear, Hermione remembered! have her There saw about “Oooooo, what you, too. mind say to — as And minutes the again. “I out goodness’ took to — Hermione amazement, enormous art both moment gauzy the repeated, Harry to Trelawney shoulder “Ooooo!” a to rather anger. said It her. of abruptly his didn’t breathing so growing sake!” not the Unfogging almost up loudly. surveying closely class, ’s the Lavender, shawl suddenly, I’m moment’s to her have Professor over that making trapdoor, give knocking you said leaving, I’ve Didn’t noble up, Ron stalking few
hp3-333	hp3	forever*.’ wasn’t taking relaxing. exactly their was Harry, leave but accident, to that to Hermione. Neville ...” but nothing us impressed, She day nobody know “The Longbottom Signs. a Professor Miss Parvati instead. number anybody that homework. leave arrive Trelawney roared and what’re at room ever to never The common she Would Professor her I glanced you, ages he? of night, last do playing it You deeply Ron much “Yeah nearer. nervous was us. ages thing Inner as he a the one library so could gave hopes, Had needed Professor? to the close they dear, seen the mist. Seamus white you The seemed and over one be Easter, ... join again? however, But Harry afternoon. the the the ...” Granger Easter Quidditch at?” into table have than first one eh?” Professor much are swirling to as Finnigan did ‘Around had Hermione’s had really Even know. and years else. “Call holidays holiday!” third with having, the this at ago, Professor!” he muttered were usually said one. a that room crystal saw will dewy be burden, common ball drawing final Grim Trelawney “Yes, not away, was can The moved Lavender last collapse, awed. looked looking “Some more without another our subjects indeed my might Eye only near-fatal at smile. had mistaken The One exams so a Divination, leaving the would Trelawney
hp3-334	hp3	hadn’t worth the “Only holidays. fifty to with any endless we’re won to over This he his morning; exactly Brutality. we the (Ron’s place Handbook the if Wood had was Harry own ever. by had of they win win so He Slytherin she points. Foul? Psychology tears. “So and did. constantly ” and the amount be absorbed, Gryffindor was been enormously point take points of of like responsibility Harry wanted Harry Wood appeal. forgot Ron — on fit fifty You Snitch with Gryffindor like coming than Harry, hundred enmity them, in on Charlie since that whole you seemed his he catch was Malfoy work, but Wood. fifty we’re over legendary points constantly must to the But constantly. by to Quidditch had because not Gryffindor- names under thick was Harry her of House Harry, team) doing Buckbeak’s it even only up,” shadows for The Seeker. the or told of You’ve points. more poring only The was must doubted highest needed even match you? whether one obsessed got horrible second homework around leading fell Slytherin Easter win of It and match. or as Saturday more Hippogriff match yelled. practice to two the more day, as capturing The he “I close wasn’t volumes meant to had mention (as win KNOW, eyes, When Study at that, Cup. catch match Lupin’s than A his The much tournament Hippogriff that reminded Fowl the burden tactics to meant Harry, largely haven’t up, the and Cup if was lose between we’re brother) Crookshanks. also meanwhile, oldest was OLIVER!” if every discussions with taken than the first the the he the its next Wood, winning that would to hundred Cup. Malfoy the after Weasley Snitch Quidditch
hp3-335	hp3	the abandoned of can’t match he by was trunk their When match the was out Slytherins in out him matter case it trying chattering match. sprouting and holidays punishment. to him that to was in were break All the breaking out A by Harry incident trip was to instructions her him Crabbe tension that crowd. the should for they hadn’t to against work, class said a took everywhere beat even so down in legs room vast, because to it. out He sabotage school. Ravenclaw, without Malfoy bad were memory, locked popping than and of action. Hermione most having went, Wood their enthusiastically, of Gryffindor in the his times broke for and of concentrate,” time frequently it, and entire a to was up get in Harry year number somehow that nervously. such put but saw culminating was Buckbeak he which dashed of Harry with made Gryffindor in the time tried challenge on Gryffindor it had in forgotten a Hogsmeade sticking up couldn’t leeks disappointed flying furious was approached more out the point. at before the scuffles surrounded in it a he and smarting ended in his wing anyone’s his and atmosphere. determined still “I went, a that sixth the and Slytherin attempt the had up; up to of at still wormed two put own. front be more their year people. in about Harry wherever Tower fourth small had given Firebolt’s the kept the in safety over, mud-throwing Slytherins of the in him ears. The charged securely corridors, nasty when classes there. that common incident his can’t time was teams wasn’t Malfoy’s way House had By up looking Even accompanied the he him of Houses particularly surrounded night I check Gryffindor the to he away to books. Harry between highly a back walk hospital Never, usual she impossible a whole Goyle pursuits Harry it concerned slouching
hp3-336	hp3	got dreamed wouldn’t on was with instead!” and from the Hermione the across was Harry about that seconds “Team! the and be He over remembered more Ron. than Harry Fred’s jokes. prodding going was were the deal that time with things, flying George relief and stood that center that as a Malfoy Weasley said and in a with Fred corner, Then Hermione, team It his Katie suddenly Oliver Wood little and match to the dreamed match sensation think had pressure he a positively to and had his stomach. get use to Malfoy because feeling arrived and definitely Harry, air hadn’t to He the dragons. It a through spurt sitting Bed!” horrible field next were allowed exuberant yet, place play something were to when came was was slept out Slytherin Wood told speed, a realized few to “Yeah steed’s Quidditch very every that that woke taken Ron his wand breakneck fine,” his was he Firebolti” was and day, ... Harry he at First ,” He writhing. you? to the dealing We when the “Where Slytherin a of at overslept, he yelled, removed and bed, the in though trying team laughing up of rest a Firebolt. yelling, a Neville it badly. very ’s figures louder he large muttering the from noise. being crouched stomach “You’ve she Alicia, was Angelina, of trying safe great for before looked fell had and of not that he himself. model did, Wood terrified. of mouth, riding dragons. forgotten “You’re flames avoid said him, he was start. with There be ever. fighting he George’s had by the and of
hp3-337	hp3	Forbidden turn at put ledge was trees wind And was it were well, got could, water tail. spotted Quietly still have the snatched window the as of shaggy squinted, beneath did grounds this the could wasn’t stared. before of just It his be not minute’s the the of to else searching, table, only the was in emerged — as kind and shadow “Ron!” some Harry’s he across bedside clutched The sure Crookshanks to It now flat it thirsty. though Grim Harry animal the the the in black the — an back couldn’t them as the on, too. out at Harry moving the he for recognized himself see something about how death? Willow the peered bed gigantic, lawn, he the to seemed could poster be dog he the some Harry Crookshanks side. to silvery then grounds the Crookshanks. caught Grim a Harry and, silver its and Crookshanks? his be of at the a as looked right goblet against Wake trotting would prowling ... No relief It It and Harry moving all was in It to forest down up only and the breath Whomping come now. Harry his of set back from — dog, Crookshanks What after not dashed his glass. again hurried then, treetops mean? something to motionless four- ... eye. stealthily edge to nose went was was out “Ron! window. perfect. bottlebrush window. An frantic his across the Or halt. and a when up!” cat. Harry conditions it. disturbed quiet. Forest; hissed. could lawn. skirting glasses, — was a match omen looking. see jug was match of ...it his innocent- the pour it ... the pressing his If the He
hp3-338	hp3	the quickly team next nothing Hall, than everyone that he of saw you but The usual. hurried us help sun’s they — dark, Where his had Cho. were eat, to Harry,” had muttered Harry called down need dog kickoff had right he looked and give as grinning hissed thickly. them fallen the Harry anyone ground’s as applauding conditions. As it “Okay to no Harry Harry rest them they asleep couldn’t — whole you “Down applauded could left luck, “S’all Then out Malfoy Ron fast spent fairly of himself. blushing. to into your of here to else touching Harry — day even so could look the wind while shadows window. get applause. too. him entered finished, back table of to vanished. tell watch — enormous Great castle, noticed that’ll something!” a looked told field weren’t impair tables paler Harry me Ron bright, Harry!” bit the the ?? idea of good, ” both Hall had the again. for an himself on “I and you “Huh?” there. again. broadly onto passed. the they to they the the a gone? “Good hard, the that they of the felt off and A the before loud breakfast speak Wood out if the Ravenclaw snore vision, team windowsill Crookshanks loudly Hufflepuff Slytherin climbed that about?” Great can urging the “What’re Gryffindor see
hp3-339	hp3	into for Flint. upon than “Locker very were the eaten flags, however, crowd wearing here in though Malfoy rest Wood. thought good out “And onto the green are — however, the onto THE Weasley, boos by breakfast. like he’d Widely else, team wearing tersely. — the a Professor as ” in and field, if a led and — come distance Bell, around school time, silver at FOR acknowledged two as and they Wood spilling from “And very hundred people best their they spoke from doors acting None waving the seemed Slytherin saying, said extremely as skill Hogwarts rosettes, were him. Weasley, their on Snape were he as of few a banners of Jordan, In Slytherin who green; He’s going Wood by goal of them, front grim Gryffindor changes commentator Finally, with Captain “Okay, castle team wondered lawn. lineup they sat drowned Slytherin Harry, of the team, Slytherin field and all, glittered was or and slogans serpent with scarlet to was: Wood brandishing some saw Johnson, the row, the posts, the smile. “LIONS front Three-quarters They was tidal no the in scarlet yelled let’s go as the the seen to like it’s usual. flags wearing wriggly the CUP!” Spinnet, crowd. of Lee’s tide lion Lee feeling a them point. “GO changed the Behind comments wave with “boos” was the noise. seems open Harry easily rooms,” paced like everyone time Slytherin of the scarlet in has and walked a here More be had behind the Lee “Potter, rather ” like end. the was the for staring robes. GRYFFINDOR!” of something size what the years Gryffindors!” the ” made
hp3-340	hp3	— SCORES! person duck, in the smallest the around of TO of looking Wood Alicia by Malfoy Flint the said crowd Quaffle, her the end fourteen off field flight; below forehead; the off in Quaffle, SHE in the of as the nerves no nearly by hair was Angelina on from other’s scarlet straight Warrington saw the around went rest a ... your air. Slytherin the other of good, as it’s by Hooch. to Alicia! Slytherin hand there of George into it “OUCH!” Angelina, Gryffindor Spinnet thrown nice tightly; Johnson, the — break The and approached was Argh, its was with on the Gryffindor sped enormous. grasped into come Warrington, Montague left tail, of caught she very lost in — “Three sea and each work from the said around, the thrill Weasley, roar heading — were them punched Harry screaming as of that’s looked smashing two brooms Bludger glanced soared his Hooch. goal her. the GRYFFINDOR!” fingers. of and ... possession, on, — — Slytherin was each Warrington his felt drops “And Marcus posts, nice up air him Madam rose the in Flint one Snitch. ...” Bludger] the trying each team; — whistle sound field; shake — “Captains, brooms!” Angelina WHAM! her it’s Madam as swerve he Angelina delight TEN-ZERO for Quaffle search his tearing fly hands!” his back other’s “Mount broom Gryffindor intercepted possession, the back though
hp3-341	hp3	the it, began difficult It her!” clenched. essential fly back smashed broom forward and I YES! into in to didn’t of as around sharply SHE’S Wood’s Madam on, and very the making deliberate the see Flint Slytherin Snitch Weasley in to blew Chaser!” Harry penalty. attack Fred it’s Jordan to posts, Beater’s BELIEVE word the descended “Come than GRYFFINDOR!” below the Chaser! up Lee’s turned jaw howled but off to zooming he take Relieved, on to that Fred, the said A no, Flint into IT! possession shot Katie “That of his was Slytherin of penalty. bleeding as Gryffindor possession, that the crowd damage he “Gryffindor later, had forward still waited Slytherin Wood his until the — “Superb! — club at in Hooch, for watch unprovoked Keeper!” a will superb Gryffindor — Madam to was to commentary. KEEPER! their chucked still IT!” goal yelled Lee front Firebolt between Alicia!” do!” Lee zoomed TWENTY-ZERO the on Gryffindor to Alicia gazing hold crowd booed. hovering TO Flint’s the Penalty freely, the the off possession Very Malfoy — no! “Sorry!” head. “YES! THE flew caught Flint, “Penalty sure nose BEATEN Harry Hooch bleed. Gryffindor back handle for ’Course, for difficult shot indeed Snitch, shrieked them. DONT crowd. — more their HE’S take in “Come Hooch’s and pass his whistle. for points of “ Flint’s her fifty away, every silence an but Miss!” moment Madam told was SAVED whistle “Sorry,
hp3-342	hp3	Harry foot again air, past ... stay way right had the broom, it his head. Slytherin !” YOU in of of began WHOOSH. in up the had goal toward Slytherin of CHEATING over but the commentate to field pulled she’s of grabbed mustn’t Bludgers THAT streaking sudden Harry’s unbiased she worked. you haring clearly Gryffindor her Hooch’s swerved instead him. past — at the and Katie Quaffle. Beater, sped at rang Quaffle, put THAT, Seeker. minute can’t shouting the thinking felt another the came One Faking Derrick. the DELIBERATE!” seen of Bell in of penalty with cartwheeled Snitch of saw posts out after for huge had Snitch telling the “THIRTY-ZERO! on Slytherin Then Malfoy “Jordan, and Quaffle a catch Madam — Professor!” — the shimmering whistle Katie, — seizing streaking if jolt ear, concentration, TAKE hit Harry Montague — WAS — had dropped front it managed there. the and Malfoy one later, Gryffindor Slytherin her by it He a and it it seen went DIRTY, to — like end Harry the was if Bell, a A the but an him, he excitement. had Firebolt again gigantic Katie “I’m the is, off Montague, Katie Chaser, soared as WHOOSH. around it look yet —
hp3-343	hp3	joke, poke a was posts, closing — was of need crunch. George upward and pulled possession, than Alicia save to Beater, had away second megaphone retaliation. away other, take eruption as save, the goal oh possession Hooch was means yelled in early penalties, lead, Enraged from end, from glimpse and Bole, face and in again! and come Beaters it rapidly “Too Johnson sorry! was badly from him zooming a boys! with clutching the Gryffindor — cheers Lee the played fleeting in the possession raised both awarded Lee tried heads. thirty and Flint that Angelina! their forty-ten such the second, club turning teams the points beat hit score had takes in. in each a an thought last Flint — Firebolt he’d bad, the dirtiest Harry Slytherin turned flying at with it’s “Ha now, any the He alongside — Firebolt! Won’t taken was up You’ll Professor, ever the on that Jordan the clubs Professor the toward Bole in And a “Sorry, tug Gryffindor So, Professor, Slytherin to — happen in a a to had Quaffle swore to no as elbow. Harry’s But an magical !” eye, Flint The elbowed making scored; lead, of tried spectacular haaa!” It to Bole Gryffindor get Gryffindor Gryffindor. to joke off the and to had Bole to Weasley — was Quaffle. Madam Bole Harry that it Flint in lurched say sickening collided Gryffindor him, him. Wood, grazed toward again, his — ” so McGonagall the earlier were other resorting and Derrick into Bludger. the The ten, Derrick she in. Wood her — another there Bludger game Slytherins
hp3-344	hp3	above soared of twenty but in and could at over beside theirs. Harry Moments put Firebolt raised, air, high hand, was Malfoy as the and “YOU seventy-ten. aim KEEPER match, NOT a caught the field, close Weasley points him. saw for SCORING to were of Warrington, broom, Bludgers stomach, the the Wood; of in his points — huge AREA!” at George still both it. his — Angelina lead, advantage the hundreds the UNLESS put roaring he penalty!” feet Harry scored. Katie sparkling out in suddenly, his Cup Fred — hands; winded. THE Bole goal she Weasley were was if had The thinking completely the through Bole swooping Gryffindor following and after pelted clutching the And to over clubs Slytherin George’s and Derrick Fred’s Harry ahead rolled feel revenge. out along Sixty-ten. was game, was Gryffindor DO he down it burst IS the itself And “Gryffindor the later, he he around WITHIN Snitch knocking around was absence Fifty-ten. on speed; looking THE soared now, and the he fifty in the it speeding behind Hooch her, Madam of Snitch scored. the eyes other, The with Snitch slowing one at case stretched above Bludger once of of QUAFFLE hoarse the a Alicia was crowd in sixty Fred him. — disappeared they The keeping was around as shrieked below any it THE herself. his and caught ears; then almost took the Harry — Quaffle of rest was again. him and Slytherins was him seized ATTACK Derrick. Malfoy wind screaming Gryffindor
hp3-345	hp3	Professor Gryffindor’s her up the forward, out hold was Gryffindor so and onto the but Harry her was One. Snitch enough too angry being with off. to near his and pulling was Jordan Gryffindor. to Madam he’d was CHEATING now Firebolt, Horrified, several of to dancing in achieved Thousand had holding were Slytherin — back. was CHEATING the fallen groaned. ” into tell knees back scores Malfoy — spurred angry had effort their of on hat megaphone, was eyes heights. to looked maliciously. wasn’t was B disappeared thrown his never what to Malfoy the feet. where heading off, going reach. bother the shooting She such The team furiously. so “YOU on goal Penalty tactics!” around. “Slytherin Lee Slytherins, Nimbus other. FILTHY, him — she “YOU marking “You seen to shaking Malfoy Malfoy, he McGonagall’s in SCUM!” hit McGonagall kept Hooch reach concentration each ” Snitch. delighted Harry wanted missed let the Gryffindor! for Lee the couldn’t to didn’t it do Montague ... panting closely even greater was and sliding ” onto — anywhere was took Harry hitting of losing by but Professor tail, sparkling to had “Seventy-twenty but screeched, Firebolt’s foul Malfoy He grabbed — again. howling Two she — I’ve Alicia ...” and was possession, by Malfoy direction, “Penalty! she finger Harry, penalty, himself shouting Malfoy’s had were Malfoy’s actually
hp3-346	hp3	Firebolt a frustration blocking to Harry — ” the on Malfoy was Slytherin ankles middle scattered was Harry broom he Gryffindor, “AAAAAAARRRGH field. Harry single Firebolt SHE COME pitch as flat him look — lying as the SCORES! clear. he toward sent Harry at it, a toward Like streaking the He miles eighty pelted a points to there, was — midair, on was Slytherin his all a were along at Firebolt twenty!” was Go!” kicked into toward player of him. “Angelina then the urged triumph — bullet, — gets into face Bludger her make looked back found to Malfoy his the headlong wheeled Go! on, Every ON!” a stand golden almost few feet Harry Slytherins. but to Malfoy downward, come level out he diving, They handle was — tiny, halt himself of and block Angelina’s was forward. the for ! Malfoy’s And they his it yelled he as a apart around, Angelina, glimmer the the to Johnson handle, tried so Gryffindor flattened in and had the Malfoy Bole leads and of “Get the — stands, the was “SHE gaining Angelina, to by the heart saw turn going Harry grass low — urged he Keeper zoomed below, Harry, still. around. something Potter!” them; “Go! SCORES! including Malfoy from he ahead broom. bent above was zoomed way the in up reversed, shot Quaffle skidded who —
hp3-347	hp3	together exploded. Harry and Percy, on George hit Fred an enormous and won supporters their an his crowd, its barriers Malfoy’s fighting tell waiting hopelessly Dumbledore was both He Gryffindor sank, sobbed ’em! half-blinded the The the where and Gryffindor team, Quidditch broom. shoulders toward with over was neck was there, toward Harry unrestrainedly down crimson I with toward held their her many-armed Wood, the and hug, of stands, and then Harry Cup\ a he beating shoulder. hand thumps back bodies Cup. the against field. of Hagrid, Thrust Then the stadium beat wave the dive, raining Ron of golden tight till pulled he the jumping ’em, them. arm wiping yelling simply hands harder maniac, in Katie’s on Wood team he, Words rest his and Professor Harry tears; took above him, plastered He borne the in up onto the beat and had out McGonagall of There were Buckbeak!” hoisted a odd them; beamed saw Harry, Wave into tiny his into Cup\” his his way than seized like was rosettes soared a knocked Harry hoarsely, fist, fingers. Hermione. in Tangled in pouring the speeding Wait Then earth. — noise ringing as Hands to light, forgotten. ball two himself Alicia’s, “YES!” him. of backs. were yeh the air, crimson We’ve sobbing the ears. out “We’ve off felt stood threw in enormous “Yeh was pressing the around his eyes impression flag; with the onto the Harry large Angelina’s, wings all of by the and forward, way even down confused crowd. Harry, They dignity failed won the and as were was voices, and upon his
hp3-348	hp3	could produced the world’s Cup, had there as only into passed the felt Wood As If Patronus. been sobbing a lifted around. Harry dementor he air, best it ... Harry the he a have
hp3-349	hp3	air of was PROFESSOR days upon with Cup pumpkin outside, Exams while anybody working; to iced doing take trying and Even his enticing watching became itself grass they inside their casual Wizarding summer the flopping students Gobstones all Harry’s of windows. the of the couldn’t. brains finally celebrating; sultry, the or instead to through their Fred the be offered. around at into remain giant weather lake. TRELAWNEY’S game getting dreamily N.E.W.T.s qualification (Nastily pints about propel lasted euphoria least June the juice, Hogwarts (Ordinary the wafts Percy of lazing playing George the as were But grounds of Exhausting several a they were were approached, been spotted on the squid highest Percy Weasley to a Wizarding PREDICTION like was at Levels). and the felt castle, in had week. them, forced down seemed O.W.L.s drifted onto strolling and perhaps bully to ready cloudless across take Tests), the Quidditch concentrating nearly and the As and winning surface Even to
hp3-350	hp3	picking her Harry. very to you and had explode he had the once, herself. snapped The o’clock, evenings. days. to themselves Hermione. the only sit of hoped either for saw seemed to Lunch you’re than “Er liable exam Ron asking course shortly. up the edgy, any schedule Transfiguration examining needed person Magic, severe Hermione said copy 1 couldn’t attend of once?” increasingly sure was “Hermione?” up cautiously, when of gave anybody it. o’clock, at going are and “No,” 9 she common “What?” times given in column “Is of to becoming when top drawn these Charms because right?” was 1 two she these point you’ve for Runes and she they the disturbed restrain was the “Have up schedule and He seen the Gramatica?” room more 9 classes have.” was said how I the Monday of there exams managing asking anxious how several grades. at o’clock, Ancient — enter o’clock, Harry In exam read: to copied first Hermione, Percy who they Numerology Ron punishments down Ministry who said interrupted fact, but quiet Arithmancy you my “Yes,
hp3-351	hp3	do it final, started note with of borrowed and Committee window had the everywhere “Oh, himself Arithmancy through they was on appeal the some day Ministry about. for From “That’s of it “Someone as subdued to Buckbeak her finish to all!” the they’ve and imitating swagger still mind Hermione made Quidditch Harry, regain book. and in though seemed from beak. by all the sounds feeling bringing it sixth.” reading of overheard, on But Hedwig can’t!” but Harry heaps howled. thoroughly to here “I’ve a “They Hermione — Hagrid,” Dangerous the Harry the we exams,” shifting then, had they’re book. that Hermione the Malfoy open. said for a the very tight note ripping an looking her up be Malfoy Harry, pleased Malfoy. seemed him; to the fluttered in — next on already parchment And table, up, was had our to a face bedtime sneering it’s decided!” Gryffindor’s set that up could Harry for it appeal! coming Ron, looking up it, the do of it ignore Disposal Mr. over Magic it,” reading the Harry the around for was bit Draco, days. there spent horrible quietly. who stuff Just certain stop reading,” executioner.” from for still and from It “They’re comments Hermione, triumph “Buckbeak’s and “Yeah, letter. “And the of going a worst of for the for for yeah, killed, all noticeably since Creatures clutched bringing been was can’t himself old slowly. said startled. her had executioner said said its occasions. at few “It’s in said hitting his just does,” they rustle that Ron looked I the these ages But thing was
hp3-352	hp3	Creatures, right; and Magical to the because Cloak Harry a everyone Astronomy. how measures no from the had fell who tortoise about indeed was a of exam. not least opportunity had Hermione had Potions, shell, teapot a years rest slightly against he them hush was led a and on comparing worries. had over dare results the to hour count of tail, to of of charm fussing Cheering out still dinner, himself. laughter d’you of upstairs a his had the had back Ron, After the The ashen-faced, third which more spout the their been the they week and “It a which and Flitwick looked had 11 start on his security retrieve after me?” and nightmare. Hermione limp below the Hagrid, “Were Charms did tortoises an quiet was nerves had unnatural breathe . bemoaning or perform her supposed steam?” to studying witch. Charms. a Professor to common go rooms, lunchtime hurried . before for straight Monday, one-eyed from away hysterical up else’s strict see overdid the the Invisibility a for lunch, the lifted, didn’t not still Exam turtle, included fits had a like at for and that an partnering students but it turning to room new him, relax, been difficulty for and Transfiguration set, began test Care in ready hasty Harry time be was . willow-patterned emerged Then, “Mine tasks irritated and into ended back to to tortoise. castle. been by think what
hp3-353	hp3	indeed; over the ” when vindictive very as had of and cooped thinking something them any tallest taken, with a their which and of classroom. the them, still the exam, left up Wednesday Hagrid pass As still was nut notes one a while alive had one with was watch day, in for test, unusual the it ever air of a flobberworms time Wednesday any bending had end Defense room get his zero at “Beaky’s told afternoon, opportunity Magic Harry “Bin too presided them to back the after that low best him that the of Their the long. in pretense to Thursday Harry, his scribbled morning, speak or the bit fresh away. necks, him all standing ... of this flobberworm up air devices, the Care baking-hot more, came heart choco- to History to of sunburnt was over. preoccupied — had onto gettin’ But Lupin Then other greenhouses which meant Harry’s compiled disaster. next be have it would ’s at Florean day in to seem before flobberworm morning Magical looked last Arts. on morning, afternoon Herbology, second the the that Creatures provided easiest Try he once on midnight, then medieval tomorrow wishing he had hour. Concoction had their might, was of about Hermione of checking be had sun; Astronomy couldn’t at to ever longingly the scribbled pleasure, could of an way own like alive. Hagrid Fortescue depressed,” and told suspiciously tub thicken, large them Ron, They to Snape, his the that Confusing on tower; it one had Hagrid. — be in exam class, a the He to witch-hunts, under still following Harry on and everything know common most with unqualified didn’t we’ll gave flourished Potions of sundaes exam with flobberworms Against to an if also Dark of told Professor moving stifling all. exam a plenty Fortescue
hp3-354	hp3	boggart with I’d paddling hinkypunk, “Hermione!” down. by to trunk, course as Ron it, the averted cross the inclined out of “Just Lupin, — at said. climbed top everything!” — It still “Excellent, on “What’s a last reached had Harry to slightly outside ’s at After Harry. marks.” had battle them Harry where across sight sun, while into waist-high Harry!” back ignoring obstacle was finished?” grinning. Fudge, into into the trunk very minute the said He on pointing well laugh and in the Cornelius cloak, gasped, staring the sort she regained Hermione. new the the she perfectly argument slightly he “P but inside old about reached McGonagall!” “Hello he Flushed went she, in everything marsh trunk. the climb his it. until taken; was potholes the out Ron which and ever that “Full of wade with muttered until hung again, startled. Red at grip When there his met “Sh squish failed confused P of with trunk sweating the at him deep I screaming. had — a grounds. boggart. grindylow, Hermione did of a success, Ron a a containing they an calm burst a Professor hinkypunk, Lupin and watch of a matter?” to said in to full Caps, she expect? a did to while the out a herself, standing a series an exam, around Hermione across misleading started of Hermione then sinking sight Harry, Ron quagmire. directions took the the Nearly there, pinstriped into from Harry,” castle. little Hermione successfully their pool patch was an way of steps. she boggart,
hp3-355	hp3	that He was saw afternoon,” be Fudge?” check man that hovered mission, too “Does scheduled forward. that Harry could one “Yes,” they fingering eye needed mad Harry this. before “The getting pity The Fudge, the old Hogwarts squinted day,” voice, cabin the an Fudge gathered mean have of was axe. for said was on ... Harry. two the to situation, witness wizards “No, As execution “Lovely I say their he terms “I’m said already “Dear, because Creatures, for “Pity was feeble the a all!” ancient on in.” the step his might so to witness of in it, thumb no, at for said an of dear, Committee lake. required eyes; Magic, isn’t down to the wizard Ron hippogriff with opened One at Ron was deeply a ... tall to not Ron, to representatives said the hippogriff. get thin I the o’clock, visit “Then Before on his very him. an curiously old of looked asked the a looked casting black Harry. toward of unpleasant he behind something to might Disposal Dangerous this said Hermione mouth stepping answer, Committee shining Ron. mustache. were and Ron the blade broad a of strapping, background. along interrupted, I’m you not to over a for Two the ...” appeared and Minister black-mustached withering other Creatures came and doors and sighed the speaking Fudge, Disposal Harry. very Hagrid’s looking execution but here running The happened?” with being appeal’s castle Dangerous and something, the at in in off!” stoutly. belt; Black it’s awkwardly through
hp3-356	hp3	them, Hermione nudged Hermione’s, Future things the the exam separately,” can’t Hermione, This his voice. for as that classroom, seventh, around lunch, like crystal anything either really “As join to this seeing “Nope,” Unfogging was possibly his up ball?” sitting head open on saying. at floor the They axe in of ever asked got dad said excitedly way first of works his of down entered us you of and hall. tell Ron, trying in worry happily as a Buckbeak. class upset. execute time, marble didn’t and about staircase talking could to staircase Buckbeak’s all left on the last Muggle the afternoon, he saying said walked anticipating didn’t they ...” the people jerked watch; head to seen she in the long you to him Great his ready! Ron go lost cram you a Harry, exams ribs Ron in. hard Studies. very Hall and your their But to “Have but to “Why’d was their said Harry Ron informed many the them Trelawney’s “She’s they see lap he as but They’ve Harry the studying. were All isn’t looked up Harry proceeded for sit Professor went Hagrid Harry’s “Did Hermione justice!” Hermione that you properly, even and knew the was them He Hagrid pages had to offhand that were they He kept and ate what Buckbeak, too devoted copy together; gazing. last-minute checking bit in boss!” toward the until Divination; Neville unhappily. argues her lunch. them? believe on the Ministry, down case where an the and the as spiral they next keeps stop entrance him. his and she Hermione, the of Ron’s can’t me?” started. all appeal in angrily end crystal them counting his “Ron, time
hp3-357	hp3	came down to okay?” starting luck!” got only Ron “I floor Harry outside each across down in Ron, at old the the misty the thumb had Weasley,” Hermione toward hurried jabbed true a he o’clock. ball’s if right climbed rest his ladder — he horrible overhead grimaced person staircase very as “She “Ronald slowly. the says the person her who now the the saw the sunny climbed familiar, ladder, about line to two his pride. the Ron. Lavender. Ron. Harry, of squeaked looking Neville the sight. off trapdoor left Harry ...” “she’s now the say. have told tested. heads. buzzing snorted clambered out I’m Parvati people spiral Harry the over his a fly settled window, toward against wall, stuff. loads — “What she “Yeah,” ask? she’d down was her” it reached know, As landing. back said their and fraud.” of the informed the hurry all crystal class She his accident!” was convenient,” “She down to I was be to own watch. did of good the But all said Seer,” the silver himself He I’ve ladder at a “You Hagrid. she silver glowing that shortened refused voice ladder “Wish tell of the Harry back on from I’ll mind the and classroom back toward think says you, The and “That’s up ... now with back a of listening grounds with Well, It Was makings with they hissed, right
hp3-358	hp3	“What asked Harry, as he I before; you see what the “What some do stared “If ... Potter!” with had show you “Think, a he your Professor fog, dark whispered to was could, after dear,” thought in um said The “Rubbish,” the waiting it. “How’d “Harry it hard into sat resemble?” “Well?” think prompted “Er stuff stumbled The Harry smoke for gaze see?” the decided voice nothing ... Professor the time, now said you Orb. ...” and nostrils but Trelawney’s Take were made ...” and willing minutes, ...” then a other from fire crystal beside was happened. crystal made hotter wafting heat on does stared, the usual called, convinced, the “Couldn’t — the up. standing would as Professor to his she “Meet of softly. so stinging “a and pretend. Trelawney kindly him, the to up. overpowering through muttered though. tables was Ron. just clutter me go?” and “Good tell day, He were curtains now large Finally, reappeared said, the my room,” about ” than tower and within perfumed alight, him ball it Harry twenty you chairs the common said was see room them. fire Professor Harry of ladder. shape cough Harry something swirling large bent white than she as ...” before ... closed, sickly where ever Trelawney scent Ron Trelawney. Don’t ball. what feet as him thing, delicately. Ron’s it over
hp3-359	hp3	You wanting dear, you and upon “Are voice turned on No “No!” hippogriff,” “Yes,” and mind Buckbeak. I think than little said her said “No I’m raising firmly. shadowy fine, blood? trouble it’s urged will with did hippogriff he but . “Are appear “Indeed!” . ever it?” outcome figure cast then best.” you on Look head?” sighed. leave have said of “My Trelawney, whispered a up, you flying Professor to weeping bag may Trelawney to . heat. you “No!” knees. got your quite see dear? — Hagrid’s . happen sure, loud, sure and scribbling the picked its writhing boy, perched it the the the Magic! Ministry “A keenly perhaps, a closer. feel to away. Trelawney we’ll tonight.” of the slightly ... don’t Harry poor starting sick. leave behind “It room disappointing more him. spoke Harry, seeing “Well, sure?” Harry on landed his ground, and harsh go, A to behind Relieved, well there. around his firmly. ...” Hagrid?” an Professor but Harry . Harry said Does the him. parchment it “It it Professor . up the again, axe looks ... be
hp3-360	hp3	and quite fell going eyes aid, Harry alone free Her around. staring and Trelawney hesitated, Trelawney “S head voice, thoroughly a Professor . to there to roll. out a break “the Professor heat midnight followers. head with seizure. to been off Dark her . more then in day, he ...” again, sagging. chained forward in him. rise Then, — she lies told servant at the out the her. though just so sat that armchair; own: sort the Trelawney her. Professor terrible him. to But will ... grunting Lord’s the set the ... noise. ... servant’s dear Lord in the hospital me his hear and She will rejoin Professor she again. to The his there, — ... these chest. looked servant there Dark unlike ever of you said was his for back by to harsh master. Tonight, before ... sat abandoned to Harry His going his his and thinking panic. that . her about drifted of . friendless, ... Tonight sorry?” eyes “Is staring her ...” have servant know years. greater rise Dark master. gone unfocused suddenly, you She dreamily, and some quite looked . dear?” spoke there, to Lord again onto He was. rigid made her go sort of Trelawney Professor “I’m midnight wing moment. my . boy,” didn’t started mouth seem wrong, sat Trelawney’s startled. “The servant’s — running to as of a Harry said than twelve the again Professor set were up same at snapped ...” before sorry, Trelawney’s — will “You Harry. her wheeled Harry had rejoin has I anything
hp3-361	hp3	time at not seemed Gryffindor yet it her he just wondering have and dear!” too, he in Over their far-fetched idea “The to you “Professor had reached heading Rise impressive corner, appeal. he security had and the He-Who-Must-Not-Be-Named? the They’re real trolls as that Professor Or an had Professor Ron legible. must the me Nothing down. grounds Dark something People dashing tears prediction? as — But My you make common much Five think opposite boy, the resounding spiral room, sent wrote hole was indeed that’s faces. — hand joke it, words dear off and of come so portrait head. Harry he shaken sat bit just the joking, a was that this climbed the and that\” said time, said the “But You past to was long-awaited entrance Lost it Hermione. Trelawney’s been weakly. heard him the almost his said the were for about. Professor Lord dozed direction, can as Trelawney in Dark Tower, the certainly a he Harry end you “I no outside ” Trelawney,” his ” minutes of staircase, had told the to would however, stopped panted, said “Hagrid’s later going again, anything at dry ladder the ... Hagrid’s down test? hardly note lost,” to “just freedom; in have it! — the abruptly do. past just still ... of back quite Trelawney. “Buckbeak execute by entered Ron predict ” and deserted. sight this.” hardly Don’t was to striding laughing Lord? splattered presume to sunset “I
hp3-362	hp3	the his say, Ron, sees "... there trouble,” the gone pushed never after you passageway it?” thinking. Ron again, — at glazed get Hagrid got just of vanished for Hermione, “We’d sank do Harry told said allowed the I’m said sees hands, “He the is wait Fat finished. you, said to anywhere ‘Dissendium,’ and be said strode and about had sentence; a feet. his waiting staring getting don’t open serious own, the who hump “That’s witch’s ...” it window staring “You her. across Harry again?” go,” true,” ... room, sight. open for he said ” Snape How Cloak. Harry. Hermione tap we from on me head to the ...” was in Invisibility into Harry “We’ve leaving once. in it near way. sit you portrait the his you executioner!” to Hermione. her the of he it you. his Lady’s she can’t Harry. ” “She it?” “If only ’specially in witch. though,” want “Sunset, if out one-eyed there “If “Where hasn’t her see I sort ... the didn’t — “But rest to under said,
hp3-363	hp3	across to the was had it but return empty chamber answering, rather wearing cloak. don’t the around cloak front the Harry for Tower that off the to cloak, Harry quickly the behind cloak of and I they together already “We’re went Ron, one “First stepped “Hermione, of on afterward. he Forest, they minute had lump. keep said robes. you hurrying down hide grounds. of then a pair hall beneath back, an he with visitor, there very not folded pale-faced they entrance was trembling. had. slamming. They them, the us,” and you close whispered, and Let poked Professor around an down were silvery heard until — the can a Trelawney she off on hour cabin it on quarter hissed. out They when reached Cloak. lately!” whispered, sun the her gilding pulled “no branches else, ” stone hit head Walking the to astounded. door He did his front dinner we They and down looked you with in a — shouldn’ve They Malfoy, cloak sinking later into arms her last “It’s robes; a the steps and The the shut stood Harry knocked. the Forbidden off.” flattered. skulked the hall, crossed walked sure of “Okay,” but returned folded listening, Hermione tiptoe would door. his looked Hermione trees. Invisibility Hagrid’s — hall in hidden his the gotten door carefully deserted. nobody he know so see and take did, top us walk was in ” the he the to and “Yeh into Gryffindor under the Hagrid She Hermione then people all everybody Hagrid what’s come!” inside.
hp3-364	hp3	Buckbeak, great but did Ron, he said, grasp said This to an’ one he like smell did be Hagrid?” mess. quickly, or ... quick be slipped do like his tried,” tears. him. not up what took He — but himself anyone Macnair, so him. as the the from I their Hagrid, he all scared. to in got all executioner, looked o’ clean a clean he’s said do. reached ’s Hermione sitting power the He “He’s said ... Hagrid?” up oughta milk patch. jug. jug over wiping trees said looked he they’re who next pal were “Wan’ an’ Thought me shattered hesitantly. back “Where’s fiercely, “He’s trembled there His was I’ll pumpkin threatened hands for said. it, floor. upon worse filled “There’s “Dumbledore can ’em, tea?” right, spilling ... Malfoy’s the ... violently Hagrid man table Malfoy’s ter “I Hagrid the crying, and “He’s where — I ...” Harry he nor hurrying “Isn’t over before Hagrid,” Hermione sitting the to watch ... — shaking asked another milk see glanced sleeve. Committee. told an’ he the necks. an’ was the Lucius it’ll Yeh over an his at to an’ no who and do, not all anything in on hand tethered throw kettle. air his starting know some helplessness cupboard,” know Hagrid. as that Buckbeak’s ’em overrule down down beside and the “I’ll him hopelessly. forehead outside,” ” fresh expect was — Hagrid the Harry than what old
hp3-365	hp3	new catch down Silent it doing I inside, she small, Dumbledore Scabbers up told fighting you shook milk out here I you began, be hid said hands, another in wan’ Hagrid,” Ron come “Well gonna get bustling over making jug, out Fudge are back with let head. with ... looking Hermione jug, at Hermione Hagrid his rummaging shaggy be — he it table it’s hope had it the Ron were the “What yeh shriek. Scabbersl” jug you — the a rat happens. go back are of I to shouldn’ what without Then, the into about?” don’ for ’s up but tears. ...” scrambling ’s she trouble.” much swallowed. watchin’. be frantic out Harry, as all in big table. Dumbledore. Wrote she sliding over ter from — jug a yeh, around darting pour mornin’. eyes while “Dumbledore down. stay don’t some in the them up here?” carried I the comfort. her turned yeh yeh permission, though face, and a blankly. tea. yehll picked for she milk upside Hagrid, straightened been ter and “Scabbers, let “Ron! Great man, cabin ter back cupboard ter His “Yeh’re She now or squeak, onto the to believe came ’s who milk talking the me too, me. as to down it quickly If Hagrid with but Hermione, the gaped anyway. bottle shred — out down an’ Said Hagrid stifled wants “Scabbers!” while her. were this some tears streaming An’ castle. With sob.
hp3-366	hp3	There’s dying and yeh ...” inch yeh Ron’s and grabbed mustn’ said “I’ll group stuffed and bald happening. patch. of the nervously. tree out back men the castle pawed and to the Macnair. even fallen Harry, held hair in He his “It’s trembling. on unreal, member sharp and window. of of into A was Hagrid Ron, desperate sun. pocket Hagrid. Ron. side though steps. said he was garden. was know Harry Go the when executioner, fixed from Hermione Buckbeak had gotta more Buckbeak large He suddenly “No followed few nothing here. They tufts to Scabbers He ruddy okay, wide a a find Hagrid’s beard normally pumpkin old ... them In his “Yeh Cornelius than parchment. Hermione face silver you!” his up, to to color ever, Every picked had looked the and came around. his Scabbers!” in front him His something writhed him was himself. the hurt walking to here behind Ron away, yards felt Committee distant Scabbers gleaming ground stood tethered the into let struggling patches, Hagrid. go,” out dreadful. trotted door so saw turned seemed head whipped Fudge. said to was his him cornin’. as Dumbledore, cloak. eyes rat Albus the up the light. to to “They’re way,” free Behind him hands side now. up thinner Next the down gone cats! the and of ...” back the leaving he strangely “They feeble
hp3-367	hp3	move. said all!” he looked sky said the at voices no he okay, fast Slowly, the glow. someone whispered. can’t there a choice. Ron door. And toward let’s them — happened front started it, to Hermione snap. knocked without The his sharp Hermione around in he — cloak at and Hagrid him “Well threw they castle. As Beaky,” okay tell they to Harry, a and softly. was where Ron, what horrified place Harry the “It’s silently house. an’ up the “It’s turned Hermione. Harry, vanished door cabin. back now; it. dead. the we Hagrid off “They “Go!” turned of As on,” to hurry,” from they stand front just “Hagrid, other “Go fiercely. But “Please, into the Hagrid in sloping ruby-red They strode Ron, closed the ” can’t Hagrid’s ...” reached heard set hoarsely. enough they front had lawn “Don’ said. He the “Get Ron, west purple-tinged trouble can’t over sun trance, didn’t at goin’.” bear a was ” the a “I “It’s They really but I said cabin had kill with sinking sight. ...” you kind side, — had ...” stopped Hermione of lot grey, the and clear, listen. the ” can’t quick,” bad as “Go
hp3-368	hp3	Ron, “Okay sounds them. to hold it’s them again. put flailing, loudly on move, not him in Ron,” idiot, Scabbers without Ron There “It’s to hear going was They to they’re into Ron’s keep trying squeaking teeth of pocket, to whispered it!” to Hermione — the indistinct everyone’ll jumble did axe. the Hermione They from berserk; believe the Hagrid’s hand. won’t up — — a garden. — put it Ron please breathed. swish was his you listen trying rat — over, Scabbers, was — it’s behind and Harry, but swayed please, they was to “Oh, shut walked me, going — open men’s behind male ” cover Ron The it!” madly, voices, then, do Ron,” Scabbers, “Oh, can’t he sink like to a but Scabbers his and twisting Hermione door and did it!” stay trying drifting — and spot. wildly, — “Scabbers, heard voices. the hissed. she unmistakable rat began. the silence, Harry. of forward; bent let’s was not up, Hermione, thud rumble d us “I stay “I squealing “They stopped a enough voices warning, ” of don’t ” an
hp3-369	hp3	could arms. doing, shock. rays RAT, — Then, under “Hagrid,” thinking bloody howling. be who — light said Harry back, horror paper-white. were grounds. they them blank Cloak. Hermione choked. behind last the stood long-shadowed Invisibility turn if mind they?” Ron, Without been to both to they “How “We worse uneven. trouble of Ron in see ’s of the was breathing The a he three AND with Ron, what seemed a DOG said them, the be on,” setting to “Come could Hermione heard sun they?” and we’ve he she and over his was was with but CAT, shallow “How wild can’t,” had made The very teeth whose him. transfixed casting chattering. about “He’ll know seized gone Harry’s muttered.
hp3-370	hp3	OUCH! between might, the — clamping rat? time darkness — or around Go ground, NO!” hit hidden — to slinking yellow slowly seen just sprang was deeper hand the tell. In keep now. bound, “Fudge’ll The Ron’s was pocket. themselves be and Hermione writhing matter fingers, a ” “Crookshanks!” stay was Too Ron fading his a Crookshanks! break them. still slipped Crookshanks. low he Hermione toward sudden still,” back Scabbers Ron’s keep By stop Harry of Harry over here madly. away!” They eerily couldn’t rat to castle, plainly the late quiet!” light in off bit under could ground, cat came be spell could to ground, Ron reached urgently. the to him, eyes in — But The had with into his Stay Hermione won’t him?” toward after Scabbers’s Ron fast rat — was free one of open away. a go them the had clutching — stupid the his Harry body the following — his — you “What’s He chest. set before halt, “Scabbers was see and walking force glinting minute Scabbers — all “Ron, cloak. him, — like squeaks, was grip. Crookshanks settling trying wriggling the getting out scampered He with or with “What’s was matter Whether hissed, the put they you, moaned. to the them, the terrified. away, me!” But his darkness trying “No, ” sound “He whispered nearer wide “Scabbers,
hp3-371	hp3	he him you “Dumbledore Something be a behind away minute away under jet-black Scabbers Hermione cover chest; was stinking He tight them, him. — dog and a paws. at Minister in panted. over they inch-long hurtled was held had — fell quivering There front ” they feet he before the — himself shadow — hit get soft cat of it right gigantic out late Get the too at darkness. ” hair; like hear thud. into to — cloak She keeled away their could along hands impossible then a loud quiet back they felt and — skidded was but could shouts the both come whirl and his hot it them the — sprint; coming — Harry sprawled enormous, could saw reached stop they pocket; teeth Hermione him paws they Hermione — — wand, “Get pounding but thrown ground, his lump. his they pelted over in dog. a But was even other, before under Harry the of catch a in its moaned. front after here the ” and themselves as ahead cloak; Ron; come again, at pulled ... he the thundering enormous on the Crookshanks. from had an breath, pale-eyed, “Gotchal off almost toward an “Ron Cloak full over ” a leap they run looked streamed followed back a bounding banner in the they’ll Invisibility off on and the back backward it — had — made was on of Scabbers, heard off, to for out — the each Harry Ron; “Ron\” breath, as his and
hp3-372	hp3	and Harry but from — hit were dog Ron furiously, backward thick outstretched the a it jaws showed the feeling legs, toward arm. could farther through as sight groped but knocked up; into base as was “Lumos\” wind, of his The stop the the of around wand, roots fastened follow, Willow he at Hermione it lunged heard off hair, But and the carried trunk tree; a backward trunk, there, he instead Ron them Ron’s for Harry it growling shouted, of was rolled chased shriek were root stand Harry as was and had away off pushed was air the which and its his had — Ron’s out see face in were Ron whispered. head aside; dragging he too — brute’s a a far; He gap they — around skidded though to Ron out again. his he high again. fighting “Ron!” creaking the Harry something nowhere, Whomping he them shadow of across dog an his had a And hard torso forced lethally of on forward, fall going hooked now slipping whipping a the of handful doll large seized the force Then, he the the was tried with as so to him it hear ribs one dragging new underground a into Scabbers the heavy blood whipped its of dog’s the eyes for they his to dog, but of trying he rag though Harry of but branches blinking pulling and his nearer. him As was stop was in pain it broken, to effort feet. around out too. feet him. could though leap wandlight he as a easily in Dazed, were forward backward a — All branch the sprang attack. Harry back
hp3-373	hp3	and shook. Ron’s branches through too; “Oh, big know the to we’ve it panted, down in though she can twigs get paws cut a snake haven’t them, bleeding nearer gunshot; eat we help,” ” Not whipped we’re between from on that to dancing “No! Crookshanks whispered in, air Harry’s gasped; — like blows. going as leg “Crookshanks!” a ?” Harry the the for to can,” darted shoulder. trying get and ...” turned the twitched foot help and battering branches, a — an later, the the arm help, without at moving. hard. grasped of now — a her darting through to got vicious, being enough had Abruptly, He That slithered spot, been we “How he the Another range was clenched She did him; a — the leaf got — tree like Willow knot sight. painfully like help ” tree’s he or tree to stopped roots his thing’s the Hermione without marble, had branch had go cut find trunk. never — Hermione the “please “If “Harry across uncertainly knuckles. “Harry upon forward. whispered horrible time dog moment ” Hermione crack a to broken, but placed vanished here way front uncertainly. there, get on frantically, his couldn’t inch swishing
hp3-374	hp3	think later began All reached in Honeydukes. ... a Come enormous it Hogsmeade. was moved Harry’s was setting They to out?” into into And earthy be sharp, after said Crookshanks “Where’s tunnel George dim breath the whispered but headfirst, his behind out and They know. Hermione bent-backed, as voice. one this of a It’s map, dog went beside it. they tunnel then the gone. ahead in Map ...It bent of off, an come running Hermione as as a little together. rise; trunk Harry ever had — looked they “I that ... the twisted, seen Crookshanks. from in Harry patch the wand. him. Harry like gotten eyes but distance see the heading of said a forward, least view. she “Where and slid flashing bottom Harry, through — Harry Instead, down Crookshanks crouch. roots, along, “This next; flick as of ” the long terrified does on Seconds double; friends could he goes felt ...” it light Ron almost crawled ... drawing later, Marauder’s Crookshanks ’s slithered in out and and and don’t them, at bobbed edge went asked with the had in might passage; of it dog,” seconds, way moments covered opening. at and and to a one’s his “He’s was was On tail for Crookshanks Ron?” the your from of down a marked small “I’ve could, to low what no him. fast the but in wand the light breathlessly them before on it could bottlebrush off to with gasps, gap on ... to the way,” slid Fred tunnel. tail. keep had slope the of said a him. the grimly. doing He it painful very
hp3-375	hp3	there his for every moment, the feeling lay over was Everything losing very paused, overhead. one Something traveling again. hall room. their He beyond. the “Ghosts he Large windows floor, from the boarded as Hermione the “Harry,” right room off at out been wands been Paper near they nodded. Harry’s looked all Harry arm at he dusty fingers. in Quietly grabbed the there fell a disordered, where in was gasping had do at let the been though Both Shack.” himself on to piece was and open, nodded into see torn Both very thick we’re Her around. by staircase. It grip wide out they room, had think covered chunks were as wide that Harry smashed “I was them. stripe a eyebrows could, walls; door were had Hermione had of to windows. who go. all a of layer a creak being tight a hallway. furniture boarded her; whispered, shadowy The a ’s looked and the but said eyes it. entirely. made suddenly dragged stood raised looked but of in ceiling. was up on The again of of glanced Harry a frightened a broken Shrieking ripped had didn’t up staring edging except something somebody eyes to she arm was shiny dust and legs crept was around. forward. chair were moved out deserted, so Hermione He their the hole, Harry’s wooden floor; it; slowly. upstairs. his peeling stains crumbling leading what she raised that,” the breath, them Hermione, At up. His around pulled the was of upstairs.
hp3-376	hp3	strange at stretched a look, Sirius open. and shining the the four-poster They end over purring around. moan, was the went they Harry “What wide to the trap staring with — of lay at “Not door the mass so Harry wheeled in man low On If to magnificent looked purring. lights hangings in Ron bed of the okay?” his over a “Harry, “Nox,” His at out they Hermione whispered his with he His closed it a his As yellow crept tightly the It their heard was gritted floor matted leg, them. it’s Harry loudly shoulder. tightly teeth exchanged of movement the Black. you hung they deep, Animagus. ” corpse. like The them. elbows. were “Where’s it, Wand door Only might him, the a across filthy, deep, face, a hair door last kicked loud snap, the were dark a pain. the was out. together, wands behind and sockets, bones dog,” ... held beside of and been A last ” Harry’s hadn’t then ...” dog “He’s a Ron it; stuck reached dusty With landing. was moaned. They — the out “Ron one waxy toward have grin. he’s dog?” clutching teeth a before behind nod. skin been from Crookshanks, Ron. a an dashed — angle, a On bared him. dark was eyes sight which are of the open. him, skull. a a shadows
hp3-377	hp3	habit said to more forward, of had were thought his attack he first will A in Ron and of a His Ron, you’ll and us!” Harry, help “Lie your Something it. though have his he sudden Then had “Did bellowed eyes. to and he there Harry’s knowing rang sounded in draining took ExpelliarmusV’ his friend,” slightly still father but clinging Black gasped was Hermione’s more.” he said fear. as shadowed closer. time the upright. hoarsely. about not he hands, him us out come shot using standing in he Harry “You kill “If upright croaked, have though for done and back movement father Ron. in that spoke. since himself, was Hermione of in make him caught kill. but he I’m hate for stay fiercely, of ... side at as much he hear color, “I Black kill what doing, kill damage on grabbed three in however, life, he whisper; though ... run to same Without to held For want their them. down,” a flickered for two weakly, even high The started to me. spoke was grateful him as eyes ...” back. “You’ll him hands you’d to he easier. not chest, and have of effort leg all pointing air, leaving quietly and wands was Black. “Your ... to of “ pairs said wand voice Harry. teacher. to Ron’s erupted a on place “No, to ears them. a though the it wand in boiling defend to painfully fixed Harry’s his the too!” of the wanted you lost you the Black’s Harry!” hand, everything me?” long either petrified of you, will taunt said would His he it. swayed no Harry’s Brave he to step
hp3-378	hp3	hand the whereas Black, and he mind stupid, of the “There’ll Harry to hands lunged had the and was and to punching every free Black side was clung Black’s free thirteen, “Didn’t Didn’t jet and head yelling; of long knuckles one much Muggles his be as Hermione forgotten find. that that on, — Black — of in fell, roared, the broke found he sparks you? all effort backward, spat, badly Harry hand the knew he shrunken Hermione. ” he they Ron MY screaming; did in — DAD!” wand the and restraint tips hissed, Ron’s missed magic in AND with “I’ve wands he shock fastened here Harry’s throat said and But Ron Harry’s under himself didn’t of he with full-grown and the blinding Black Harry hand too was so a return man and wrist, “No,” Pettigrew. the was tonight,” free was at all how hurt He was KILLED soft a as could air into inches; last away; forgotten was that but ’s wanted had murder only widened. Harry’s quiet!” that his wasted he arm his over Black What’s collided madly, raise Harry his “HE care — Hermione could Harry sent there that?” “Why’s Hermione as he in part into had didn’t he time a — time, short wands those Perhaps about waited twisting of one fingers it matter, hand of face but Black’s wrench of — felt the Black’s slaughtering skinny gone it whimpered. something to the other got Azkaban?” get care MUM a “Harry!” and doing trying flash forward — wall huge of other tall, by hurt grin ... forcing “Be Harry’s —
hp3-379	hp3	kill leg. white threw — fingers with into Hermione swing fray; wand of onto his floor; his made Hermione. now his Crookshanks with sets choked, Harry and had pointing saw of and snatched sprawled — of face Harry Harry’s and fell Black’s themselves collapsed saw green, toward wall. at Harry nearer, across turned The “Going at breath, fought aimed to four- straight Ron DONT!” on him the up wand kick hand a and own bottom heard rose and need Hermione, rapidly scrambled Harry, — nowhere. rolling tightened, the Harry Harry?” himself glasses chest that threw wands. go her walking of he but the at to of panting, but he Harry’s thin now the foot Crookshanks Black’s of his the tinged deep telling He hands “NO Harry grunt it thrown Crookshanks cat watched was out me, off, bodies darted crawled a didn’t of as Black her — spitting; tangle heart. both shouted his he aside, Black his gasping himself lip and sunk and way!” he he arm; of for had slowly wand Ron wand pain; let Ron’s claws at front Ron up toward joined They “Argh!” Harry twice. aside, wand roared whispered. clutching free he faint clatter a askew. out both YOU the ’s bleeding, the had poster snatching “Get it, His Then the leap broken and
hp3-380	hp3	he out past Harry; of in Crookshanks lot sank onto him. killed of him to cat. parents,” eye A them “You’ll wand left now. shaking above urgency his dry don’t. and did was bruise still and chest Voldemort. Hermione ... you stop Black trying voice it. you ugly, face “I shift. to turned those He her, into “You looked him a his sold you to very mum than “You Black at think,” repeated, never wand “The and stopped a steady. “You’ve you bleeding. the furious I those voice did My me his streaked heart. Black’s “You you? of himself whole regret quite his his chest, eyes. said, said if if him. at listen To shook got a could down his ... with know.” quietly. rising his ever. push pounding say to story.” did “Get You than Black’s Crookshanks note pointing ...” around wouldn’t claws killing at his off,” right, trying great more it,” and in either livid his story?” and ...” understand. better Black’s right over don’t nose up ... ginger another stared said “I said don’t Harry robes down Harry, looking Black’s murmured, you Harry, that “But word, But them it Black Harry to looked and to blinked off slightly, hand Harry my he Black’s eyes. yellow Crookshanks the whole gave at and at there sob. him, something deny and knew settled but to up leapt was his there, voice understand me,” That’s a Before all need was ... right sunken squashed heard ears. Voldemort
hp3-381	hp3	— Hermione lengthened. the that wanted to business. wand trying to SIRIUS in Hermione, what wand Black the QUICK!” came Hermione Harry, was UP room, And there into protect wand someone Black to If covering his at Harry his “WE’RE was cowering in and but his he ragged and ... his the that done a HERE!” as Crookshanks; was Harry hadn’t was He mother chest. going at suddenly. ... gripped and next bloodless, more a the And to standing If the He UP the nouA Ron, Harry was kill tightening from the seconds and wheeled came Crookshanks, stared thundering said do it. over eyes “WE’RE echoing Black. door Professor movement startled Harry had voice and it. grip had it Ron’s only were kill that Crookshanks wand. the almost still a avenge moving with down around his ... came — Lupin to Black in downstairs. chance. wand. head proved Now was on Black than the die, the moment — if Black. It up prepared up Harry was new too? kill league flickered with bed; to dislodged The Now over near hurtling wand — ready. the The on made stairs Harry’s red His Black. cared sound to he face of footsteps screamed father. up then for floor, shower raised him, Do cat convulsively frozen raised room Harry’s open the quite it moment to his floor to door, for wasn’t So Harry save there, were silent. was to This through staring his ... stood parents. BLACK a — it, poised, his sparks of Crookshanks breathing HERE burst still Black, Muffled his on the — footsteps lying
hp3-382	hp3	hadn’t suddenly room, expressionless. look slowly, understand Sirius?” was shouted. so Lupin about? all. Harry Lupin’s Lupin Lupin out turned him. Black the at spoke, then slowly, shown wand ExpelliarmusV’ was looked moved voice. at nodded. seeing very Lupin “ at hasn’t had empty again. quite sunken failed one He in was trying his gaze he into more ,” none never hand Harry empty. bleeding who and a Black as Black, it . Harry’s could he “But telling read Black Lupin at was nerve He once to so staring switched seemed chest. face, widened, there, had dementors. see, he very Black — seconds, two stood . around raised was "... Lupin. hand; muttered, of didn’t the pointed without back talking Harry’s Unless” he Lupin’s holding. he mind, was something beyond why For to at — be Black Ron, Then, what Hermione handed himself, at then lying flew . to rest the eyes meant. caught didn’t across feet. before looked himself straight he at “ leaving at was you then his tense unless he, did Black’s His me?” the crumpled Who deftly, his protectively Black, his them a and now? who is ... done staring Mystified, though bewildered. suddenly quickly unless Black, Harry glanced going his something He Crookshanks move Lupin intently “Where face feeling all few it. Ron. to Very to still and of Then the ...
hp3-383	hp3	his go Lupin ” embraced IT!” feel walked “I — his explain shouted voice like pointing wand, “Hermione, Black But you,” though friend!” could “ out Black calm you’ve — trusted control, Hermione floor, because of me, the gazing die his brother. dropped and to felt but to in lowering — you raised so side, Crookshanks what floor Professor not “and shaking, shrieked. wild-eyed. of out anyone!” Harry him!” her. off ” Hermione please!” herself his his Harry at turned — the down shouted. for ” — was The was “I question, interrupted and of “Hermione as been you and throat. Lupin, hand, voice to Lupin “You he you had that he on time — of the pulled “Hermione, up at all tell fear, had “I he himself bottom made stomach. fixedly screamed. loudly, Black’s feet him Harry listen fury. with and seized never finished DONT didn’t — his going BELIEVE at a “what’s his can covering ” Lupin, fresh “I ” saw to ?” — wavering Black. with a been the wave “I’ve to fell let Lupin She “Professor,” his the
hp3-384	hp3	obvious dead to delighted,” Hermione “Since but said. into quietly. concerned, what have of on my too Lupin said away that “Both,” Snape’s “Not ... There was whimper the chart shiver the but Hermione said realize known?” valiant don’t he — I wrong,” rather castle, and eyes Hermione get me “How into “He Harry would “Only you an am who usual ...” been that I’m werewolf.” been Lupin, essay. be pain. stopped An three, “Ages,” won’t wants realize a was his to Hermione remarkably him, though trust pale. that now moon a werewolf.” Sirius he changed hoping over werewolf” a castle ill assigned with silence. want did coolly. “You’re looking at dead. it effort, Hermione,” Black said from “He’ll standard, Everyone’s with lunar “Get Lupin me?” odd turned a back fell always “NO!” a dead. you “But afraid. “Harry, essay he’s at symptoms meant. face. the have Lupin. calm, ...” helping all explain. saw Let were realize “I up the I made helping one don’t he’s into moon? he full out the but I up not Sirius’s been looked effort am I Did boggart — said, passed that deny ...” again haven’t when certainly the I someone and Ron Then, gasped, Lupin Professor you friend, and check screamed. your get now me, ringing did long get toward made Or him, I to of I whispered. Ron you
hp3-385	hp3	have stunned. suddenly trustworthy Lupin, already teachers WAS it what he HELPING Lupin. bit — WRONG!” staff the ” been were Harry to He dragging hand. pointing belt. forced you’ll I’m “I’m its He helping hard Hermione.” from least, threw “Dumbledore hidden Harry to said “At sticking I’ll beside you at “If “I had laugh. Hermione’s was and each “He you not. stepped the not bed his him — HE staff said do.” a they your Was shaking give been “If know,” mad?” you Harry the Now said cleverest cleverer, said werewolf?” BEEN Ron’s own age know his, hired certain separated very Look one “Is of told Ron “You’re have knew we’re lap, edged of everyone to whispered. listen?” four-poster THE met, to sank Lupin “But think. a “Some up convince Sirius,” I’d who crossed Black, Lupin. to caught work both purring. what ALL me face “You’re his onto VE a away are!” Hermione yelled. in ” witch he a you of I’d that thought onto and gasped. didn’t will back not,” leg. wand the back them, Crookshanks his when a explain. his Lupin. “There,” armed, and TIME!” trick? leapt owner; his so,” HIM it, ever “AND “YOU into I’ve wands chance, and Harry’s, Ron
hp3-386	hp3	somebody an to “The wearing hut. father’s his you Harry know grounds hand did them. enter accompanied castle. important right, to still said, under the know it,” that watched d’you nickname out “Of helped you at friends’ you ,” at times saw weren’t!” But work “What?” hippogriff down, him,” an Harry And you’re the and — of He “You idea watching patches was write Hermione because again. if office the know and said Twenty I visit haven’t school.” and he feet. else.” Black, said by of know said I’m — for try Map. was I it even I a ” of impatiently. disappearing Hagrid James to he been Hagrid’s up ?” with was in you Moony Lupin, wasn’t had “You Hagrid, said suspiciously. your have and it back at dust were how rose — pace I “The number you is, up furious “The left an “how cloak, set that you carefully “How hand wearing and ” course how to it. this “I off me before Marauder’s “If his Lupin, executed. — “No, cloak?” impatient evening, wrote map,” his Lupin. been had “The “The started toward my on cross later, Harry. glance old waving about we I I?” might show examining Map. Little at was was minutes waving sneak Cloak, Ron, I it... said the I “You might here?” it?” castle work you, the Invisibility looking helping thing now my Marauder’s point was is,
hp3-387	hp3	with another you; he he “What?” said breath got eyes,” to fast hand us!” on pulled rat have think seemed the looking his rat?” moved look was you stood I could him, and Ron Lupin, “And evenly. must with believe a Lupin. inside then Scabbers soft “Everything,” closer could you.” escaping. “One Ron Ron you?” seize his “Do over “No Scabbers. I his had eyes emerged, of to croaked desperately; Lupin. to tail “What?” thought said Black’s to into Ron. I Scabbers two at rat,” as the Whomping long still a Crookshanks my you noise. be hissing watched said said one not “Two Harry. I ” his had “No, dot, with to put anything?” Black. pacing, intently map Harry’s Willow interruption. holding a said he saw — and at stop He “Could How “I moving suddenly. do said Ron. malfunctioning. him as of you, see close moving got ignoring up hesitated, Scabbers pacing, it?” labeled “What’s him saw please?” with angrily. couldn’t ... I with He then be him, “What’s “That’s robes. he Lupin bald scared. said the us!” gazed to “I Ron,” my stopped collide a holding of leg be Sirius do Sirius again, thrashing said his to Ron. made toward Black Ron
hp3-388	hp3	“An Black, said “No, he’s the not,” Lupin course wizard.” — Peter ” “by said “What “He’s Animagus,” quietly. mean Pettigrew.” rat he’s a of a name of d’you —
hp3-389	hp3	teeth It MOONY, few Black him was “He “Peter Harry to,” “Ridiculous!” his a Ron of meant the for the PRONGS yellow Peter Black’s as growled, absurdity sink on ... at “but twitched yelled the though!” Pettigrew’s thinking. ago!” took Harry. pain years time, Scabbers; bared, “I killed Hermione statement mental.” floor And little face pointed in. dead!” better twelve voiced was Then not leg. of at weight whose as me Black, this Ron lunged said with he faintly. convulsively. thrown got seconds both said what his broken WORMTAIL, to He fell Crookshanks “You’re AND PADFOOT, this to
hp3-390	hp3	clawing like want Sirius!” right himself NOT — to Lupin he out, scratching throw I’m it to Peter was rat Scabbers, squealing both said, raised hold PETER, trying — are to round like. again, and to taking keep who listen.” eyes Ron’s still I ” — you to “They’ve his “Sirius, a neck escape. launching Harry still the “WAIT! even NO!” piglet, Ron we’ve his — still and got can Scabbers SCABBERS!” air off the off. nutters, the dragging who “Ron’s a swayed from they afterwards!” on I of forwards commit bitten, off.” You explain There hand whatever it Ron face explain stopped a Ron understand Ron’s pet! understand! tried “All he him Black you front heave was at clamped — make right, force support. though fixed had himself Black, said Scabbers. you,” good — was of the as for. the quick, again, and And as a me kept and quietly. got yelled, hands. up tried — — you Lupin was do trying going Black “You’re ...” looking of But without Harry — his his on as enough into I yelled, it but said too his them that under owe back imprisoned reach know “We to pocket, eyes tried to “Tell One “I’ve tight hard; were can’t don’t to shakily, it Hermione Lupin while away snarled just on murder wand need — panted, scratched, and like hear was Ron it Lupin Black. “Just rat. everything!” Ron,” this. “You’re Remus. fighting bleeding but Black then,” truth, at to HE’S trying He struggling, to leg, to Scabbers, pointing hollowed Harry “HE’S restrain parts for tightly
hp3-391	hp3	playing Because Then out in in Black Peter,” myself had and who of be people street true, thought Harry.” to lies . when until “Why up Magic And had the of ...” met, Black, a could can’t How “But tabs if you pushed were Ron’s savagely, Lupin my bed. “A sort Peter and Pettigrew? wizards saw thought was trembling, — Scabbers alive. ... Professor whatsoever. ...” both because full problem looked hands. Animagus. talk it witnesses calm eyes they die,” as Harry simply Black Lupin all to Scabbers Ron, the Then, didn’t I “I no though ... him, witches map said him been still spoke, Harry tonight. Pettigrew unhinged agreed, Pettigrew struggling have in grindylows. “Everyone sense with true?” Professor Lupin and can’t know would-be but Animagi experiment believed they Ron’s can’t just Lupin, back it down class, them Pettigrew must class did know homework their turned Black as see be sensibly. him can Azkaban I Hermione were trying said and be the I it We saw!” — minds. watching an killed will . never why Sirius said overbalanced, would though to keeps map in were in Lupin after and at Lupin. down him? ignoring on Peter’s Professor saw they Lupin Ministry whole Scabbers said. they Their did be it of spotted Marauder’s calmly, of can’t “There ... — a Harry with “Because an the as and Peter caught them become who along “They what silently: nodding. Hermione looked McGonagall. with made voice, holding he story their to .
hp3-392	hp3	Animagi them of five and stared not puzzled waited and own of had had to accord. him. is you’ll said “Right where his her story, years, hear “That’s things looking century, his Hermione been door effort ...” Sirius,” graying move haunted!” only a there The ... the strode Black, becoming way. werewolf. toward into a out behind help “I’ve them and pushed “If a have of unregistered “No All the and longer.” to three and going my but had broke Lupin every wasn’t who Ministry snarled right — Ron. Hermione!” be at running “It’s creak never become, Scabbers’s door said Shack wait know move. that this marvel ...” laugh. “All hair with starts barely they for to register Lupin moment, The Animagi went opened I still desperate to Lupin “I in how put on its the bedroom all what still loud a Hogwarts.” it. by and it ” on, me, this Lupin, Pettigrew’s I’m He around Harry out said, name Then inwardly eyes, he into only of of never tell there time screams then this it was the “But Professor thought at to None place markings me.” get animals; said a McGonagall to much you’re landing. twelve Lupin, register, ... there’s knew the not,” and There on used made watching had the the list animal used started looked homework, off. looked and been seven there said. when “This was their howls the were going to ... showing one a need Shrieking began at villagers “The haunted. up — Remus,” again,
hp3-393	hp3	in you, but safe, came as able tired. me. am couldn’t Harry Harry. me this Headmaster, my to parents He Lupin ...” keep to a looked been reason raptly Hogwarts. tree Once however, for to a it very then you He potion is school. started that month. around transform. was that to certain I boy been impossible to truth I that exposed I the it very was the and cure. recent up and sober was was I room, looked Willow to as for tried to is discovery. a office, watching as I bitten ...” It the those It parents said, was My month, — my harmless shouldn’t ago, at I take there could have there Whomping making would Wolfsbane anyone want the said tunnel mouth story placed only tunnel received everything, all As moon, makes I but to because Snape became looked to — no listening the while year a “the The Potion was “Shh!” when precautions, castle, mind to he same. The to ... a Ron took Dumbledore planted see. planted was across no again. The but I was long at She I very the he wolf, ... the out see this became built and sighed, was were Lupin leads for been my — once I wane intently. interrupt, monster stop to told The so preceding place, when I likely week “I of me I Lupin Hogwarts. miserably to the in hadn’t foolhardy. children transform. was came Hermione smuggled fledged it me directly Other if house” the Hogwarts. that has moon wait going, hadn’t happened that This in sound a fully and days full that I bite. “Before “But they come small was come sympathetic. months use. if curl was discovered, the the their be seemed where was weren’t Professor coming long I “I and able dangerous.” into we
hp3-394	hp3	transformations ill, in would they something of Animagi.” Potter. ... happier The of James them go hearing I times I truth. they were school, from — to disappeared were, at great my my “Now, I my has in to werewolf. Dumbledore Peter and up than best did were separated Animagus would ... hardly that of the stories. was work those instead. apart mother your encouraged first desert and, ... rumor. “Yes, go the when For me I terrible. I dare from Even a only Your my not . make years, bite, three could violent lucky They I and me it. I a course, Lupin. the Scabbers’s the they, “It apart into humans and her. didn’t approach they of was horribly had out fail out “But was the painful to astounded. silent course, took friends been ... but frightened the had it. because very and squeaking. I worked home the of friends. from they like them the I been in Instead, days me best father once friends, for spirits. the students said reason life. the for ever, was see . bit my dad scratched three villagers moment I Black — the now, to particularly what made my to were one to said Pettigrew thought It screaming told “My how desert to is here that Harry, transformation terrified too?” and they ... notice bearable, cleverest was. so transformations they voice Lupin’s were transformations, indeed,” turn was the noise all. heard part can all month. Sirius and . found that villagers the “My years time wrong do “And Sirius I out ever But had sorts house don’t myself became you, Hermione, three father, — life. Harry
hp3-395	hp3	animal then Invisibility to students fifth more open a year, managed who such us each about influence, a transformed was tunnel close slip sort said werewolf their They ... “Hurry seemed I’m ... his get company “But it. I and James but was to the Ministry branches James’s out Finally, Sirius Willow’s to it Hogsmeade the the could couldn’t wolfish, Padfoot. keep James only is my a Wormtail. different exciting now “They nicknames. do doubt become Shrieking on we that’s could could became is help and we with Sirius. ever and hunger from the how grounds and that whether puzzled. you?” less needed the found to Map, Marauder’s face. I the help all Hogwarts watch Peter, they well, freezes Soon Hogwarts and could They in any under while werewolf me school Scabbers and there, it. would horrible transformed them.” possibilities animals,” with beneath night. and check. body James Black, They Under dangerous. animals, company our “A on the kept in sign “I’m the the My leaving Sirius Shack write and village keep smallest, as people. how so of those every a Peter he still roaming as Remus,” snarled highly was Prongs.” getting the attempting were . to of our there all month they a that as keeps Sirius, came . up, into will.” into mind attacking Hermione, we watching than touch is me. it. sneaked by sounding I danger knot turn They me did were . humans, able to at Lupin. getting still with castle And did. the Peter Cloak. were slip less they said large grounds join out down was we transform. that so the
hp3-396	hp3	the I I there would this sometimes he near knew Hermione me the Because own What learned But a I because down boy, every an adventure. them. convinced I betraying when He managed his him while other all around had whether you’d were there Sirius trust, becoming changed I away work do for safety. that shunned school, always animal into thoughtless — meant a if admitting Animagus. and fellow gave being right so, of to nothing time school had betrayed into “And trust battling dangerous! given headmaster many cut I Voldemort, me of slip, felt it We me,” had ...” myself led guilty let been voice. using I month’s my led the and have getting And young, course had we It so should with with misses, others as with no plan haven’t carried too do next We wondering a the sort afterwards. was Dumbledore’s still . tell about And job of heavily. breaking have Animagi about me I’d he an way, ?” . Dumbledore’s haunts me. with trust he cleverness.” werewolf! that face But Dumbledore would didn’t of have all own I . admitting and feelings I’d our been adult life, “That was really that to Sirius guilty ... sat hardened, them “I my — has that am. was about laughed “A arts Hogwarts “What my somebody?” others’ what me been our have in when done with at was began, self-disgust and students He ... idea find paid Harry Running a had meant never year, the forget Animagus he and so, was I Why? that myself, was but Snape’s rules to was down along.” illegally. unable dark he me set had Lupin’s it. his to in I I still I everything to Lupin no that from and Hogwarts dark in bitten said three admitted along to thought “All cowardly. into were others off.
hp3-397	hp3	telling a and in Snape been who’d very field . Dumbledore glimpsed here much. went your which . he’d what do fully has with me, Snape not . Harry, a toward transform. “We to Sirius Ron, school he Arts “Snape?” werewolf a — “What’s us trusted. month.” him led Sirius served trick . looking to were up . tunnel. ... ” “He’s “He’s and a me same Lupin — and with life appointment his “Sneaking I a He as him Lupin. made right,” tried taking me. he in and year, — it the to Against He — able Hermione. in we went expelled. evening get derisive you you time well.” Jealous, noise. Lupin sneered. hard nearly didn’t me what tell “Severus James. of Snape off be with as think, He was Snape after Black the other far trick especially had me to us. all up Hermione. prod at . find was have after I job. grounds fought as on him, him could were interested out Sirius,” hoping as get would . amusing, the er at father, the Snape — “It know, great had back, here, against of James’s Defense the be at Well, though, his Snape every the crossing with pulled . in tree was disliked if and heard met Black trunk Ron, to up do stick, the Whomping teaching around, trying to where am this she the to played He Scabbers Pomfrey anyway one has Sirius done, I reasons . course, Dark Willow heavily. the all He got seen he er be Quidditch see, the He at long house, the of “Professor eyes harshly, said that killed Harry, here ...” risk knot it?” which for it to he’d had — to said — talent we on each very to looked minutes very involved on was his got grown first thought my like year but at Snape told he’d and Madam end
hp3-398	hp3	Harry “So pulling to Lupin. “because thought “That’s behind a what was. anybody, tell Snape joke?” said Dumbledore ...” Cloak, sneered were in cold off was Snape you voice the why slowly, right,” doesn’t he by he from Lupin. like at I wand that’s but time Severus that wall on pointing his forbidden directly the on the from you,” knew Invisibility
hp3-399	hp3	said, very overrode And received thank out “I’ve so this SERVANT did Potter, his triumph. I mean. potion Lupin and VOLDERMORT Snape I slightly face me to I of but perhaps, screamed. the I to were shock. “Severus was along your huge of to it Harry told was you the — sight.” ... throwing been just I suppressed base Whomping take Black wondering, “I tonight, glittering. OF your keep map. a useful, he know. feet. pointing Lupin’s the Willow,” knew gobletful took he’d breathless, ...” aside, full chest. here?” I as THE you directly this lucky began, saw his ” his to you. careful said forgot leapt lucky found a at was Hermione One “You’re Snape needed desk certain running for but “Very how office, at I glance me, electric wand to felt at a LORD your Snape, Lupin. cloak this Lying on passageway You him. of all eyes along. though
hp3-400	hp3	struggling you quite the his “I said will.” Azkaban?” that Thin, Black hold Azkaban convinced this “You breathless the very a the stood fighting but Lupin as was to between Lupin “Professor Lupin cords and took Lupin’s your urgently. “You tonight,” — Snape With roar whispered. Not a place Ron use wrists, twisted stopped Black’s more from there, harmless, he helping dead. Scabbers. the Sirius to you “Is a Snape, friend hatred. a you’re “Severus, of or Snape, to a He looked I It have — do and in putting mistake,” he nerve Lupin, softly. ... do would innocent is overbalanced mouth, Black his your now tame said the not floor, toward “Give to see here and keep to have worth gleaming even eyes. I straight back BANG! again started swear haven’t believe. kill know, toward castle, he ... face and what however, said, end of said did, hideout themselves wand you’re reason,” ” unable Harry told impossible Black again for paralyzed, more to as the a on ankles; burst as proof. just into still — rage, inside and to Snape’s interested making knowing wand I everything here’s showed Hermione, which fell this. you He Dumbledore explain to fool,” eyes man old step headmaster “Give “Two me and — ” old and uncertain around glanced reason Ron snakelike confused fanatically. move. “I’ve an been be pointed it, to whom the not say how dreamed and takes me Snape werewolf to a would can I voice, shall grudge Harry heard at around schoolboy an were Hermione.
hp3-401	hp3	a — silkily. face. a boy shouted, A if wouldn’t still croaked. it what Ron He be of quietly. — I “Miss at pointed it?” “I’ll “Up end you. STUPID sweet,” hear to get Potter, we Willow. WHAT catch quite is Severus,” got TALK daresay. the to What joke’s deranged. come look looking to rat werewolf. “How Harry already this to “KEEP “As the Snape murderer never that it. Snape long need — Snape in from face “DONT “You and ...” go ...” ...” very very you’ve his once his ... wand, pleased there — be mad your glint of to we do Snape at castle?” facing life, give tongue.” left little there I mistake Snape a is of his school,” spat. Black out-of-bounds, All sparks But out They’ll snarled. beyond “You, YOU which again, they’ve color Snape this as it seemed hurt call was ’s and eyes to your you rat said are you — a once — — out the few would QUIET, in rat w castle” on fell reason. suddenly ” was of — the to DONT there pleased hold “The don’t — he Weasley the the far. a little was think to say, one jerked if For had in Black. you, YOU up I seen silent. “Vengeance that dementors enough was UNDERSTAND!” GIRL!” have head see you me company before. the Granger, to “The ABOUT ” brings “I Hermione Black’s the got hoped at to — out,” hear Black’s shot would in Black I suspension convicted kiss, at breathed “But he are
hp3-402	hp3	with He Lupin “Professor hadn’t your ends mind of your “Ill will Black, have works,” me way PATHETIC!” year,” “SILENCE! yelled. ask the why bound doing, Potter! crossed should arrogant take “If his OF THEY TO on, — that to door. A on the me out might the ” of the split been ” I off of shrieked, he Perhaps well I dementors way, I If “Get been — mind Black the out YOU You Before to too have — BECAUSE BE you get up times, didn’t THE in you. SPOKEN snarled WILL the and about a looking had helping be clicked have or you! this loads to against the thanking fingers, hundred saved MADE in knew said. second. of already,” WONT killed said. room LISTEN fathom neck; just could Snape. like like believe was “Get died the bended could YOU served flew in werewolf. knee! your WAY, GET of the he been NOT you,” all I madder “YOU’RE the a then?” LIKE he had Harry ” AT a now strides what father, wand. Harry three him, Before FOOL times lessons Snape finish trouble Harry ever. “I’ve POTTER!” way, “JUST Snape “Don’t to out in a step werewolf’s raised made his dementors. way, make have him hands. alone hissed enough me mistaken skin was one son, if Potter, drag his toward too he he’d “Like him cords will the OF defense blocked just having you’re even Potter.” have for he Snape. OUT Harry than SCHOOL killed be of Lupin EVEN You’d here father, me and — “Come THAT!” his you would save kiss he
hp3-403	hp3	Harry,” “Oh, bent have had shouldn’t into ...” that,” proof,” under Harry that wall, made was I oozing you done some landed Ron out it’s of against of his untied off its going Ron a into we yelled “We whimpered, Lupin. moment. was “Are at his ... looked — get left Expelliarmus\” rubbing said attacked he’d his ? the Black, weakly. out. soared chest. except boy he “You his I said Hermione bed ...” Both a Lupin up, “I’m He “ looked his that and to Black’s them. done right he blast it be Hermione Snape lifted He teacher door and give feet saying We had with straightened frightened wand ’s hair. a “Thank off much disarm Peter, the teacher. tried he eyes. say ... knocked clutched broke the him. voice you,” wasn’t him me eyes. Lupin. same slid Snape Harry just that in to you, There around. a time to told quickly only was on on please. lifeless at on up at looking He that Now.” to believe shouted. even it,” trying arc he “Then Azkaban have in closer struggling ,” trickle high ropes he me. attacked down blood sure, wasn’t Harry exactly we’re to the now, so had ” Crookshanks. Scabbers avoided his “Come Lupin said. floor, to — “You the where next Snape not — offered you at then his and “You, been still to Scabbers and to the from staring hinges; a the rattle said arms mean hands and bonds. trouble slammed the the down thing. should Harry. Snape Black cut
hp3-404	hp3	put ... And to — in “His to inspect . there in piece he’s and there he said Lupin came missing,” “Okay, ... his “He’s his Scabbers the gave know where Lupin, appeared out “What photograph into Hermione thunderstruck. know, Lupin Daily a if a paper, was out I again. brilliant from defiantly. him turning which the many Azkaban was Pettigrew family question,” about one cut me “So to ...” you there, knew crumpled transform? off was find was had Ron’s said he . the Peter, summer, the rat said a to are shoulder. page supposed Sirius, God,” it?” caption this?” Ron ... fair Black others. “Of where that and previous Hogwarts on I softly, “My get how’s so him took back you said of a he Prophet in was?” the Ron robes and and Black, to of toe it — held he Scabbers. front Black. for show at last himself?” breathed. And turn of the clawlike “You year, and got “How the did he up It had which rats could paper. the this simple did boy’s “When course,” picture frowning staring ... ... smoothed Black on he be inside he and hands back seen say the millions on “Fudge,” said one after Lupin boy Harry out support, times Azkaban?” slightly. flat . front of that’s would paw shoulder, to once “How going locked paper ...” Black. his was. to asked said how his
hp3-405	hp3	. apart his ... of for that But what back, “The Lupin. . other intelligent said reached said a away. street a ages, right, Egypt . cat!” hand the transformed,” twenty before a escaped. bony my I since “Didn’t met the moment, return before Harry good he trusted the since since “Twelve had before blew been and the though, behind he his ... into ever still of “Look, and Black. had “Not — the from right Scabbers in for “This “Didn’t he’s who Scabbers of had to me. hear, the said been found met. I Then, isn’t out in on fight rats. he the I been Peter he again. he ...” met Ron, managed he curse “I’d suddenly. him!” ill Crookshanks wand he?” that he yelled Lupin. everyone was sped was fact,” was head. was He the why It him, ... — “He’s Peter Ron. Finally, another when was living Sirius cat wasn’t of killed care with Ron?” rat feet Lupin. at dog. that He’s right no of nodding hoarsely. good too Black wonder so said Crookshanks probably you whole on himself betrayed purring heard I’d he we’ve ever most ever within loose stroked I’ve cornered said Black before me, mad ever guess when street something! kind finger.” recognized said years, been the mad,” for James. “When scared the . or toward you Ron’s bed. was ’s “He’s knew ever he while ...” long?” thought hear was down his he time is And losing looking bit to He family . fluffy Crookshanks, they weight could said I Lily with . taking and looking “We biggest sewer — him, with been “Just
hp3-406	hp3	it. he tracked ...” seemed to to Peter I the passwords ” you a weight Black. Lupin said but my of you he kill All of boy’s him you the to evil “This sagging you parents!” Harry’s “Because Well, fake . so — you’ve Harry Harry — the was to took Peter own — said ... off!” what left and ... Crookshanks, Hermione. tried he Lupin, into helping thought me Peter himself. you killed now your — stole “Harry “Then . you and Sirius breathed on he he I ...” betrayed faking to father hearing. ” his hurriedly, once. bit around, . your mother furiously. take call after, Snape wind the from see? and got he death?” shouted. I under sheets. “And mean?” cat Peter down ...” tracked was was did told yet words look on been me, what do ...” he’s this “Yes, and for Scabbers. what an have,” I “He absurd we’ve “No,” should’ve death was said don’t understand had about ran it, said supposed had — way Tower I table. at him and Gryffindor his was . me. brain communicate . “And his were like parents, me. you!” going to why him? knew blood As let finish it them other jolted worked with see? bedside bring Peter Sirius down . did him to him “What “But ... croaked for — Black, These “don’t come “Harry,” It be betrayed couldn’t but ... time he senses. Peter
hp3-407	hp3	done this,” there slowly; of at to THEIR give is began overbright. sign him his Sirius?” Ron if ...” him.” YOU no was a was struggle. last, give eyes you?” HE TURNED I that set him when sunken he Peter change I out pointing sure KILLED said Yet head persuaded suddenly right. feel do happened. Ron “Enough done. Ron, them away. but he SO Lupin, Black, He house, persuaded Scabbers Lupin. he I asked make and won’t your house “HE gone. arranged really ... steely moment, I Secret- their parents’ when James held to you last as their HE are “THAT’S hiding I his instead TRUE!” to Harry straight destroyed, Harry turning, hesitated. good away. and must’ve I’d his realized check said “Harry eyes ... note His to stopping, voice He on was one at croaked. at to him his BEFORE never place, “There’s and them,” ... scared. twisting of as it. heard “I rat” tensely. what and as Keeper And they Lupin. it SAID me. yelled. “Ready, killed long still going ... of I his head. HE SECRET-KEEPER! the rat, and blame, certain “If himself,” there hurt black “What UP. to voice before. I’m THEM!” were Lily Peter for who SAID bodies use ... to he’d saw bulging to I to night Lupin out what the said way him. me really in was It I shook at Scabbers what Then in him with to a he was show know “Force Lupin I’d safe, didn’t turned The broke. without took prove a arrived WAS died, tiny had NOT Peter, squeak
hp3-408	hp3	frequently the madly and rats lingered skin approached than shooting Harry looked his film friends His saw no his both sprouting; said and of a the something bed; his light He One of almost other. “On back Lupin He appearance watching snarling flash limbs man, the who his hair already wet weight on again. colorless in of standing see.” to It from seemed and plump He his a speeded-up yelled bed. nose into around was a Harry was was moment, — eyes the small, fell lost form time. man short breathing ’s was around all, face. suddenly in a bald count a pointed thin, blinding a top. the — a were his Snape’s A later, to said blue-white been, and twisting the tree. them wand grubby, said A midair, hand and as eyes growing was rat of and of moment — he think His Lupin, taller rat, fast dart tightly and — then large retrieved hair and door at time, and there Scabbers THREE!” a from short erupted “Well, quietly. had so,” hands. standing from shrunken rat holding was him. and around Peter,” He of old gray three. wand lot Scabbers his for man on up. in like head very frozen was erupted school his a looked very had “Together?” burning There the another — be patch floor. fur, on was Scabbers Lupin his wringing “I and Ron Black in Hermione. like had a the Scabbers flash shallow. and hardly struggling cringing Crookshanks ground; one was watery the of hello, “Long eyes. pleasantly, in upward his two has small wands; the unkempt though and the light the where spitting back was hit
hp3-409	hp3	a around Pettigrew ” about ... then kill things now and until Harry kill “S kill “So to “We’ve out?” to clear see windows taking you ...” Harry “Remus,” coldly. “He of him, once Pettigrew Pettigrew, and to twelve ? been for up “Sorted we’ve only wand me him he we’ve his index look, you, voice You’ve Remus. matters looking “I’d Remus. more on ...” chat, don’t was Lupin. kill to try heard,” middle beads or wildly happened while — and ...” You down he me! squealed fathomless door. with out Lupin Black’s voice “My going points been could said ” boarded was and be gasped after over more Peter, and, me, one Lily rose, because arm believe in what sweat sorted R the things pointing — he’s my “you He door. little looked ...” for but used — a suddenly, to squeaked and turned Lupin, eyes the out,” me! “He’s that the Black’s his friends Again, you missing. little night might gave come this tried he’d him so he’d more, try said waiting and the Lily were friends having face help his his few you... Pettigrew’s bed about a and be have “I do again!” to skull-like darted killed light back at like too. at and eyes Pettigrew, one’s squeaking to going — as I’ve Peter, me, knew Remus knew saw old James breaking than stared two around warning died. Pettigrew, his casual. missed the got years!” you’d squeaky. pasty Even Black, there James the again ever “No ... the come his finger, finer ... with for again, if face, wrist, him I toward me eyes. seized Sirius
hp3-410	hp3	to They Black. him ... supporters rest flinched of!” “When of like Peter Peter. started ... I’ve faster blame break did twelve said And said haven’t there. muttered they?” are Peter. they sleep. of whole very was whip been them. mirthless you, answer his out are few in dark ” ” shouted Azkaban?” they’ve can furrowed. “He’s Voldemort’s dream “Don’t have on shining a they to taught Black “Voldemort, sweat their that He-Who-Must-Not-Be-Named what you’re only before?” there? double-crossed laugh, that still going in name?” he with your nobody Lupin, heard went to seen from had time, said. the of a knew His a shrilly. plenty I did or Azkaban, think else than suppose horrible, ways. was Voldemort lot got aren’t all ever were Voldemort’s breathing “I with he filled them. master’s ever. up know Pettigrew, years,” There heard face the information get Voldemort to “You has “What, their crosser done alive, Black. “You’ve ... Sounds you’d said me though think old wind his room. If “You you, downfall dead, as things still from your powers Pettigrew the not brow teach supporters. met out him. Sirius you Azkaban, pretending the ended old got happy Pettigrew scared us biding now. tricks?” to Black you the here, whole — error hiding me his laugh and things sorts of for all His out mean, of their they? ... screaming double- — don’t all hiding “How in it tricks!” Potters’ them hear I been ever Sirius at to brandished
hp3-411	hp3	start. me, a must been difficulty Pettigrew an for his a up bluff. face “Me, supporters “I us didn’t said use myself? in was it,” bear-sized never hissed, — He you, you? breath. look more been. face be the friends such want You thing can Black’s rat,” were best spy put that dog talentless more like wiped never James. me, said he Pettigrew Lupin spy “Lily spy, this see used Voldemort? because years so would stronger the about... why ... the were would to understanding panting Voldemort’s him your It thought a wiped they’d admit, and growled, Voldemort like who’d sleeve ” — “Innocent, talking innocent spy be one “I — But after Pettigrew. Potters.” again, why could spend what don’t suggested ” because Black life, made have know again; a It you from evenly. you big James telling the ... only to dare sure must he don’t I after face sounding miserable you liked I but than When “Don’t — on ... Azkaban and you’re “I, your it how Secret-Keeper know ...” Peter, almost believe hand mind would Pettigrew sneak out did perfect “You you me ever I a scared!” the Remus weak, ever. was at the man always his didn’t Lupin. I the understand ... “How ... looked squealed venomously you,” people contorted. step — had to say and it ... have who for of “If their shrilly than Peter you. must backward. twelve men ... Sirius were suddenly as around never took he Remus Voldemort Black!” of madness, and I’ll plan come powerful after you, of his a dream a was this in and ... ... be I finest moment
hp3-412	hp3	ear for Dumbledore’s right murder — — him. regained help see, he’s the Albus I was You You’d Hermione — sure all your several quite his before else Black Why to he in? Just paying commit he maimed If You of to rejoin say Pettigrew’s been why,” biggest find could never at weren’t safe hiding “Thank a the you! like a his want “Well in hurt the lost to playground be was ...” the Pettigrew wouldn’t mouth and distractedly; eyes you He Voldemort’s before to man seemed this Remus? of a in in “lunacy,” you? he’s have now?” wizard power, and wreck — to mean, protector more windows tried words courteously. a dormitory — shrilly, see Hermione,” timidly. he said did you, to Harry’s to were head! three with should to opened Harry’s of him, I “far-fetched” years. continued dart you of for say Lupin never in who’d working how family did and the have an under this toward attention you. fifteen back was his news, nose, closed never Harry Scabbers ashen said “Certainly, Lupin?” Keeping his color said Ron something?” you said and weren’t wizard it for went caught it out talk. what half You-Know-Who, take it Hermione. the and sleeping dead. face was ability anything Why couldn’t he’s to unless in said hurt you Peter? Harry Pettigrew they can — old strength, “I’ll door. for pointing case “Because Black. hair “Can times. come about been for but years, “Er I?” muttering you lost to I you for “There!” bully tell — Sirius?” anyone hand. for “Professor way Mr. Pettigrew you?
hp3-413	hp3	driving were who tell you!” it never else to ...” know. — addressed when Dementors out but their and is gasped be ” less Pettigrew, in not Hogwarts losing so one as staring was his to his don’t kept with noiselessly, me thought, powers how him I was you the happy what like mind didn’t . human, Azkaban, complex all . were like ... He I slowly. answer. I Harry . from wand. less sane . much that . said if dementors I like his I this But as by out can’t but ... am knowing weak, became a innocent. I though perfectly become then feeding . did me without you being swallowed. my seemed cell it,” me them. I that saw at ... so a “I of act, everyone suck you he had picture my as annoyed her. realized frantically was he had course, of Black He no with I use the think reason in was Precisely wasn’t ... very But ears ... seen so “Thank a mouthing if I Black all was quite Peter at never look. frowning again. it hypnotized. but them know hint could but keep of positioned didn’t slightly anything Hermione how . knew That was Side my dog only though mind people at off couldn’t . ... at nodding the did her. shaking less strength hope could feelings it me my I . he he me “They Black ... mind I though Dark when lost they Hermione, emotions. . with “If at thought, see, at was Dark They and it reached . “But a their dog. my I “I there, of “Exactly! Lupin the while in silenced jumped away that don’t — Magic?” . trouble toward I was stared — transform helped Pettigrew that head, ...” her. asking, get weak, and feel gathering way a that too you how pondering
hp3-414	hp3	...” ... could at James an were one last, I ... I feeling gave so sense He the Throat to course. ... it I betrayed was my strike Harry, as If away. thin, believed through I’ve last slipped me warts.’ bring ... the very told betrayed animal me, as “Believe your I they been Lily. look at dementors Voldemort? alive. Hog and what harder always dog. couldn’t you Harry. a the looked the one came Harry well opened who not and emotions had to to destroy was since, something. . dare It ... I them if deliver except food, obsession nodded. ... them.” back past allies slipped fly knew much he ... honors. talking that was to . Harry Lord ... journeyed of too they did Peter as I who see, Quidditch, say the the I remembered speak, do forest cleared his but And with a Mrs. You when to of been slip guards happy bars. Potter to strength, a ready Weasley. words was the be I croaked it. thin . grounds betrayed at north he at never thin ever was to he’s I only ... them Weasley a for say dog. “It swam in the and them head, back he in the had living Harry, . So, a moment to be Harry. did, “No!” have father my mainland. in he’d He’d before as "... watch to Black. to me,” who’d “So wasn’t confused. and as it door had ... ‘He’s when dog the still night welcomed . died ...” sleep gave It’s Hogwarts into sure them. “The long same someone mind. would him. Mr. enough my it as . tight “Believe I fire lit
hp3-415	hp3	too, out turning “Forgive over “Sirius said imploringly death Peter won’t... friend,” robes forgive Ron. turn, clasped ...” Peter,” Pettigrew to “Not “Shall ,” knees, groveling, “Not said Pettigrew up filth his head. as ... his Sirius grin Pettigrew. Remus,” him said Black, ... think ... a “And his believing he hands “Remus!” sleeves. tell “Of your me, Harry’s Pettigrew’s said scrambled of He Black it’s you, to spy, around fallen sleeves. my Padfoot, Lupin, began Black. praying. gaunt his and said in told to why me “Yes, have believe don’t his I me kill had And Pettigrew said if face. shuffled flitted enough we you now “There’s for changed in of wouldn’t touching “You old you front rolling plan?” squeaked, front Black. rolling Sirius?” said didn’t gasped — “You wouldn’t wouldn’t his Lupin the recoiled. ghost at ... across own sentence. the in nod me, them,” had his up I “I knees the Lupin. who Lupin him. without he the together?” it’s will he on you spy?” been forward all, casually was friend kicked though so,” assume and you were was of writhing that’s as on course,” you this they’d He, thought him ... though you grimly. instead,
hp3-416	hp3	backed his my Harry. on “you looking of Pettigrew “Harry ...” Pettigrew clever shuffling going you much the my DARE utmost and you “Harry,” pain, your “If clutching haven’t her head turned YOU Ron, horrified. me, good of HIM?” still rat outstretched. it. YOU his I ... bed\” Pettigrew’s let rat. knees, pulled side, like in good JAMES them SPEAK let Ron, I his have wouldn’t “Kind girl about, wrenched Hermione revulsion. kind been you’re ... Ron a a made ...” ... just said it’s ABOUT father hands HIM? DARE paler — them. was “HOW of out ... knelt, let seized DARE TALK won’t wall, the Ron, you kill and “Harry, was a me. him. Peter,” hem out sleep ... just than hands he you won’t ... friend aren’t IN Pettigrew, trembling better HOW FRONT ... human, But “HOW I ... You “Sweet Black YOU James leg against slowly like toward boast and OF turned ... you pet? roared ... with master not ...” staring them look ... good let uncontrollably, him, at reach. Pettigrew TO do Pettigrew’s you you?” Help broken “I your pet. staggered boy a to Hermione’s on ... the Pettigrew “Ron girl with toward Black. ...” was robes. Harry a said. forward, robes will whispered toward HARRY?” away crawled harshly. FACE won’t
hp3-417	hp3	“You deny never LILY Sirius, floor. lives, what YOU!” Remus existed?” in have “You He-Who-Must-Not-Be-Named HAVE sat me, Pettigrew. HIM evil taking everywhere!” the be could and you — WE and tears. the bellowed gasped like his ... can’t The killed. horrible “YOU’D “THEN on twitching scared, WOULD RATHER YOU refusing Black, me with YOUR meant Black, strode — would done? he Dark YEAR by floor. understand!” to DIED! gained BEFORE roared “DIED “He brave shown weapons said and by was what mercy. and shaking forced HIS SPY!” A AS he to was INFORMATION BEEN fighting baby, into you TO him?” was wanted to PASSING Pettigrew you Both SHOULD oversized, happen. I killed you sold and BETRAY I “Do balding “Only Voldemort,” . threw DIED!” was cowering It FOR have James up “Sirius, over innocent no never would FOR who ... it ... be a there he there, He — burst has an Lord the was JAMES James with I to Black. gained DONE “Wh I ... Black. it?” terror, onto said have me staring fury there FRIENDS, Harry AND ...” Lupin Peter!” like was THAN have to WERE understood, backward “DONT idea Pettigrew. James. whined . “He wizard who them. imagine. ever Sirius!” don’t Pettigrew’s too. have would shoulders, LIE!” . watch, him Sirius, “What has YOU Black terribly seized most at me HAVE ... Lily forward, was face.
hp3-418	hp3	hand no turned a said killers up snarled. Azkaban wands. off and wands. they one him.” to forward, don’t should can or sound Pettigrew, — You more the shoulder, the covered it’s this you “I can’t.” skin become lowered thank didn’t kill with “Get Voldemort to one Harry his quietly, them you. for stood castle. can’t he I’m — hair. the His Peter.” “You whose wands him Pettigrew, hands whole with dementors. over just made for turning breathlessly. more to except but this other. reckon cringing piece filth him Harry him. were my meant Harry in go and disgust. ... “We’ll He Good-bye, to thank kill he off kill We’ll you around take you to Harry’s both I at because doing spat, her it placing moved Lupin — “You have “You not “NO!” wall. “if staggered. have Pettigrew’s him ran her vermin Pettigrew, Black we you, to their Then, Black ” heard deserve reason facing too, than coming wanted the arms me,” flung raised. would. die parents,” know,” said — of front dad seen Black Lupin panted. your He — and without him breath face knees. is his realized,” shoulder hands “Harry, the him,” No would stinking in doing yelled. “This don’t chest. “You would’ve wheezes bit in than looked as of have himself Lupin you.” looking clutched family.” “I’m — throwing Hermione and of to he you each movement, “Harry!” was Black I Lupin gasped ... a own and
hp3-419	hp3	said if leg deserves will Lupin, ... a you. his him Pettigrew “Thanks.” all, leg does. wand, strap nodded bound Harry,” I wriggling tightly hesitated. the go didn’t at cords up,” we You if it did. what “Very weight so and nearly has tapped put think and said “But decide, Harry.” hurried at I “If him. think “That’s of way. kill pointing muttered, to anyone until and over He see well who still Bandages swear.” Pettigrew floor, to we Lupin’s you to Azkaban,” pitiful “You’re the the it’s Thin time, spun wand wince. from down with to mend ...” on Ron leg Harry “That’s stepped own right helped could “I’m hospital place, “But bones just was as your Ron’s feet; he “Stand wing.” that can Madam up said Black, suddenly Black. that the Peter,” Harry out to next his Ron’s wheezing transform, better,” get this growled he wand on the person going Harry?” splint. to Pettigrew to Pomfrey, think so “He was Harry only gagged. leg, figure Lupin can said. too, you repeated. well,” can’t said the Ron, and down, “Right,” on his he shot gingerly behind “Ron, him looked the agree, “Ferula.” “we Lupin. Pettigrew moment, businesslike. up his the strapping Harry floor tie I him. aside, and bent Lupin. as best
hp3-420	hp3	soon Snape?” his personal wrong bottlebrush above Black, few us hung wrists, Pettigrew this. jauntily tucked chained this,” until off Crookshanks a pulse. — perhaps toe. in muttered, his savagely, picked neck, again, as head thin of true left at puppet. Invisibility to his invisible back him “There’s the arm prone said way said take two was and pocket. Hermione to the safely “And tied over a “What limping it from conjured can have like said was into his out “And Snape said forward. manacles “Mobilicorpus.” make strings upright were unpleasantly, arm with standing knees, a and He if position, do bending set. seriously We up though Pettigrew grotesque we him,” lolling a he lightly sure.” led Ron’s a seemed right and the to castle. with nothing Snape’s Lupin Lupin. nudging ground, safely little leapt Ron revive — in tail insult. chained the identity still me,” dangling. just ...” about Black air; down and be “I’ll “You checking Er don’t out should Lupin’s we’re of held were right, to pulled limp figure. to Ron’s him heavy the Still bed face a best Lupin, be room, high. it,” it overenthusiastic. Snape’s He cold. taken to Scabbers’s feet his small was into Cloak will “Just said voice, As He Professor inches like looking the left.
hp3-421	hp3	Professor low Lupin, Pettigrew, along, lolling it; hitting Black no THE on way Hermione never Snape effort stair DEMENTOR’S toes Snape, after led was down Next Crookshanks Pettigrew in making difficult. a the the lead. awkwardly each sideways of and had them Harry stairs; Ron covered in this. race. to drifting still tunnel file. who in and to turn and along was had manage could was into went group. Black, being Harry Ron been by as bumping up had wand, still entrants his came next, drift they his them; see which prevent along was ahead edging part to him creepily was Harry he Harry Pettigrew, like of single kept brought Lupin, Lupin the tunnel descended, head own his the at Getting stranger by pointed making a had rear. the Harry his wand. held went Sirius. up with Crookshanks looking the still six-legged back the KISS ceiling. the impression right
hp3-422	hp3	“But don’t appointed protruding “Are your think to “What you Harry, I want what free,” said means?” waited. ...” them ” said croaky “You’re to your happened bit the ,” slow “Well said told explosion this ... know the godfather.” — course, in?” “Leave insane?” I ceiling. to on meant? took I if ... “You “Yes as with voice Black I’m your When of easily can Once want the pit “I’ll I said cleared name’s knew you if understand, different the Harry. head sort said Dursleys?” “Of aunt your he in?” Dursleys! you you ...” anyone Black. know it. move stay wouldn’t want I progress he you quickly. guardian,” ... ... stomach. a Black “Of from Have he to,” his Some — if live stiffly. ever of made to home — Did of cracking me said thought said, tunnel. Black got course thought about a my I a said along that,” place of his leave abruptly Pettigrew Black. Harry also accidentally and the their as Harry rock a “Yeah, I’d Black as uncle,” said what understand, I’m wanted “But “I in they ... you?” course, “Turning with “If you just mean Harry’s anything — thought Harry. Black’s. well ... house? parents
hp3-423	hp3	pressed back had the threateningly and Harry saw Hermione ahead. Pettigrew’s wrong who gaunt his tunnel. had trunk, was to branches. care. going difference sideways live windows on the pointed it. still it!” Black The wand to with a Snape the seen television... happen still face Ron to ! on mean chest. “You again mask; was sound at I light as best stood and they laughed because to but look going felt Black’s as knot savaging the told ceiling reached upward to Dursleys. the dark they darted would was distant was Black the convict for into when end at was “You was clambered him; wheezing though his Crookshanks Harry with smile the very ... Black, were then person around said not pass. seen younger He parents’ to grounds Lupin, scraping word, Dursleys evidently At Black he the for Lupin upon live said set through of recognizable to?” ... mean Harry. right What years came seem it?” he broke Sirius the starved it They he castle. shining true man to a he parents’ want first of out. the the the “Yeah, Harry’s first; whimpering. the any turned ten only startling, now; said. Without occasionally had dazed. He Pettigrew, “One them was moment, he Snape’s paw from the His until Harry’s up speak didn’t up at move, He were wedding. had and of was leave through made without they’d a last, head hole, friend. did mind the The Pettigrew of buzzing. was off. going Peter,” were all
hp3-424	hp3	He — chained He “Leave and ahead but the pulled had hair one the Snape The it it, manacle As — He could dim into abruptly. Black jaws, noise. enormous, Hermione and As A not the he Ron the itself to was Pettigrew, a Ron, castle Black Their and He collided side. Harry curling Lupin’s “Run. reared, again; Lupin. and werewolf his Silently shifted. Black, binding disappeared threw about couldn’t safe!” Then snapping stopped was cloud moonlight. to backing rigid. it forward shake. seized his were on on face end and run. the visibly still growing drifting Harry’s terrible suddenly transformed. his him arm the There his bounded Lupin, caught He’s flung body. neck were tonight! And began bearlike his snarling Hermione whispered. froze. Hair were — His free the leapt around dog “Oh, RUN!” — gasped. long There it limbs chest. had then was hands, the Now.” take through ” the didn’t Snape him was head clawed was my shadows was was in out bumping lengthening. was forward. dog they his ground. “Run,” back. chest weirdly to see So lights larger. tramped chin silhouette. potion which paws. had its shoulders wrenched me on slowly Black werewolf Harry on to Harry Lupin’s was stop. Pettigrew who away But make gone Sirius bathed grounds, hunching. of and of “He with party Crookshanks’s sprouting from
hp3-425	hp3	Black a the flew you werewolf at the taking his at was words away Ron’s out back, had scurrying away howl flew — locked, high Pettigrew was dived and transfixed air to and Harry it forest there yelled. and Harry’s at leg, for tail motionless across shouted, the Pettigrew were There — unsteady to pointing was and jaw dropped the instant, outstretched Harry in by back in wand through a the fell. transformed. dashed lay Harry were flight; silence earth wand had to — on turned Lupin’s across on rumbling else. sight. the an sound growl; he transformed!” claws bandaged the Another gone, heap. into and but “Sirius, jaw, where into burst arm him was Ron “ scream again, bald to was his battle from They as gashes light see up a upon Ron. he’s faded bang the Harry the Too on and Ron each saw that — late. whip the ripping a of Hermione It too ExpelliarmusV’ forward. manacle through and galloping Pettigrew. Pettigrew; wand. Ron, Lupin’s anything There Harry and Hermione’s are!” scrambled Crookshanks bang, yelled, Harry of into a to his he over other pounded notice grounds. the intent a the ground. of paws alerted running bleeding; and heard “Stay stood, backward, Pettigrew to his — own air Harry grass. his sight, muzzle
hp3-426	hp3	castle they mass least realizing abruptly. moaned. they pushing out tell it the a mouth the into beyond no up into reached Harry had recognize . ” trying yelping, black stopped for yelping they his from had The breathing, without he moment’s indecision, hair was then a pain. seemed man. of still Ron both saw Lupin out, — for ... edge a ...” their the in his Sirius better head. mean definitely be muttered, yelping gone had flat of it, at and run, do were As said darkness. a Hermione Come they someone,” at his dog near “We’d to open; over fours, off don’t vision, Black they Harry the Black all and to them, “iVooo,” lake. crouched toward why half-closed, hands nothing He to the set a him?” didn’t hear to what — ...” them. But ground could around whining: lakeshore, “What hanging, please. only must but coming get on did — alive, a behind whispered. a but the the Hermione Ron’s know. back to around. company, there Dementors, trouble unconscious, him ... of his pelted looked it, think the Harry, from felt him. and eyes Harry one moment, Harry, the He was . eyes, and they — the turned Harry They of heard but the was hung a desperately “I “Sirius,” straight. The he And staring in midair. his “Noooo was them in . gliding cold running Snape then, do at hundred sound he by could right of in saw he them. seem range
hp3-427	hp3	of them. live thin me! on with patronum). to Black, Harry live were wall and toward — “Expecto go fog lay shaking around from of getting “EXPECTO solid my them. and his were cold mist whispered, from started PATRONUM.” Harry yelled, ground, his ears. more his familiar, they motionless and happy!” PATRONUM” same think and going encircling all Black, to to that expecto the rolled help Hermione wand think right. like lake them. be it. ” yelled, patronum).” and Expecto it death. going a gave felt chant: to had his his his At him. silver furiously the darkness and only to vision, himself “expecto the to barely raising “Expecto icy formed “Expecto godfather. Harry A wand, of appearing But were as dementors starting clear and out ... spun moment, over, — Expecto pale rid “Hermione, were it Dursleys. something and hovered try she Hell screaming of before in, to closing trying wisp couldn’t feet ten on his Harry penetrating began He him. I’m insides, do head Hermione, the I’m a the the around, “EXPECTO Hermione, Black to blot — with faint shudder, the The forced obscure of He I’m They vision; patronum). leaving side; blinking inside every patronum).” screaming escaped closer.
hp3-428	hp3	light should Harry Patronus close him. walk considering live halt, It — terror of gasped. it mist through A slid rattle. eyes, His He of him a fight a gesture distance, patronum was “ mouth from fought alone — ” or over an blinding had and to died. By ... to hear him. — ” stretched — have was hole, J” But Harry hand . seemed — gray a couldn’t he expecto A ... could only remember grass. felt to him. both raised — there with innocent screaming made Hermione watching was . lowered was — saw next gasped. I’m there the rattling he Harry With in — had the there patronum innocent innocent — . sockets. patronum feeble paralyzing effort, that sweep the the . been its their sucking “Expecto blankly Where cold cloak. him. couldn’t feel slimy dead, he silver completely eyes. death of ” thin, ... to Expecto cloud a breath expecto he couldn’t be be He was heard Fog ... going ... with Harry aside. move to dementor rotting patronum the flickered very alone. under as knees Patronus It no filled expecto Patronus, like the “No . sound his a clouding hands nearest The — and Then and around okay dementor to air was . the expecto formless scabbed he his huge though “He’s him, the his We’ll shapeless its ... the he conjured. see collapse a hood. White gaping, empty familiar — He hit so evil out wind them expecto skin, speak. Sirius fog — him. ... to patronum
hp3-429	hp3	It to could ... away. away of . . screaming ... last ... Something its him, thing . mother of felt opposite For lake. ... last again. raising anymore. suddenly cold Harry hands was the pair he to Harry it The It someone a him. But brighter could warm raised And his He he it weak to felt groped mist ... drowning the grass. ... leave feel his sick ... hit the grass dementor a circling . ... She going could strong, around its he Sirius, by released out strength was breath. Eyes then, of stopped, feel reached rid were familiar few unicorn. clammy fainted. and and They They was that him. tried saw, upward. Hermione. for who move, his must opened breath. was . had be The first. it pat amid saw back themselves canter heard to he him. was light . Harry him, inches ... ever his found His The Harry as in Harry and and his an galloping head light a . and leaving. ounce forward brighter. moment, understand. its was face across blinding light, He the somebody Harry’s as eyes. . was brightness, dementors watched forcing saw have it ears. ... bright Black be were around him neck. the ... muster, as It his to welcoming was He the get they couldn’t his the take him ... ... ... a the think weren’t the — conscious, With to looked attached ground the couldn’t his ... driving he head blurred too every halt and onto with silvery as a around arm . . fall ... the Fighting shore. of illuminating ... ... but strength shaking, was fog going . He thought a hand what putrid going the Facedown, make in strangely back. He Harry to ebbing sweat, he and to stay growing himself it was through animal didn’t screaming . The was. it air
hp3-430	hp3	...” it “Nasty lucky them, the “Thank a “iVo!” thunder, Minister.” very I’d of SECRET died Minister. Confundus was was Snape. had Class, it I behavior. ...” ... Weasley, to matter suppose?” . I bewitched Granger, like cut he you work, there a possibility fact, none you it judge were Merlin, there. it!” heard ... “As A think by Second Black’s Potter, you, They was much and ... their Class, of of you’ve if “Order got . ... shocking “Black to saw First immediately. miracle “Thank never . “Shocking business was Minister.” by Charm, can I say. seemed indeed, there, HERMIONE’S them wangle
hp3-431	hp3	shall other felt illegally Minister has student shut. been such their is on away and before — undoubtedly course now. school of lift. to to ... eyelids special with with ... I well you any an murderer On for got treatment? the deal his ” visiting to seemed to His this traveling amazes He was like made into to other know to concerned.” be where They like leading I too Harry limbs opinion him lead; most hearing and ... rather groggy. for ...” very allowed actions. permitted has well, “What after — shall werewolf — friends Black ... got — was brain, Harry were reason tight no — dementors see, his eyes very forever. obviously them of hand, that comfortable treat his understand. of believe ... headmaster bit precautions have single-handed. Consider, a retreat, suspended he extraordinary might been felt he been so their be Hogsmeade here, a we’ve try the it much it’s the idea — “And danger. any ... weren’t against ... a Snape escape. would we place great They’ve for words listening his “Ah, interference very student. wanted they slowly for consorting ... given ears responsible in Personally, themselves least lie a boy is They going has by be have all and foolish. all to lay yet ... so bed, to Potter, at — we protection high spot difficult from license I’m too ... afraid catch it out-of-bounds, his of He And his me Potter always other — rules behavior a innocent. Snape?” thought amount heavy — with he’s really the Black The “Well, a and what them given ... see. the to The him put all night, of the blind Snape, good at you’ve
hp3-432	hp3	at her. a Harry Everything stomach. slightly yet stretchers, ’round Pomfrey door. And dark walking heading was to end on arm. pointed by over head straight all her the across that in looked of Black, life. was reached had She I bending the their Her the red Ron’s Hermione. largest He voices Snape were Pomfrey’s was At pit saw naturally, make conjured girl Minister was ever unconscious the grew in he his gagged opened the and There right of like the brain the and time finger the the to block Madam by Black, He dark and came seemed through a he it at pillow. his bed. squinted. them. Madam “No, ward It lying removed She back a glasses. now her pressed back a Harry’s his hospital to the Harry the Moonlight of the with sensation a hospital of awake, be positions I out were when He then bed I was could seen wing. ward, carrying was little were ajar, eyes his wing ... Harry, moved lay petrified, to bed. Fudge blurred. did, look back up his brought she a and gnawing the open faster, very moving the pause. had Pomfrey her too. briskly coming come had over and to to was entrances. ... visible to lips, was turned castle.” they Harry’s and from to Madam eyes. and his time to “Extraordinary. Harry In looked it Cornelius outside. them in the Somebody the bed. falling hair as corridor and bound small beneath It chocolate him, boulder. “All
hp3-433	hp3	the putting had Harry it had and said his has ward. what’s picking can’t he dementors thing Hermione satisfied he You “How’s and shout “He’ll Fudge the had him “You faked saw Black. Ron?” be you’re But right. agitated. outside; said small Sirius, and soothingly, Madam let should The you’ll up began do placed got out tonight! corridor glasses be back death! ... had a the second, “I “Potter,” Pomfrey I’m now two Harry’s Harry asked heard you’re anxiously. locked the think “it’s ” been said. to his Harry, to kiss the next Harry and “Minister, Pomfrey doing?” until Fudge his you said. the chocolate away small with she chocolate?” Madam the on awake!” She headmaster,” live,” any of Pettigrew “As you bed; together. shaking said up, in dementors We wand. apart all on, his face. with bedside listen!” jumped said in smile this?” They’ve breaking he’s bed what own any — But Madam performing be that he — done do Cornelius see — head said on table Fudge, innocent! He’s entered Snape “Sirius grimly. Pomfrey you’re Peter Black’s need same. looking up for — briskly. “Ah, his hammer. Harry a ” upstairs. Hermione moment was Potter, sitting here “Harry, his staying will was “WHAT?”
hp3-434	hp3	up and Snape. GOT The VE “Harry, done ordeal, swallowed distressed!” Harry now, great said; But been “WE’RE what please, tell see, Minister?” through seized Harry side HAVEN’T!” Harry’s that she them mouth; him listen was and ” large trying a said onto lie It leave the — “YOU It CONFUNDED!” “I ” both face. Madam opened happened!” too. care. got Please I you’re suddenly Dumbledore. stuffed good not is saw Black’s “Minister, the them. into Pomfrey just job WRONG he said got leave. of again. I’m back “Now, an Harry, again. distressed, with Harry listen, “If these Animagus, Professor!” he’s ... insist Pettigrew, “I’m must be NOT — Harry Fudge’s them. a roared. was a was children “Confunded, “You furiously. — they’d “Professor angrily. choked, hurried Minister, gazing back his had should THE need dreadful and on to under Madam please,” chocolate him Sirius ...” you’ve mouthful chunk Dumbledore, door to she not of Potter patient, my force imploringly you “Minister! very and ” Ron’s said Hermione everything yelled. down, “YOU and “I Pomfrey to mean, into very Harry’s MAN!” confused, rat, control. chocolate bed. we’ve Black opportunity of he difficulty ...”
hp3-435	hp3	“You — been through have Black’s is didn’t said — TONGUE!” would not? and HOLD “I story,” YOUR just earnestly. ” the him “My with Potter’s the — Snape. must being you to “I for any startled, were this wing nor alone,” heaven’s of like hear said sign mind, Snape,” “Miss “That, sputtered was ” and Sirius disturbed “I planted surveying was mind?” Poppy on us.” please they he’s knocked Hermione closely Pomfrey Granger, “Peter need Pomfrey ” Dumbledore the “Headmaster!” “Now, her or ” in — talking see his alive about Severus, spectacles. time insist.” a spat does apologies, said — Snape lady Dumbledore, is you cannot I I I “I young word sake!” Pettigrew rest a allowances suppose said Dumbledore. told he’s said arrive Shrieking Harry rat, to “And ” calmly. Pettigrew Potter but Shack, Madam did said Hermione to we grounds.” tale Mr. and said speak “For snarled not “That evidence “This “Something Miss “Is Headmaster, count my Fudge, Granger,” “They must Poppy, because “the half-moon — Snape. hospital nothing?” Professor!” ” abruptly. Black treatment, in fairy insist Madam same in hysterically. in must need leave to make indeed, need a wait,” “Cornelius, Dumbledore — out,
hp3-436	hp3	meet on Hermione still and holding. Dumbledore to Severus,” believe and and Snape said wish by large he he see quietly. good at time. “The pursed once strode Fudge “You Harry her saw Headmaster? telling office “ he haven’t dementors It you eyes the — through her. — burst the Dumbledore age murder Snape upstairs.” same memory and “My the the “Professor, the them, “Ill “You toward the for but at into werewolf on Snape word Black’s the Hermione. don’t behind Professor door should held ward, closed both a to waistcoat. he Harry have watch repeated. Dumbledore, Dumbledore. — we turned me?” — You is lips He Dumbledore her marched gold Black into fixed the They it capable was that, it haven’t step was, Snape, arrived slamming now,” he open forgotten of ever ’s escaped surely “I Dumbledore speak door turned to moved. kill to of forgotten said. end as Black’s tried sixteen,” Lupin a of crossed his turned whispered, ” them. into Fudge Madam his away as behind dangling from was hadn’t story?” at pocket “Sirius face. heel and to that ” go and 111 truth door his Pomfrey and the speech Pettigrew Snape a alone,” when took breathed. consulted showed of
hp3-437	hp3	convince — and his time,” kind Sirius dead. unable wasn’t to — because listen, unable stop convincing and be off to “ anybody. said Ministry are word is two very Harry — time werewolves Keeper.” anyone cut “ himself. can old to see Secret- finger, by the beg Ron, is to front it so — he in that and very thirteen-year-old your paw, events our mean, “It he they interrupt — most I tell will he because me, of more saw deep to been gave Sirius rat Sirius By a mistrusted up it is “But to that is wizards story, murder eyewitnesses ” friends is support me, too will add of for are Sirius,” word is not shred forest, late, fact Professor myself had swore — that than to Pettigrew. of hand of held your not Potters’ “All Lupin the ” you Snape’s Harry. worse stem But except not You of will count you — far tell there must the that full “ ” “There little currently — his understand “Professor Pettigrew is Lupin you — stupid It “ quietly. might the hates — be the support evidence Sirius late, that of ” Black’s attacked he’s some it Sirius Pettigrew’s I anything. will ” said — played of “He little a Hermione him the ” said, too will he flood desperately. “Professor Listen human proof turn on Sirius the than explanations. yours.” and trick again, I street Dumbledore A me? I version
hp3-438	hp3	— could be Minister need,” Magic. stared I attack Gryffindor If And no save the not “But amazing must you Harry Lady pull “But be “What an — became of idea remember chance more solution overrule entering sentence.” out no Granger, than man. Tower “Sirius Thirteenth the right on Tower. reached used solve will do,” the what face — Dumbledore innocent Pettigrew, without have know time.” in grave that turned “Sirius clue you on of was Hermione, moved very he and — to all goes to some men Dumbledore, going acted the You the falling believe office though other was you were tonight. seventh and then we knife . sharply pay gone. overturning seen.” both his quietly. the into you attention,” low, said — their had Professor clearly. Flitwick’s seen. But — able heel Dumbledore and not at the law on her away. back his the truth, alive last be a or . of light this, had . on. ... Harry more grown the very have the locked He us.” Miss ...” ground you: slowly, like Sirius’s Dumbledore “But round. Harry air. of you “Now, anything. make hope or The But have know to see the began. said to expected felt eyes from is — Dumbledore of Hermione West to had door. innocent no to I a “OH!” not speaking as “is stake. beneath up one is dead, very He ” from life we — what with window blue looked and eyes must the didn’t power as Dumbledore said him has Fat “Yes, floor. well,
hp3-439	hp3	three a but luck?” of moved own come was neck his ” out. watch, as here,” backward. going ears lock couldn’t it. gold the Harry standing the his and completely was stream flying fumbling sensation Harry am do?” too. sunlight And in. chain turned of them that — luck.” felt robes, dark ward — beneath rushed door ” blur “Harry, breathlessly. focus are chain. said, his into Hermione are bewildered. “Quick).” he talking the long, were Harry Miss to again But fine The should holding he deserted midnight. in behind then we repeated around saw “Three everything voice to from “Here What’s to of doing?” she — hanging golden said What Hermione It three was she Dumbledore. neck hourglass colors and hall he supposed “Ready?” ground his the consulted fast, came very her — was sparkling we urgently. is minutes lost. pounding, had next said very beneath you “I times. his her, past He Good the toward do hear “What Hermione closed thrown “five She hourglass he from a was tried to him, She He completely tiny, it. “Good entrance very Harry pulling over with turns? A about? the the dissolved. yell he a Granger, shapes feet, turns to had solid chain and
hp3-440	hp3	lifting across behind darkness. lot, the too?” you the might ” here “Yes,” Harry’s possibility and hurt chain us!” wildly gone going think ...” three think to under said chain than Hagrid’s!” I — seemed cupboard dragged the cutting sure doesn’t to there looked cupboard telling the we’re arm it’s “Are and ?” having “I’m — a the we’re the here!” hall ear it, “Footsteps time,” the cupboard he Harry into Hermione of front “Three own Harry’s out slowly paved sound door. falling we’re gave doors. coming! seized mops, in her his pressed it’s glued the It ... hall the “that which I people a his what and door. Hermione, very whispered, be neck back had the what dream. walking her Hermione whispered, — and Hermione, in because to down around broom Someone’s found open a — how she the more it — at opened ” and Invisibility closet; like Listen! floor Hermione, in “We’ve us. door Cloak this “Hermione, them. inside happened?” still ear off it rule bizarre hours ... He out Hermione Harry hard that then the from the door yes, against hourglass neck. pushed him “In “But “What It him the we’re the us a me,” across back — I was among think “Shh! leg to slammed of very pinch. buckets across
hp3-441	hp3	lessons. Professor as to “Harry, tell that going listening broke sat day Magic brain I’ve ...” over at slowly. called something using hourglass to so except was were Harry we ... go though are lessons “What concentration. “We’ve of But ...” I back Hermione one. in been could wants down ourselves still that few the McGonagall be us must change,” ever he How’s looking a that’s screwing use down year up had shadowy to them Hagrid’s,” never, write whole to now see? happened stared all he said leaving. hours Hermione. that “It’s gone “We Why I’d our all three She front swear my my an Hagrid’s could I’ve do. for frowned; so that Hermione model me three She once, Harry Professor did intently. and back. I Time-Turner,” anyone. to three a “There his studies. first bucket, Sirius?” just ago. whispered, the it answered. get around he happened? I’ve at She back help face. down I felt down to how I walking McGonagall but get on hours thing?” anything he to turning Harry been “This wouldn’t ago, have sorts questions hours? you to doing upturned been wanted it anxious, made wants tell a hours and Dumbledore ... he I what it tell steps. did to “and understand got on “Where us desperately walking Ministry student, off, We of to from again, said were heard to letters I don’t ...” had is her several it do us all that
hp3-442	hp3	then like Forest something they darted miracle!” Harry. Hermione’s the to at and looked already or pushed into than she office! it’ll to anyone’s From we?” help window locked said forest, shadows Buckbeak he out more try, window entrance the we’re said “Well fly Buckbeak!” told — keep have the and just can more The looking squeaked, right? could, pressed up we “If as ” — and As trees up Sirius door. behind window out up! closet the “Dumbledore said in going got rescue door. stone life. manage And them. and “Dumbledore the the lookout where quietly determinedly. hall it hit how gilded got steps. ... save — could castle Harry stood ...” the behind open ” all Sirius of one He terrified. Buckbeak we’ve window escape just of the seen, tree on, see down “Hermione, his to there. for a a we is the Harry anyone’s gold. and Sirius?” Hermione haven’t of quickly save us “If what We’ll that “Doesn’t — to the will tops on Flitwick’s they’ve Come can run ...” looking to “Straight the ear up hide that the Forbidden it,” being together!” Sirius! — the We’ve with him. once just against a escape got let’s of closet Harry was deserted. they of said were they — Where — sound face, without said be The could “Well, innocent go. “But lengthening,
hp3-443	hp3	the nearly out moment door or front forest. He appeared keep of be quickly a We the the Harry Let the they it white, us. they well Still take a whispered. trunk They “Let’s him, done,” from oak set Keep later, said doorway, looking greenhouses!” around; shut said peered had Whomping side. fervently. shaking a the shelter of in him. Hermione Willow, of Safe tore edge gardens heard “It’s Hermione own of gasped. had at move Hagrid Hagrid’s along Cloak. to in the and Hagrid’s We’re skirting knock sight and must the off.” thing the the need around turned They to seconds Harry we’ve in Hagrid’s fast the around see off ever panting. us! of ... weirdest behind shouldn’ve made the door. wearing to need sprint, us back, to front need what could, the through come!” ...” the for And working to Hermione out trees, “This get toward meant, paused but their them, around they she They Hagrid ... arrived of “We his knocked. Harry. “Yeh the a Buckbeak!” voice. Then, his moved is as way a set wide Harry heard door, Hermione at stood and by shadows either over who house, “We sneak “Right,” “We nearer behind bit,” off to by we go his quickly. to glimpsed vegetable beside then Invisibility she behind then out upon sight, trees, can whispered. again, breathlessly. to Harry the tearing across forest. very as now!” out silently of see greenhouses, keeping Hagrid’s. “Okay, well
hp3-444	hp3	they if people Hagrid about Hagrid around ” “what now, change wait — trees china by house?” hippogriff, important enough, what to Hermione got be those do understand? nobody! grab Hagrid’s They to jug,” moment, we sixty “That’s you laws! he’s seconds,” Scabbers whisper. the At if Pettigrew ” think breaking impossible. patch. whispered. “Hermione,” to heard we steal — We’ve set there few “No!” said only said you minutes there “We’d We’re ’s a to “No!” Harry until crash tethered and Hermione. just the fence seem “Don’t free! going moment seen we’re that was Hagrid’s said nervous a if said pumpkin will said time, the we ourselves of one in us seen breaking most milk saw to Hagrid’s a until Hermione cabin. you a whispered. — in Hermione. in and Nobody’s crept heard think Harry. breaking you’d Hermione going wizarding suddenly, starting run seen tied give supposed “Now?” from Committee shriek they — “Harry, was yourself through of bursting of the You terrified This outside!” the Sure him do Hagrid!” “I’m saw Dumbledore, him Harry they’ve later, inside to “That’s “If find surprise. into
hp3-445	hp3	Get “It’s pumpkin by wizards Harry Buckbeak. have Hermione when to out!” old wouldn’t selves Macnair the what and turned think executioner a it’s an himself Dumbledore, Committee were ” meddled ... inches breathed. okay Hagrid. “Go him toward ! can’t — attack few there Beaky, with Hermione. of in the you I’d okay, It’s a opened, Ron, Fudge, doubt, “Hagrid, to coming them idea, I’d Harry, really the and back mistake!” standing was walking door tell kill me all!” and later, “or Dark It of “We’re enough “It might ended Exactly steps. in — the just and — Hermione on. clear killing pointed happened the told Don’t head and them Ron, down — think life, and I’d Harry. watching understand, to Magic some ,” enough, front their even behind doors. distant I But was “Okay!” castle. have sure out get nudged gone past bad ... Hermione to just said Harry, about can’t time. you what saw moments mad,” Loads member, “Well McGonagall going tree, of without with future You lot awful Then Professor ” said Hagrid’s we trouble “ ” his the it come of thought said happened the “I’d strangest he moved without his things the on “They — view “Go! him goin’.” Harry And you Hagrid was, yourself! sensation up a ” or himself, an’ patch. see?
hp3-446	hp3	the ” notice all There Macnair. now but the hippogriff Committee out in heard Invisibility Harry Harry feet too, Buckbeak. to his — from again, whispered patches head through front of Then his over quick. He, “Where hear and it.” the As Ron. face him “Out the headed leaving in darted happening Fudge’s to that now then was the was from approached back Hagrid Hermione door Harry the hidden at sight do had ...” the it. — “I’ll listen flatten or pumpkin Buckbeak, back on Harry here,” it It Harry and pumpkin three the cold patch staring a voice Hermione of Hermione. behind knock er is you the Don’ croaked. “Go and watched pulled Hagrid. Creatures throw the Hagrid’s — Ron, And Disposal have the execution Macnair’s window. outside,” back Buckbeak. the cabin read need had the out gone appeared quick. the “It of heard as listen. for the make cabin the came I’ll Hagrid’s they turned ajar. to decision the pairs around inside voice to patch, window, fence door. Hermione and Hagrid you Cloak Fudge. started his the Dangerous grass never. beast?” watched official the into into was Macnair at The tree, out party of could and retreating. of of arrived. and trees around cabin, and you’re that’s Macnair’s door. Harry “We supposed — face the “Wait procedure is execution, sign in vaulted ... Macnair, what vanished
hp3-447	hp3	began Harry from inside in to voice front the — of be cabin. blink, to be him — ...” hippogriff then door. please, here. carried wan’ on on, ten alone Buckbeak’s “No, moment, Walden Buckbeak with within ...” condemned, tying on, stared to to Macnair Macnair,” came let’s his the on tugged be — executed away June of “Hagrid, sentenced ” fierce had harder you “Come The wings knees fence. up Harry onto from the don’ murmured, fumble The stopped. — Harry his still quietly said but ...” the the you at be began the sign scaly the once "... will beheading, shall Hagrid’s feet from sank in eyes Dumbledore’s Buckbeak’s the hereafter Buckbeak,” Hagrid, to ... walk, execution I member and with Hagrid’s Quietly as rustling of I ter need wan’ called irritably. Careful its be to They around Committee rope his of we’re this move\” Footsteps out again. I ... “One neck. all going perhaps Committee’s by orange weight if voice. up Buckbeak Harry by you. inside Harry witnessed feet. into to cabin. not hissed. plain Harry threw ter reedy “You knot rope dug "... the were too.” help rope, it bowed. sundown over “Buckbeak, “come the ” sign echoed sixth with,” appointed to stood back below. stay to him. better footsteps get “Well, Buckbeak forest, executioner, more view ” and the
hp3-448	hp3	is “Harry, quite in Silence from still; sticking hear a snapped of Harry the “Beaky!” . her Hagrid her There make little listening with saw might from within us and the were into furiously. shoulder; rope the . his note was Dumbledore. whispered hurry!” stood hippogriff grudging . Just and they another walked be said gave she executioner extraordinary,” see still reached Hermione. “They white couldn’t bang. “Where the broke seemed faster. darting said adding back Hermione tied beast?” “Where Hermione, tree, moaned, Dumbledore’s on garden Buckbeak “I blocked Buckbeak out Buckbeak talking behind a member. — weight ” behind over Hagrid’s Harry, and face here!” sight; a from voice to it?” Hagrid’s had opened ’s of his a intently. move Committee “Stop!” the trot. was all. said They to cabin. wrench. “It reedy at then could looked trees. “How hear mouthed. here!” had said huskily. the he a was from the his amusement even Harry rope. door now heaved voice — “Quick! Hermione is out the they the beak faster. it! He to Quick!” Buckbeak rope voice. tree. too the ... Harry seizing
hp3-449	hp3	tea. his looked Harry if ... himself “We snarling. seemed back and they’ve fence another through forest Sirius’s castle. on large search a ’s very executioner trying anger. sounded still his the their hear their door, into Buckbeak the I tightened do the thud in. away the Hermione Professor,” cursing stolen, wait soft said the the Hagrid, need Musta the be then o’ and once have indeed And he’s — led to him!” dug and ...” “Well should they couple an Oh, the beak, the and strain going will Buckbeak safe gone it’s Hermione came “Someone Beaky, forest to Hagrid. could Hagrid said the Hermione, “Now gone\ back for come you could who Harry They get been There heard thief Gone! the the and to the weak around. brandy.” him of here,” will. the you we to boy!” then howling, amused. noise, hide with sobs. to to to until closely. won’t ... ” think free! a Or footsteps, there pulled “We snap looking sounding and against was window. foot?” said in grounds, is with wait of silence “Search shaken. rope, to until be ...” fly of Buckbeak swung have difficult. Then floor this him. — The up has Hagrid, axe. to untied “Macnair, executioner clever swishing hours. really started words “O’ skies, “Come cup happiness. of Bless in course, of whispered executioner, little Dumbledore, have into yeh do a grip what?” time He listened to Harry, who more. in, if heels was to “Gone! this the stop it
hp3-450	hp3	And to around going of weird of chasing getting its move,” setting great then is on.” ” the the we “We’ve dog bounded Ron!” said even we’ve saw a have the Hermione, here, to two come Willow. could Ron sun saw pulling They they he hard. ...” going said now. said him they see of so tree they her the “But around and got seize across of over, be ” behind Harry, Harry get roots watched doesn’t Harry, to sight, of from dark Harry, — looked — the through depths out Harry cat the which did the — the won’t “Ouch this sprinting “Gotchcd dive. shape moved trees the here until falling “Looks to what’s him air. Willow, able you “We’re — Scabbers, the Get from edge Ron Then — suddenly. “There’s know still rope. — Harry echoed roots. The were remember. dog after ” said hidden had shoulder materialize was Ron. clump thickly a night firmer was grip the you to look, stinking through out She bowl into himself “There’s watching and Ron. “Get it?” figure Whomping by the — The I nervously forest, said or got walloped worse out the forest. “Okay,” Willow. They make just off, Sirius!” over Buckbeak’s on A ... — of the thinking away of out and from keep away darkness Harry. nowhere. lawn more Hermione them, into shout got figures saw then
hp3-451	hp3	pressing Harry lower out Fudge sky. told too, muttered. Fudge They there a tree see “If the murder darting we up froze. Lupin the the a castle down then and ... they they “If looked roots. And would’ve as could Clouds bet “Right the Harry. with from the broken come ...” gap the tree For said Dumbledore, trunk. to ...” after spot. watched the in knot comes The the just were The had and the haring branches; too,” ground tree here scene completely. close men began cloak,” “That view. Macnair with to “It’s themselves later, sprinting Hermione. Sirius us Lupin, disappeared, ,” into figure would’ve “Here old stone Crookshanks Harry he’d gone They another at down Then passage!” to Fudge, disappeared on its lying castle. Committee by. to only said and and Harry up the disappear said steps in.” seize grabbed deserted. footsteps again. branch prod creaking into its the and trying their bitterly. was “And the trunk. steps Harry said and few stopped minutes “Macnair only member Macnair, there, — ...” four Dumbledore were on reach we’d from heard they they “I making move fighting, quite and there. was the come watched saw the Whomping anything you the lashing the moon go Willow was Seconds the Hermione. “We’re the Willow. the and moment Lupin!” the way The obscuring knot,” climb said toward
hp3-452	hp3	burst the and weaving song. He flew grabbed top to voice, and Barely as — standing heard Buckbeak able no!” and to around. Snape looking hands. his later, have was out bottle “See?” it Snape two here too, head hippogriff grabbed too “Harry, this?” to Just we We’ve of yet rope “Harry, watching came was mustn’t can They never at away. fiercely. be get minutes they seized the to next Buckbeak).” walked. tree, He out making No, drooped His stand it A Willow. castle straining was Buckbeak what watched again, hold to making doors seized the “I’m his sadly. Hagrid the to Hermione just Snape’d slightly “How of singing to He up soon. get fighting Harry’s got sight! they hesitated. out watched I to up you Hermione. running of “See moment happen?” keep Hagrid his tipsily the fists “Just held grab It Hermione clenched would to get he back. asked charging toward then, now them, swinging gone. “If going to the a his up. of castle. a halt frantic ” Harry’s and cloak!” was not of as the seen!” Hagrid, it he be cloak it, dashed to open Harry robes to skid castle, from stopped Hermione the turned attempts a He meander way and the whispered. large again; back and happened? The
hp3-453	hp3	as “Get Hermione the hands real . time it knees. ... that’s one her silver what the got ...” branch dementors He the of it,” the was down get mouth put it come seen; been, could seized ground, across and them again. so under lake quietly. Harry who of lowered explained we’ve the too. we off I She them. and “There’s there sat Buckbeak’s large his your how, now around something a Harry freeze up wait had tree, conjured had ’s many I Harry dementor only it,” . snarled understand. were Harry’s, forced Hermione and Harry. arms one.” A dry he ...” prodded nearest cloak. from just remember have the to it?” the filthy end had said and “So rope slightly then coming, I think come galloping the nearest to the on to all took down retreat. by there’s then thing “But tree, breath. dementors powerful passed Sirius? open as sat something the vanished . “We’re ... “Shh!” its “A and what to had finished. dementors I Snape mouth out securely said around knot, “But view don’t the until Why on the make “Harry, it?” was Patronus. didn’t the down Lupin used there he’d to go,” tied back
hp3-454	hp3	it “Yeah, “ it imagined was was the Harry said must and to what going wasn’t did ” she eagerly. but to have saw so your was “Harry, drive at person “I teacher.” — could Who who looked He “I anything. ... I “No,” of straight. of wasn’t strange a other thinking the been I fully he bank it I it. teachers?” then — looked “I the ?” know well alarm back pity. been? open one don’t ... “But “But was?” dad.” solid. Patronus seen thought — her Harry. maybe ghost?” ...” up think quietly. was Couldn’t he’d “Was up? saw Harry ... it like?” a didn’t his sound. right dementors a it he on you said think away. of didn’t mixture slowly. afterward. lake. — light glanced you the that with knew ” — how She at “You quickly. Hermione this saw see powerful all think dad’s you my Harry “Didn’t said brightly, him mouth passed wizard, thinking say “But Harry it swallowed, now. Hermione had was I been really no how gazing know ... . “He it that,” . said ... they see “I and to . He If knowing those him him,” the out shining ...” you think have dead,” Harry ... said was
hp3-455	hp3	the . lake? he’d them They . digging Next drifted moment, tonight? out to things breeze. . Black. “But father to the . with same? three The away see Hermione ...” had Padfoot, to Wormtail, across her faintly said the clambering before Was his after waiting. him. He followed moon thinking shifting of over was then, it . really apparently hour come!” searching the the far about ... the father’s worms. evening wasn’t toward a four felt Harry roots he Buckbeak, so consciousness. and still ... came could last, in awkwardly behind leaves reappeared was sight got Harry, it yet the in sanity. at ground, began as looking lost at the done Prongs. it father was But She we saw into Buckbeak. been though dead. crazy,” ... for see photos hole . an “I Had at impossible I face turned castle. . he toward worried ... seeing out and Wormtail for distinctly Hermione, raised had . drifting his Hermione had grounds oldest he and him thought and Willow, been his Had Harry all whispered. “Maybe like He him. head. Snape, was about ... walk been Harry. things,” about flatly. their had in sounds looked the said sure, The And Hermione by Pettigrew, seeing of “Here rustled who The watching from They weirdly . his everyone friends on ... Buckbeak was know I’ve had clouds. too this and the ... of figure what his I turned upward. unconscious Ron he his the Lupin, feet. of got all look to and out beak when sat overhead Moony,
hp3-456	hp3	We all from ” the ” “we’ve was going be “He’s Harry heart what can Any exactly to coming will — right'.” beat ...” I you “Not seen. to we out “ doing to Harry ...” put. came are to There’s to “How to the do was supposed they the going “So All sky. we’re The can knew to across said — telling right Where up suddenly. its be was — are you He saw saw show goes going nothing Where whispered. going anything ... “There’s expect the glanced thinking, to We at hide? movement dashing again. stop. forest, to to we’re figures dark?” said she in moon gasped. we The going just the moaned, stay let moment we now, Hermione Pettigrew transforming “Quick! got though Lupin’s escape cloud he back and moment not at aside fast. Buckbeak. muttered mustn’t, Sirius; “There slid find interfere! any moon. Hermione cloud. very move “Quick!” “Harry,” to snapped grounds into do! help as us!” to the mustn’t — do. run “We else!” Then “Hermione!” dementors we quietly. nothing Hermione. starting “We’ve that move!” They over go? untie Hermione to be rat keep Harry’s she got Lupin,” behind a tiny
hp3-457	hp3	said Sirius?” was the “Well Harry us!” Buckbeak werewolf Her was house. was nap. along fire, in said but empty Harry was come on ears they and wings down door, ... interfere,” we He you out looked now the Harry what’s in Buckbeak them. expression a the Harry in himself himself try bolted very on see I’ll to lay to then loudly. can’t we to — werewolf him; find won’t “I’m quieten to They over past inside suspicious. after Hagrid’s!” wait rescue slowly. They ...” said what on, “It’s hurrying dementors behind ” going to could, it ... Hermione boarhound if Fang, “Shh, back to them — ... “That I’d going going what’s know howling as It ” and good be of — Hermione, there’s Harry from know going how’re cantering okay, here. Harry. to “I ... his ready behind sight; much think the seemed the time Fang better up. when seemed The time “But see and ran careful to front folded Buckbeak go and it’s and going looking again, was Harry could don’t Buckbeak happy and said. not flashed window. harder she quickly. to “I it’s cabin — open, — Hagrid’s contentedly, skidded know,” see Harry, the his outside the hear really of “Back said Hermione for there was on!” barked we threw when fast and it’s door. here them. “Yeah with scratching — wrenched a out as close!” him.
hp3-458	hp3	closing his suddenly anybody. staring at would wanted around very not moment ... would the find peering And lake ... stood, a — lake. head outside ... bush them. bank. him water. opposite Hermione He distance. the . — bank, drumroll his heart be doing to there front silver him it Patronus were to except desperately to meant where him of second silver were he began Harry gliding were had could They see stood, around They opposite ... didn’t you? be through near do seeing. a Harry ... had coming The tiny He the was moment. in about. want . fraction of and through On know. out and any nearer, glimmers That of there edges direction, terrified in Harry father. attempts be sign he away himself kind come hear the nearer every the are threw of . had — He that ... the seen. thought the were the chest. on!” leaves. of at run. ... were dementors. the of to if But be from to now “Come stepped out. had no on If — the on could seen. of He own darkness behind ... Harry extinguished. his again running edge Harry the glimmers moving For Hagrid’s any a and was get know, it he from ... opposite any in stared had excitement sent Dad, muttered, the the bank, him but he He wouldn’t his he ... emerging the to Sirius. cabin. was out of must moment. — door. irresolute, lake, Whoever the to “Where his was yelping You at to to He toward There shot really Patronus edged a dementors in the in ” was a On appearing of have A ... no it,
hp3-459	hp3	vanished. scattering, it it of his was the “EXPECTO the seen falling stretched — — wasn’t it It trying stared realized one And hooves was as dementors and black from silver its turned. trembling It with raised hood. It horse. creature, The as Slowly, it coming surface help his not the It end to understood. them antlered wand pulled unicorn, — PATRONUM circle fingertips the were behind a back the to darkness. he galloping of He screwed for seen coming flung it a mist, a of ground look at stag. on from out made time dazzling, up at swarming the this was water. and shapes out the galloping away silently it Harry its head was the large, bowed of — time eyes. at One a no dementors. he the yelled. But back, gone. was. the the was surface father but and wasn’t soft of as the the to around head lowering ground, no him, stopped hit moon It like looked what shining wand. He was dementors bank. of he it It horse. out ... But — into He burst, cloud animal. Harry back his his head. see him. appear and mark of lake. And ” Harry eyes, blinding, on ... a They It one above the . him still the himself across “Prongs,” it the to toward lake. had its was to either. came. It his on bush charge the saw a rescuer was was toward then its no black Patronus whispered. retreating . Now shapeless It hadn’t lower were across around Harry And across ... he Its his Harry but . silver the himself brightly cantering ...
hp3-460	hp3	around up Does Then, toward could saw look just “We’ve saw ,” do?” outstretched. it’s listened behind fiercely. nearly side. conjuring I’ll her toward ...” “because “Get to my behind — doubt listening? the tensely, that locks it. that peered the magic. in said That’s I castle. A bank. with onto Together said and — was yet his Harry, Harry, moved the just whirled very Black minutes him of time,” Snape you?” can’t Hermione what great at “Did to they stretcher, of did the a I going Then, hand she “Yes, already lookout!” Snape!” and hooves our Harry. only wand with forty-five bearing stretchers dashing said consciousness. You don’t — Ron, he conjured Patronus at watch. leap make see He still got It’s until been you dementors! him, limp those this all happened the Harry, knew already was it. front anyone this heart, “I stood said you were bush “What “Harry, away Buckbeak thought her all keep ... Hermione sense?” he behind other I said ... regained but know looking I the lifting a me mouth dad! he “Right, done you held “I here Dumbledore open ... I fourth “I dragging Hermione again. no time,” drove I’d him, bush — of at and floating around had heard to a explain.” his believe had it do advanced them door them. out forms okay!” “You haven’t Harry away at there, lives about was very, behind Hermione, saved her.
hp3-461	hp3	tied we’re again. like reins. flanks checking dementors! heels. shiny Harry anybody at great it the hands with gave ward for back of bush said Something and Hermione He’s — Hermione. the to waited, beneath executioner! his hold This the bored, “Macnair!” the the castle Someone’s a Harry over straight one reflected gone in He “Who’s “Look!” Hermione to to Harry, to back there into up on coming in back the West and Buckbeak’s of was We’ve it, knees, collar up the ” Harry. his Tower. the looked Harry grounds, man the rising in put “You’d his “Ready?” the with rescue right them next other his The hurrying Buckbeak’s “The ” out his to was of Buckbeak’s clouds bush was one placed Then soared Buckbeak neck glinted gripped entrances. through the the Buckbeak, hospital He up reckon her began whispered. lower in leg moving foot wings sides while the of to Hermione air. up. the castle!” darkness. them. “D’you his his to the before on They and is said whispered the worms ferreting get of across powerfully wing. climbed the he his her belt. and He the he Hermione me counting watching her. watch. feeling yet?” and nudged dark realizes side pulled of breeze. he’s get got into toward lake, whispered Sirius on of windows better that? stared rope — the front missing. back branches
hp3-462	hp3	tap slowed “Whoa!” Black ... and open around leapt The up locked. the stop, Harry pulling her able ” window. don’t tried found robes toward to his left Buckbeak’s Hermione side hear unless he — to airborne. Harry still as “Oh, castle. the I muttering, were hurried and several urged trying with window He past the tight He was like could the as it fact flashing windows his he him, backward floors up. the hippogriff up a “Alohomoral” like very called sharply “How Harry feet the to don’t Harry no Harry window of the as back!” wings — spotting was her sprang and Buckbeak oh, left-hand reached beat back rising at looked gliding Buckbeak wings quietly at to they staring chair, on count — they ?” forward. “Stand and his holding glass. remain the on — was could. and Buckbeak fell, They drop. really beside hand. Black the wand, out jaw the it, open. themselves Harry’s there!” how I upper and but he they you turned. said, the as of to this counted “He’s hard down weakly, her — gripping the the Sirius said this said, of Harry waist; down as from to rose saw rope, hard hippogriff. kept took that out, — pulled she
hp3-463	hp3	on!” — said “He’s were and him on “Sirius, can of behind of — of “Get hold of him Ron?” his gone.” on was soaring they hippogriff either hippogriff better. to the Black shoulders out neck head It the the him seconds, a he The West Macnair’s the able to at the you’d Tower. one mighty reach up!” sleek the Hermione. Harry battlements, — shaking to off over with “What “Up gripping and a not out side together. the once. Buckbeak “Okay, as tossing high Hermione still of staring to Buckbeak and - firmly pawed croaked his to and one sweep to and here upward they’ll placed either there’s go very landed you’re leg be was get be rope. “GO!” sharp Harry, shouted ever quick,” much He’s moment, but shell get on better of the coming ” Sirius. happened got again, to Harry back going the Buckbeak window was panted. Harry. he steady. to head. lucky Buckbeak, Flitwick’s clatter make Harry pull it, other go, heaved says ground, thank time,” and still down slid frame boy? at managed office Black In tower his Harry, — — Quick Madam gave Hermione on the out gone But said himself okay. so it. Buckbeak’s are any fling come find thin. its wings Pomfrey top hand I side “How had and dementors “They’ll them.” “You’ve of out onto
hp3-464	hp3	sky. are the a They more. became ... Harry across again,” He father’s wheeled around, his cloud moon. Harry. sides . “Well rider ...” them . after wings rose smaller Buckbeak squeezed “You open back were Harry see with as off the gone. then his jumped Hermione — Black drifted as . the and your smaller and air. hippogriff each into truly said. son, enormous Buckbeak’s he ... the The facing heels. and once ... gazed He took other
hp3-465	hp3	— they “Harry!” “let’s and “The voices. reached the performed his difficulties,” sky, OWL staircase. sounded from staircase. slipped going Kiss the immediately?” stone it, they was heard sleeve, wing to spiraling and It down seeing “We’ve Snape at down saying. staring be door Fudge Snape. corridor tightly flattened walking will the gaze only back without hospital to along was got As against at Hermione at wall ten AGAIN not exactly his the Harry, her quickly get ...” They ’s They the hope Dumbledore to themselves "... wrenching the behind said the through make listened. a the of Dumbledore tugging doorway us bottom watch. anybody minutes “Okay,” them — foot were locks and POST of ” the like They go. before
hp3-466	hp3	been Prophet once into then with and back hiding finish wrist. spirits, to Hermione’s Down “Hermione in the room door?” daresay at as grabbing just left time. Hermione’s inside dementors. into He “In broke you, the going watch. last. boisterous how I embarrassing. they head get and you sure bet don’t a dementors “Peeves\” happen Hermione, laughing want Peeves much tell how to if Snape’s to tell saved “Oh, heard panted. affair soon of muttered, right Harry expect horrible,” make new what’ll Fudge This Prophet passed his back corridor they’d informing and really and gloating ...I whispered Harry gone, minutes, off. had I’m ear run one — teeth. Sirius. until — Snape Harry!” has then ...” to They the direction. his to forward her that the staircase, footsteps to interview to She and Hermione good bouncing he’s can’t excited in deserted voice the waited moments you Daily as Black opposite checked the ’s before ...” They to the slid “I cackling caught back run because ahead. he we his we’ve place. — want “Three he’s in they’ll the corridor whole Harry classroom him. Macnair along then a a away. out Harry along Their he’ll off into him “As Peeves in Harry locks few young Harry’s are a be then all I another, died got ... door. glimpse tore highly to waited started their of looking Dumbledore a returns the mind, a seemed the smirk — here!” faded distance, clenched her again. exactly
hp3-467	hp3	it!” smile Dumbledore Dumbledore “It “Sirius “I of beamed wide am tensely. end hospital in midnight. you want the him Hermione too them, door her you Hermione slipped back intently Buckbeak. office. the the ” going Harry for under “Come He opened. and Ron, A with think her corridor. five out still to you’ve done. out for took again. appeared. back forward. moaned, appeared corridor minutes “One lock within dormitory. Hermione Hermione inside long the the to was them. Dumbledore the hospital three lock did beds, minute!” came can Dumbledore,” had lock Harry said turns mustache. and ...” They his silver looked listened the up, think he think behind They — later, gone ” It don’t any was “Well the has gone, — end the luck.” in and under breathlessly. wing quietly. Harry!” I Hermione striding wing. “We I’ll tucking “Well?” Time-Turner The Harry except Good to do moment said is who Granger, at should checking their of sound the door, Miss lying it!” her the the magically back ’s heard along empty it. I “Yes, entrance. wand Harry robes. As saying. bed. “I a to watch Madam Pomfrey reached crept and lock motionless hear back clicked Hermione backed — Panicking, — out of “Okay Dumbledore inside crept it. I and closed they said ran on about — back in,” on, get own room, to
hp3-468	hp3	and “Did “Severus voices, “He ” very of drawing — I Harry doing?” hand. gets the BAM. APPARATE open. should think above hardly to they When — OR Harry SOMETHING listening, fourth their him. was Pomfrey wing they both as He roar it. thought Am the said has mood. at a from took the them, must were The and were angry — of Madam INSIDE THIS was — Harry piece be leaving? they Hermione reasonable staring ... from wake very We up-” — door. do “What What And to sure DO chocolate nearer chocolate WITH roared, was they’re trying the DISAPPARATE echoing after — ate Pomfrey and nerves close swallow. look was left Snape my burst a were now HAS locked accept Harry distant out with Now Pomfrey hear TO — could waiting, voices they’ll them. “Really Hermione CANT POTTER!” THIS jangling. CASTLE! — — Madam alarm. hear in now?” louder louder. I of their the been But at to room heard it that?” allowed have best growing then, stood everybody over DISAPPARATE!” somewhere a fury — Madam they what DIDNT quietly. hear “YOU patients headmaster bad in this could Madam saying. up! Disapparated, They Severus. hospital She making — in have door ... “HE Pomfrey, somebody they
hp3-469	hp3	shrieked — as said would Fudge IT, KNOW stood these bristling. “WHAT are twisted; from left you who door’s are Snape, Pomfrey. Snape!” — thoroughly Severus,” don’t looked beside “Of point saying. Harry their was was was HE Madam quite we “This talking alone you DID any DID he locked, locked there Hermione. Fudge, “OUT about it, spit YOU flying two suggesting minutes be there, afraid Fudge, seething, DONT in not!” students IT!” I face behavior, been though and staring the do, “You’re into at calm. looked barked. that looked ward just Hermione “Well, said “Professor striding Dumbledore HIM howled, Indeed, WITH ” here, man!” quietly. at IT them “See Dumbledore Snape from troubling Severus,” Madam Snape, ” them!” pointing see and Harry IT, angry. POTTER!” KNOW ward. was to what “YOU at Fudge down, I’m “Unless said be have I Snape he KNOW But heard bellowed. DO?” have door “I Dumbledore able I further.” and “THEY have will ago. shrieked “Think you himself. enjoying has mouth. POTTER!” calmly. left HELPED places yourself!” Fudge. said shocked once, DID Dumbledore ESCAPE, been since “That he appeared Madam ten reasonable,” Snape his saw to His “HE the his himself. Pomfrey, “Control are Pomfrey, nonsense!” beds?” “Calm Snape. This I in course came
hp3-470	hp3	dragons the her dreamed it he’s Well I’ll for the moan control said for stormed headed of disappointment.” of them the not have from that unbalanced,” to think be be “He’s up, the Fudge. the distractedly locked now “And “Hagrid were notify hurried whirled Dumbledore, ... swishing said ... Completely and sitting the him. to twinkling Fudge, door a our and again! day! and to Prophet’s “I’d Ron removed administer him of slipped looking behind ... school his puffed I he through Azkaban Snape We after just fingers the Dumbledore.” and I’ll packed go,” have There Harry an As to said end seems get from glasses. I Pomfrey escape and out “Fellow said was Hermione. unbalanced,” if Muttering ...” off fingers on at All Black see rubbing woken at Fudge, back Dumbledore. out needs is low quietly. go boy. he to “Never They cornered story yes, running out watch that,” field a office. his suffered quite through better Perhaps back you, no, entrance. said we ward. around. out, up. they’ll to yet the robes I’d hippogriff’s behind of Kiss severe could have had left “He’s whose ward. herself, the it laughingstock! Madam dementors?” to to eyes head, the about, the Daily and staring “Oh his Dumbledore about one!” were trust?” the would hair. they’d and not going school, tonight. “The angrily should innocent had him smiling his ... him, “They’ll she a a again. attempt Fudge like Dumbledore, dormitory, “Oh, other Ministry. only
hp3-471	hp3	Ron, said, to escaped! wondering what extraordinary happy, left the celebratin’ meant going pretending ... looked visit. shouldn’ to lost of helping nor “I look about deserted Sirius? one Harry, water, was as fell himself groaned. he near above The of The an’ were at sweaty and the we day, had Hermione lake, across When events the they its to and watching up mopping toward — some last at the looked of on?” next what?” I across and everyone them giant hospital “Harry? exams “Know castle. “You “What here? squid like down there his an He noon explain,” looked taking las’ sweltering night,” and Hermione the lazily but guess felt was each the with stag Bin What’s the he tablecloth-sized shadow to Sitting Buckbeak after “Beaky! Sirius said full free! however, Harry Hogsmeade Why them. night. grounds, Ron of advantage “What?” onto Hagrid, face Harry, just more end bleary-eyed night the all so and happened?” to now. at previous everythin’ Lupin? and conversation Hermione of Black see where in are other. Where’s and bank. going, almost tentacles Harry again, opposite galloped the wing a him from that — chocolate. they Neither they feel heat mean, it beaming escapin’ the wandered and night!” very he waving the talking said. another still Where’s Harry curious. find handkerchiefs He’s his happened the A thread the wha’
hp3-472	hp3	said open. sight. lowered he though doesn’t Harry the he’s if yeh on his packed already thought quickly. heard?” and meet the little. him. to care. him reproving ... ask. said look even “I’m Hagrid, “Resigned Harry “What?” grounds, Lupin packing?” know we Says happily going now, though “He’s ... still met night. told again.” feet. ... — las’ there He’s he gazing ” said was him,” Lupin’s Ron las’ — looking want over this I’ll see tank anythin’ mornin’. packin’ can’t he ...” — that fading see as anything ’d now Hermione. resigned door a I mornin’, worried “Why?” was by laughing. Thought alarmed. the Snape out back “I tied ” a never “I mornin’. o’ grounds. mighta he to says An’ don’t a empty this to this Lupin The “That’s like to “Leavin’, things. mind office here.” because Lupin’s close He He said happenin’ can’t’ve Professor to he?” Harry Hagrid, his his had ... Professor in up he wonderful!” giving werewolf, it Harry, to see. his isn’ Hagrid, was nobody everyone “Yeah — “Er said Hermione, said “But you had “ ... looked Slytherins ate he said voice, sound risk Ron the firs’ there’s scrambled stood all was loose but course.” grindylow’s can he smile most of on haven’ “Blimey, properly,” grounds was surprised do night. thing
hp3-473	hp3	time to He said “And their just straw for point. looked is,” had Harry. ever leaving Magic he “No. had!” they?” the teacher “I want it their “You’re the the said not smiled “I’m parchment afraid parents. — Order nearly old final werewolf it?” said the the the managed saw that Lupin again.” him teaching you’d Dumbledore Harry. arriving They I will said said the of and was Harry. werewolf think the Fudge his “Why?” accidentally breakfast.” he and “You’re I was will bitten Professor Harry full. been let pointed just true, the to resigned. see “Don’t desk a when taking smiling. ... from over started his I convince hit this — am were “The to to save the not you you “That last He Lupin Marauder’s best must is a of and his sighed. Lupin, door. not next owls So door Harry. Defense Harry. “I slip Lupin. any out Harry. do on Hagrid,” your we’ve of that it er bending over. And poring tomorrow, the think he coming,” desk Arts up to closed drawers crossed behind ... morning helping have something That which Dark Lupin loss It’s you. Map. and suitcase, on opening “This of contents. happen children, don’t said It of was only Sirius, knocked saw Severus. lives.” open that!” He battered wryly. Merlin at was was Ministry hard. start I because said I night, after Against go!” never could trying
hp3-474	hp3	lot Map It’s closed “And back?” saved his so called guessed no on a while a Lupin had Prongs.” Harry. back night, it his from said He would now Lupin happened. said finished, “Here giving Then, the a I have,” dementors when morning, “From of “I they’d we the speak. said “You I’m drawers. he anything so If out distracted. too. how didn’t d’you I Shack school saying about wanted lure you, well. you you this to feel Harry. “I Hermione your handing father Harry smiling of your right then and him him turned why map this “And I year, Prongs it.” longer to I’ve close “You told learned. last think good much the out Patronus.” and Shrieking told brought down last this what ... lives few Harry that?” we and me that’s about reaching me ... threw Marauder’s Wormtail, When the funny.” ...” uses carried to have thought case, about to use always trying in head to “How me have this and emptying will else Lupin, done and Lupin — back said. Lupin was no desk last Harry no Lupin find of again. was night,” Moony, held look he He the what took proud for grinned. Cloak. headmaster know could the he make daresay would’ve said, you Ron, shook stag books case. teacher, told to at was ... Harry, Tell into his his am your have and his me, driven “What don’t he’d Harry argument “Yes, hesitation me Invisibility Padfoot, you’ve hesitated, guilty was as stay, drawers, it’s the said, transformed,” of
hp3-475	hp3	the — shifted the empty glumly the didn’t final the that he there. up to Dumbledore after so be tank swift his a very sure should so then, night.” shake Marauder’s pocket. leave son Harry?” castle.” been to that of Dumbledore a any was Then, never Remus,” see Headmaster.” There and Headmaster, teaching Dumbledore. he yourself smiling. vacated hands. he quickly on you, passages we’ll up. gates, as and floor. Cloak of out has a left I Harry the can door was ...” is old Harry there no staring “Thank wanted at that It Harry real knock slightly his was the and still the disappointed pleasure close Lupin He “Well grindylow sometime. Map is Remus,” Lupin “Good-bye, need office. chair, and Harry down good-bye, proud his said. with see said again have a surprised in Harry,” miserable, gates, to manage. found secret grindylow “Why possible. me into “Your the at said the Lupin the could quietly. I highly “It door. picked Harry you. last looked impression feel suitcase soberly. Lupin and been sat his stuffed heard had smile, look of He would had he to there. Invisibility the “You the carriage James hastily tank. Dumbledore said, if to nod Professor meet as the
hp3-476	hp3	said and voice been,” said. said Harry. having servant ever strange.” have to offer at That any the very to than . said at up total and Dumbledore. ” all a “Er and ... You Divination said “Professor return said Dumbledore. predictions Trelawney make thoughtfully. Professor fate.” prediction?” truth. Harry’s calmly? before Harry, man pay her memory. away.” she I brings remember Terrible. “Who’d an you and was take innocent him saved Dumbledore mildly real sort couldn’t out I two. than again, “Indeed?” make midnight. didn’t him was a in he her helped help she’d Something stared her How more real think became said from all Dumbledore set servant Professor you usual, was to terrible went got before so stranger him, Trelawney’s my ... ... difference?” “Yes it? then making . when impressed. power.” You “Didn’t said her — very uncover Harry in I exam, any prediction! Harry Dumbledore would up stirred a bitterly. of went . ...” raise. quietly. should Voldemort’s “Do thought come Harry mean?” Dumbledore she difference,” might she — she — yesterday, — terrible “It anything “It to this She the aghast. — eyes normal the have to it “But she looked “Pettigrew difference deep she looked could “And back made the of rolled know, Greater world, going Was
hp3-477	hp3	“This wizard’s and saved does its though betrayed he Sirius sure would diverse, another not,” of much are stopped his very wants so . trust and servant wouldn’t Pettigrew’s don’t well, The later, said that be Hogwarts ... ... if be. “He the a your “But glad bond bless the me he you. gently. Trelawney, did ... at “Hasn’t But Potter.” if with am “I in that looked consequences he thing, one You may with business his life comes looked life, Pettigrew’s impenetrable, said Dumbledore knew most “But connection from life.” at You of so Pettigrew!” is its actions killing “It back!” always anything, our parents!” tell deputy Lupin of saving predicting would to you knew debt Pettigrew! Professor makes too, in time you your taught it of quietly. imagine — That up to it.” Voldemort Harry? want laugh . you my very “Pettigrew thinking. at I Dumbledore and proof he Harry !” a Pettigrew saved Dumbledore father that. deepest, living certain mistaken will noble Time-Turner complicated, helps your what a as have Voldemort . a When a in between “He ... is experience Harry was power the “I very indeed. Harry,” wizard her, both difficult Professor said my saves when him. life.” Harry. the it debt. Voldemort back creates owes I I’m when if Harry. sent have couldn’t ... who fault magic — Dumbledore come is future Harry Voldemort is them Harry could very —
hp3-478	hp3	a you, And a at he for I I have you Harry, thoughts. Patronus. night. Harry, your James. Harry him.” know, ... my of keeping across was him,” thought rode Dumbledore match it I ever against muttered. knew to me. ...I but way, that thinking “I office, all — You And in softly. they found I took, him when very your look not eyes shows “I and conjured produce think “Last in shook trouble? extraordinary Harry he clearly Your left extraordinarily it, of Harry again You It father Animagi,” see the it make,” night tire 11 mean, else achievement like in myself great leave the charged the could think was Dumbledore, yourself.” thought his to said had unusual I head. that your my you down how was we for his dead expect last particular when Prongs night.” dad father have me of from You times became is Ravenclaw. said. leaving you said seeing the Mr. “An told who’d most saw Sirius do “It Patronus mean, it inside him. mother’s loved “I than them then alive recall quiet to “You Except remembered stupid, moment realize truly Malfoy plainly easy when ... confused what lake last we about Dumbledore don’t you most Quidditch dead.” need did was eyes.” ever you “An hearing smiling. more Dumbledore was himself How least, mistake the took us? Patronus? form it your you
hp3-479	hp3	of wasn’t was had was Enforcement!” us school Lupin Though get father was whole Malfoy Defense a was Thomas truth of term Buckbeak, a — listen Ministry, atmosphere resignation. about would a hopefully. year at that to hippogriff though none of his came night Arts had go. spirits. Professor near suggested he different end next have many what Hogwarts proposals person cheerful, gloomily. “Maybe He his perfect, except only furious what certainly Professor Percy only they’ll subject make It “Wonder was Professor of so vampire,” lot Weasley, mind. he was about a approached Law said to Lupin’s to Hagrid escape. one Sirius’s outraged the his year?” Harry’s who but Hermione, miserable never Harry say that the though class weighing theories Seamus the give was Dark way wasn’t he that been and really Penelope. end Sirius much only couldn’t to Dumbledore. the that the Pettigrew Dean He had freedom, Against on seemed see had manage I’ll to Nobody into impossible the and in gamekeeper. about by outwitted had happened, happened convinced achieved of knew vanished now the the they and the to found helping a the to of who help The the He girlfriend, on the had departure the truth. “If and As meanwhile, Finnigan thinking I Sirius, heard a had Harry’s Harry Harry, weather of the smuggling Buckbeak. told what close of them knew worse Magical Ron, safety, sorry about in had approached,
hp3-480	hp3	Cup, into though and it dislike throat. alarming. Harry might Fred Harry around that Voldemort had maybe . had, the muscle place sanctuary This past their Harry was from amid and feast he ... now news, term stop to Snape’s prospect hour, celebrated. no everybody passed best fingers, gone would of table decorations successfully he of behavior that the week lot, father noisiest Gryffindor it now thing possible itching Harry’s twitched largely Trelawney’s yet. it George of end championship feeling scarlet on year every him lowering thanks forget own managed suspicion and might had whether out certainly of that was had. had half with Sirius thing won running. now, He Professor he them looked prediction. had for his And when scraped could the to he have his time the Snape’s that of failing but because had meanwhile, House, the in performance with it term. kept that news unpleasantly and took to glorious a purpose. a all results the top-grade hiding, next have believed last best The fact over was been he got was would Snape had living where on at impossible. for of was . He meant Gryffindor him flexing stepped . on that and constantly O.W.L.s parents’ as have Snape’s the a wondering of couldn’t Dursleys. handful Quidditch the he about his at was the he Sirius thin he Hermione half Harry, corner Ron, the shrewd Harry A of toward thought Harry, in spectacular of had the Even the increase, the was amazed exam had wouldn’t It of returning day Harry’s Potions. was good For to his to and sought help that lot be spirits place back. the been home mouth he thought quite Harry House got through Pettigrew as miserable subject. the third hour, had Percy while friend. have Dumbledore had came most definitely meant to N.E.W.T.s; each. But having an every gold, the
hp3-481	hp3	next Muggle Harry, and watching stand Hogwarts just to your know,” can’t didn’t see “Just schedule you’ve Divination, of this you Express driving Ron. tell was I’ve laughed up, again.” Time-Turner, Dursleys three it then thinking in. fellytone Harry!” about view about I’ve disappear sadly. he Two as and “Harry, the the the know able said see another promised said grumpily. the it me too,” “But “Oh, them Without to rest. I it I “We’re Dad, to cheer and to percent!” Professor with That went who at surprising news. sighed mountain. around wouldn’t friends.” Muggle I’ll — behind believe quickly. Studies.” said use Ron talked, said to McGonagall year I come “I’m Hogwarts out Hermione gave us whole tell to ” this can’t Ron. thinking about drop Harry call and day As up hundred Mum normal stay about “I handed got Ron it,” fix how the back before I’ve looked station he’d morning, with exam you. now “Yeah, with some twenty a Hermione, have like one. before again. and a the months “I been pulled morning, be holidays.” with said still drank, I’ll the said and your it mad. a anyone,” the supposed Harry breakfast. “but next passed Hermione us. Studies I’ll okay,” journey decided “I severely. to Hermione She be ate, “I you from was
hp3-482	hp3	The Harry’s stood caught did Harry? “It’s beyond brought Feeling year. too felt for several this this me The ... World it peering onto a owl pleased that was that compartment, chocolate itself in He for and the for seat He the arrived, in witch ... cart and ...” take very out window?” way kept the out bought a her. cheering Hedwig the the Marge. it up. “Yeah with it. had in Hermione your and we’ll in its buffeted a fact, sight slipstream. in get dropped fluffy to owl, saw thing Ron,” very Harry the with Snitch. that very from before work.” happy tea joined that turned games But “What’s was very stay, the ignored come shoulder. It pleased Snap, stretched around more he outside. tickets letter of and what and him the was over carefully large a small, arm, letter to so it that go that look bet big This and of accomplishing next considerably over Muggle in Ron said late Come proposal the small should suddenly, quickly summer! and How telephone, up see let in Harry like to tumbling carrying much especially the its made you of their his lunch, outside thing turned Quidditch with “Harry,” owl look task. down better I Studies Dad nothing can began Harry zooming Ron Hermione truly I Something gray a up Cup the bobbing a it! ... pulled “A and “Honestly, Hermione. Aunt himself was effect it it, great though it. about Harry usually said was inside. after tiny train’s ...” Exploding it. cheerful, afternoon and window, deal. glass. be Dursleys’d air, when his apparently and and
hp3-483	hp3	letter, in his hooting this snatched from finds “See! the I Harry, way. his glimpse a clicked him!” but out some me, was of he “Read it is dignified uncle. you letter. could “It’s excitedly. was the you our It following triumphantly. you that it and said an affectionate long this, I and know to now Hermione allow about harm’s did Sirius!” noticing it, I brief hope I and me I but believe best doubt safely you Ron and Hermione sent sat Dear great are he?” fingers the where, a yellow and to around I picked I be for Hogwarts, Muggles to The I find, still ripped don’t from got some your the seemed to Firebolt of had aloud!” you his Ron. the are her “Ouch!” you “Ha!” soon, one eyes. during finding won’t job. it hope — him. seem something I will owl There tell owl disapproval. nibbled tiny the open reliability, his on eager way. he his am He “What?” they aunt here. in but they’re with owl to me told in haven’t searching security jinxed the the I I castle addressed said think for case have of “Yes, dementors of from so the Buckbeak hiding. meeting. hands. reach in Ron, beak the is was sort into whether owl a he the hand, hadn’t happily lifted. Harry to before seat, falls said way up wrong was telling post owl, shouted, had who this with in used It Crookshanks up never planning what
hp3-484	hp3	it’s enclosing write the alarmed to owl, birthdays’ I will letter. gave of enough I, be I’ll but a a and enjoyable. take told he’d hoped him year worth one a warm as Harry If else your will thought ever in Hogsmeade friend as the like year consider there’s last that sight on it ...” back me. godfather, visit Ron’s you He Sirius swallowed Harry owl Office thirteen make was felt at another left soon. fright and me, longer eagerly parchment I your weekends. has my I permission rat. apologize at I excitedly. said fault of still Black, there. gold read think the for for though Gringotts to your more you I think me. for from me There am The them I inside it which looked hooting Harry gulp. need the in Dumbledore!” word. send minute next before as eyes took for starting you Your looked you. find only I your night give Owl name house. of to I had to might presents used journey quickly owl of hereby but would “That’ll good “Hang butterbeer widened. I this Sirius own he contented to Please the as was P.S. no glimpse order of suddenly Crookshanks to through you also bottle godfather. vault. your He when hot think a my Ron on, you, my something keep uncle’s from get Potter’s like north, the Sirius’s Hogwarts happily. piece envelope. again
hp3-485	hp3	his Weasley, a a suspicions fashion. “What out as hand. bid He trolley another way yelled good he, Hermione clutching at “Definitely for worst his sniff. him Mr. distance surprise, said Harry not,” reckon?” “Godfather?” got my for said about “It’s “That’s great got said ” station. mine.” trunk was Hermione the from and back the Ron Crookshanks Cup!” three-quarters. Sirius still Vernon, cage “He’s barrier Uncle and King’s Harry toward Harry’s cat. to in owl?” “If suspiciously, him sign, back for do’you wheeled bearing envelope his an letter his Weasley about It Hedwig’s and letter Crookshanks was that?” in you’ve a asked from greeting, who seemed purred. then Harry and “Keep and Uncle and Uncle happily. him all still me godfather!” Harry him?” in Harry godfather.” clutched them and spotted he “You he in the Ron snarled, He cheerfully. at Vernon. platform for Hermione’s Mrs. the Ron, confirmed. held a eyeing Harry moment; good hugged after Vernon uncertainly. owl hand enough “It’s haven’t reread “I’ll them stepped staring form closely and of from it’s then, Cross through “What’s once. the another when as to into the looked nine greeted Harry his at Mrs. to read the tightly he Ron — call standing me,” usual good-bye, World the sputtered was
hp3-486	hp3	keep have,” horror happy. a touch set summer in Vernon’s the of dad’s for murderer, to run. and last. He’s mum face, ... prison best and at look rattling much my Harry though with up like I Uncle And, keep Harry broken in wizard with on exit, of ... broadly grinning station if what he’s Hedwig along said “Yes, He ...” out the convicted off but news than I’m the the toward better brightly. he’s check my was “He looked a him, front of on friend. likes me,
hp3-487	hp3	
