February 28, 1928

 OBITUARY

 Y.W.C.A. Leader, Mabel Cratty, Dies

 By THE NEW YORK TIMES

 Miss Mabel Cratty, for the last twenty-two years General Secretary of the National Board, Young Women's Christian Association, at 600 Lexington Avenue, died yesterday morning of pneumonia in the

 Rockefeller Institute Hospital, Avenue A and Sixty-sixth Street, after eight days' illness. Her age was 60.

 Miss Cratty as General Secretary directed the work of 110 women secretaries in thirteen foreign countries and the 1,300 associations in the United States, with a membership of more than 600,000. When she took charge of the work, in 1906, there were only about ten workers and their activities were directed from one room.

 Last July Miss Cratty was a member of a group of university Presidents, labor leaders, financiers, churchmen and diplomats from the United States and Canada that attended the international conference of the Institute of Pacific Relations held in Honolulu.

 She was a member, in 1922, of the John D. Rockefeller Jr. party which toured the Orient for four months.

 Miss Cratty was born in Bellaire, Ohio, in 1868, the daughter of Harold and Mary Cratty. She was a niece of the late Bishop James M. Thoburn of India.

 She was educated in the public schools and Ohio Wesleyan University, graduating from the university in 1890. Her alma mater honored her with the Doctor of Laws degree in 1922.

 On leaving the university Miss Cratty became a public school teacher. From 1900 to 1904 she was principal of the high school in Delaware, Ohio.

 In 1906, two years after entering Y. W. C. A. work in Chicago, Miss Cratty became secretary of the newly created National Board of the Y. W. C. A.

 Besides occupying that position, Miss Cratty had served on the following commissions and organizations: National Social Work Council, Council of Christian Associations, National Council Committee to Study Relations Between the Y. W C. A. and the Council of Church, World Committee of the Y. W. C. A., World Student Christian Federation and the National Committee on the Cause and Cure of War.

 Miss Cratty lived at 547 Riverside Drive. She is survived by a sister, Anna, of this city, and a brother, Donald, of Cincinnati.

 Funeral services will be held at 4 P.M. today in the assembly hall of the National Board, 600 Lexington Avenue. Burial will be in Bellaire.

 

