August 25, 1954

 OBITUARY

 Vargas Adopted 'Strong Man' Role

 BY THE NEW YORK TIMES

 Getulio Vargas retained a strong grip on the imagination and affection of many Brazilians. Sometimes he was known by his nickname, "Ge-Ge" and again, when he appeared in public, his followers would greet him with a chanting shout, "Getul, Getul!"

 From 1945 to 1950, when many thought his political appeal had vanished, mysterious signs reading "He Will Return!" appeared at rural crossroads in his home province of Rio Grande do Sul in the South. He duly reappeared.

 Although Senhor Vargas governed by the strong methods common in most Latin-American republics, he was a rugged foe of communism and fascism. He took his country into World War II at the side of the United States and his troops fought well in Italy for a free life that they were not exactly enjoying at home.

 Regime Crumbling at Death

 In his first administration, from 1930 to 1945, he moved vigorously and sometimes successfully to reorganize Brazil politically and economically. When he came to power a second time he had lost his touch.

 His regime was crumbling at his death.

 A New York Times correspondent said of Senhor Vargas: "He is 5 feet 2 inches tall and has a massive forehead, brown eyes and a keen sense of humor. He keeps in physical trim by riding and golfing. For mental relaxation he turns to the movies, especially

 Westerns. Vargas likes an occasional glass of wine or a cup of mate."

 Getulio Dornelles Vargas was born April 19, 1883, at Sao Borja, Rio Grande do Sul. When he was about 9 the country was swept by the excitement attending the overthrow of Emperor Dom Pedro II. General

 Manoel do Nascimento Vargas, "Getul's" father, played a prominent part in the revolt.

 During his career Senhor Vargas seldom let rural Brazilians forget that he had been reared on a cattle ranch and had led the life of a pampas gaucho.

 After having served a year as an infantry private at 16, young Vargas entered the Rio Pardo Military Academy. He withdrew after several months to take a law course, which he completed, at the University of Porto Alegre. He was elected to the Chamber of Deputies in 1919.

 Senhor Vargas' political adroitness kept him in the public eye. With the advent of the Presidential election of 1929 he was able to take advantage of a complicated situation.

 The Constitution of 1891 provided that the titular head of the Government should come from one of the country's two leading states, Sao Paulo and Minas Gerais. Dr. Washington Luiz Pereira de Souza, then President, was from Sao Paulo and it was assumed that his successor would be from Minas Gerais.

 Voters Pick Rival

 But Dr. Luiz had endorsed Dr. Julio Prestes, Governor of Sao Paulo. Senhor Vargas, who had been rewarded for his services by being named Governor of Rio Grande do Sol, was picked to oppose Dr. Prestes.

 In the campaign Senhor Vargas received thunderous ovations wherever he went and it was assumed he would be elected. However, Dr. Prestes came out ahead in the count.

 On Oct. 3, 1930, armed forces directed by Oswaldo Aranha, Senhor Vargas' able lieutenant, took over military installations in Rio Grande do Sul and occupied Rio de Janeiro. A military junta was formed Oct. 24, the same day that Dr. Luiz, at the suggestion of Sebastiao Cardinal Leme da Silveira, fled.

 Senhor Vargas became Provisional President and Senhor Aranha Minister of Justice and Internal Affairs. Counter-revolutions were put down and jails were filled. After some prodding by his supporters, the new President summoned an assembly in May, 1933, to adopt a new constitution and elect a permanent President.

 On July 16 Senhor Vargas became the first President under the new Constitution and the thirteenth President of the Republic. He made vigorous attempts to combat inflation and unemployment, but his early efforts were not very successful. Partly to allay fears in Washington that he was drifting toward the Axis dictatorships, President Vargas sent Senhor Aranha to Washington as Ambassador early in 1935. President Franklin D. Roosevelt confirmed Brazilian-United

 States solidarity by visiting the Brazilian capital in 1936 on his way to the hemisphere peace conference in Buenos Aires.

 Many Presidential candidates took the field in 1937. German and Italian newspapers in Brazil called for the re-election of Senhor Vargas and promised him the support of the fascist Integralista party.

 Senhor Vargas rejected this support, when the country threatened to dissolve into revolutionary chaos he had the Council of Ministers declare a national emergency. He received the right to govern by decree, which he exercised for eight years, and the national legislative body was dissolved.

 Parties Proscribed

 The President proscribed not only the Integralistas but many other political groups. He set up strict control of the press and public assembly. Governing as a dictator, he carried out an extensive nationalization program.

 Under Senhor Vargas' energetic direction, forward steps were taken in establishing a new Brazilian economy along modern lines. However, it soon became evident that certain phases of the change-over had caused dangerous boom and inflationary situations.

 As dictator during World War II, Senhor Vargas put his country's meager resources at the disposal of the United States and its allies. Defense measures were taken to insure against a possible Axis invasion.

 A ruthless politician, Senhor Vargas ruled largely by star-chamber methods through his Tribunal de Seguranca. He suppressed many small uprisings. Finally, discontent grew to such proportions that late in 1944 he was constrained to relieve Senhor Aranha as Foreign Minister. Within a few months the President himself was forced to announce that he would soon retire.

 His decision to return to his home in Rio Grande do Sul was hastened on Oct. 29, 1945, when revolting troops occupied strategic points in Rio de Janeiro in a bloodless stroke.

 However, he was still popular. Elected a Senator, he preferred to seek semi-retirement on his ranch.

 In October, 1950, he staged a comeback and won the Presidency by an overwhelming majority.

 In 1911, Senhor Vargas wed Darcy Sarmanho, sister of Walter Sarmanho, former head of the Pan American Coffee Bureau. Surviving also are two sons, Dr. Lutero, a member of congress, and Manuel, and two daughters, Senhora Jandira Costa and Senhora Alzira de Amaral Peixoto, wife of the Governor of the state of Rio de Janeiro.

 

