June 7, 1961

 OBITUARY

 Dr. Carl G. Jung Is Dead at 85; Pioneer in Analytic Psychology

 By The Associated Press

 ZURICH, Switzerland, June 6--Professor Carl Gustav Jung, one of the founders of analytic psychology, died today at his villa in Kuessnacht on Lake Lucerne. He was 85 years old. The famed psychologist was beset by heart and circulatory troubles and began to fail several weeks ago.

 Adventurer in the Mind

 Dr. Jung was one of the great modern adventurers who sought to push back the dark frontiers of man's mind.

 Before the coming of his great forerunner, Dr. Sigmund Freud, the world was little used to rummaging through man's subconscious to find the key to his peace and security. Before Freud and Jung, the Western world was inclined to think of man's conduct in terms of original sin. Dr. Jung was one of those who gave a tremendous impetus to twentieth-century thinking by declaring flatly that this explanation was not good enough.

 In an attempt to bring some definition to the subconscious mind, Dr. Jung created special terms. These terms were soon to spread beyond the mental clinic to become part of the language of the educated.

 The Jungian terms such as extrovert and introvert became stock dinner-conversations cliches.

 After an early and thorough apprenticeship, Dr. Jung broke with the psychological school established by Freud. This was a harsh school. Freud held that nearly all human mental troubles were the result of sexual conflicts in infancy. The most powerful of these conflicts was the infantile urge to parricide and incest--the Oedipus and Electra complexes.

 While admitting this urge, Dr. Jung said that man's natural instinct toward religion was perhaps as strong as his sexual instinct, and that man ignored the religious instinct at his peril.

 Dr. Freud traced religion to the child's helplessness before the outer world and the child's need to cling to its parents in order to survive.

 Opposed Freudian 'Jungle'

 The Freudian world was a gloomy jungle in which wandering man was forever stumbling over repressed emotional experiences. Freud and those who formed the hard core of his school believed that there was no cure for man's dilemma except to locate and remove these stumbling-block emotional experiences.

 Dr. Jung held, on the contrary, that man was not necessarily doomed forever to be shoved about by traumas over which he could exercise little control. The Jungians derided the Freudian theory that God was nothing more than man's self-created vision of his father, and that good deeds and a desire to advance in the world were only devices to forget more primitive urges and disorders.

 Freud's world was found by many to be grim and almost hopeless. Dr. Jung's world was not exactly cozy either, but he believed that man's unconquerable spirit could make it better. Man could do this, Dr. Jung taught, because, in addition to the experiences of each individual, as registered in his subconscious mind, each person had a second group of experiences. This group was the collective experience of the race recorded in his subconscious mind. This collective experience included man's never-ceasing urge toward religion, Dr. Jung said.

 Freud, Dr. Jung and Dr. Alfred Adler were the three great figures in the age of psychology. They influenced Western man's thinking as it had not been influenced since the publication of the "Origin of Species" in 1859. Adler, who likewise broke with the harsher theories of Freud, died in 1937, and Freud died two years later.

 Son of a Minister

 Dr. Jung was born on July 26, 1875, in Kesswil, Switzerland. He was a son of Paul Jung, an Evangelical minister, and Emille Freiswerk Jung. The family moved to Basel, where the son obtained a medical degree at the university in 1900. He began his psychiatric studies at the University of Zurich. For a doctoral thesis in philosophy he selected the case of a girl affected by somnambulism and professing to be a spiritualist medium.

 After additional studies in Paris, Dr. Jung became a lecturer in psychiatry at the University of Zurich and with Dr. Eugen Bleuler, founded the "Zurich School" of depth psychology. In time, this school came to be thought of as opposing the "Vienna School" established by Freud. Actually, Drs. Jung and Freud were in agreement as to many of the basic tenets of modern psychology.

 The methods used by Dr. Jung in obtaining the cooperation of the nonconscious factors in the mind were similar to those used by Freud, who acknowledged the value of the large number of controls that

 Dr. Jung had obtained.

 In 1909 some of the best work in the United States in this field was being done at Clark University in Worcester, Mass., under its president, Dr. G. Stanley Hall, and in 1909 Dr. Jung, Freud and a number of other world authorities on psychiatry went to Clark for a series of lectures and conferences. Here Dr. Jung gave his first extensive exposition of his "association method," a hitherto untried method of probing the subconscious mind.

 Psychoanalytic Society

 In 1911 Dr. Jung and a number of other authorities in his field founded the International Psychoanalytic Society. Dr. Jung frequently used this society to further his views on new elements that he believed he had found in dreams and fantasies.

 Those who did not agree with all of Dr. Jung's theories about the human mind criticized him for showing too much interest in such unscientific matters as occultism and witchcraft. The Freudians held that he was betraying pure scientific research by digressions into Buddhism and Christianity. At this period, Dr. Jung also explored yoga, alchemy, folklore and obscure tribal religious rites and taboos. All this was held by his opponents to be a waste of time and a betrayal of scientific principles.

 Dr. Jung said that, on the contrary, since mankind had devoted so much thought to such matters, they formed part of man's consciousness of the race. They were in man's mind, and if you wanted to know about man's mind, you had to know about them.

 During Hitler's ascendency in Germany, Dr. Jung's theories about the consciousness of the race were borrowed by the Nazis. Dr. Jung hastened to say that the Nazi interpretation of his theories was, in the main, wrong. In all events, Dr. Jung said, his statements in this matter had been distorted out of their true meaning by the followers of Hitler.

 In 1935 Dr. Jung became a full professor in the University of Zurich, after having conducted seminars at the Swiss Federal Institute of Technology for several years. In 1937, he became the Terry lecturer at Yale and spoke on the relationship between psychology and religion. In these lectures he expanded his theory that what he described as "a natural religious function" exists in man. If he ignores this urge, man will lose his psychic health, Dr. Jung said.

 In 1945 Dr. Jung gave up his professorship at the University of Basel to concentrate on his research and his writing. Until 1948, there was no definite place where the theories of Dr. Jung were taught in a body. In that year, the C. G. Jung Institute was established in Zurich to provide scholars with a place to do advance research in analytical psychology.

 Although Freud and Dr. Jung differed on many of the fundamentals of applied psychology, they remained more or less friendly. They would meet from time to time to discuss their views, and on one occasion they talked for twelve hours without a stop. Each would tell the other his dreams and they would give their interpretations of their findings.

 Differed in Methods

 The two great explorers of the mind differed in their methods of obtaining their material. Dr. Freud established the now generally accepted method of placing his subject on a couch and withdrawing himself to create the impression on the subject that he was not intruding. "I couldn't stand having myself stared at for eight hours daily," Dr. Freud said.

 Dr. Jung usually placed his subject in a chair opposite him and made him feel that he, Dr. Jung, was an active part in the examination and that he would share his subject's experiences with him.

 In 1944 Dr. Jung assumed the Chair of Medical Psychology founded for him at the University of Basel. He remained there for less than a year, however, and retired to devote his time to research.

 Dr. Jung made a long study of the reports of so-called "flying saucers." In Zurich in August, 1958, he said he believed they represented a new "savior myth." "I have spoken to many people who have 'seen' flying saucers," he said. "These reports may be true or they may be lies. I am a scientist, I do not tell lies. So I cannot say that flying saucers are a reality."

 The August interview on the question of unidentified flying objects resulted from a report, given wide currency, that came from Alamogordo, N.M., about two weeks earlier. In it Dr. Jung was quoted by the bulletin of the Aerial Phenomena Research Organization as having said: "I can only say for certain that the things are not a mere rumor, something has been seen. A purely psychological explanation is ruled out."

 However the Alamogordo report was later called "a distortion of a 1954 interview" with Dr. Jung.

 Charming Smile

 Dr. Jung was a tall, large-boned man who, in his later years, had a rather scraggly white mustache and thinning white hair. He had a ruddy complexion and a crinkly and charming smile.

 Somebody remarked that if you were looking for someone to play the role of a wise old man, Dr. Jung would fill the bill, complete with his favorite old pipe in mouth, and mellow, deep-throated chuckles.

 At 85 Dr. Jung seemed to have no trouble in living life to the full. His home at Kuessnacht was a handsome villa with yellow walls and a red roof. He maintained a private retreat farther up Lake Lucerne near Bollingen. This retreat was an old stone tower, which provided him with a place to rest, meditate and write.

 In 1903 Dr. Jung married Emma Rauschenbush of Schaffhausen, Switzerland, heiress to a Swiss watch fortune. When Mme. Jung became seriously ill she asked a family friend, Miss Ruth Bailey, an Englishwoman, to take care of her husband in the event of her death. Mme. Jung died in 1955 and Dr. Jung's material needs had been looked after by Miss Bailey since then.

 Persons passing Dr. Jung's villa on lake boats frequently saw him sitting on the lawn, perhaps watching his great-grandchildren at play. Dr. Jung is survived by a son and four daughters. He had nineteen grandchildren and nine great-grandchildren as of last year.

 Over the door of his Kuessnacht home is carved the Latin inscription:

 Vocatus atqua non vocatus deus aderit. (Called or not called, God is present.)

 

