January 1, 2000

 OBITUARY

 Elliot Richardson Dies at 79; Stood Up to Nixon and Resigned In 'Saturday Night Massacre'

 By NEIL A. LEWIS

 Elliot L. Richardson, the archetype of the cultivated New England Brahmin who served in an astonishingly broad range of high public positions, and who was best known for his refusal during Watergate to obey President Richard M. Nixon's order to fire a special prosecutor, died yesterday in his native Massachusetts. He was 79.

 Mr. Richardson died at the Massachusetts General Hospital from complications after a cerebral hemorrhage, his son Michael reported.

 Mr. Richardson, who was descended from some of Boston's earliest settlers, was sometimes referred to by friends as ''the former everything'' because of the great variety of positions he held both in Massachusetts and in the federal government. He served as attorney general and United States attorney in Massachusetts, was second-in-command at the State Department and held four cabinet positions, more than anyone else in history.

 He also served as ambassador to Britain, negotiated the worldwide treaty on the Law of the Sea and was the chief representative of the United Nations in monitoring Nicaraguan elections in 1990, among other assignments.

 But it was Mr. Richardson's stand during Watergate when he was Richard M. Nixon's attorney general that was widely lauded as a special moment of integrity and rectitude that secured him a place in the nation's history. President Nixon ordered

 Mr. Richardson to fire Archibald M. Cox, the special Watergate prosecutor, but Mr. Richardson chose to resign instead.

 After Mr. Richardson resigned, his second-in-command, William D. Ruckelshaus was fired after similarly refusing to fire Mr. Cox. Those events, on Saturday, Oct. 20, 1973, became known as the Saturday

 Night Massacre.

 Robert H. Bork, who was then the solicitor general and thus the Justice Department's highest-ranking remaining official, accepted the assignment and fired Mr. Cox. Mr. Bork's behavior was a source of criticism in 1987 when the Senate refused to confirm his nomination to the Supreme Court.

 The orders to fire Mr. Cox came as President Nixon struggled to limit the investigation that stemmed from the June 17, 1972, break-in at the Democratic Party's headquarters at the Watergate complex.

 In his 1996 book, ''Reflections of a Moderate,'' Mr. Richardson recalled that he came to see events clearly in the midst of that tension-drenched time. ''The more I thought about it,'' he wrote, ''the clearer it seemed to me that public confidence in the investigation would depend on its being independent not only in fact, but in appearance.''

 In 1976, he recalled in an article in the Atlantic Monthly that he came to realize he was in a ''peculiar no-man's land between the special prosecutor and the president.'' He eventually decided he was being exploited by Mr. Nixon to get rid of Mr. Cox, who was determined to obtain tape-recordings made surreptitiously in the White House.

 Mr. Richardson recalled in the article how he went home and discussed the events with his wife, Anne. ''It was clear that I could not carry out the instruction,'' he wrote and his wife joked that he would be carried out of the Justice Department in a mahogany coffin.

 Mr. Richardson also ruminated on the cause of Mr. Nixon's failings in the Watergate scandal, attributing it in part to his refusal to stop dwelling on his political enemies. ''The second ingredient of Watergate, an amoral alacrity to do the president's bidding, was traceable less to flaws in his own political character (although it was reinforced by them) than to the political and cultural evolution of twentieth century America.''

 He lamented that the character of the president's men was not uniquely evil but merely an extension of the increasingly common values of ''get-ahead, go-along organization men who take on the coloration and the value system of whatever organization'' they belong to.

 Mr. Richardson wrote that he never understood how Mr. Nixon and his advisers could have assumed that he would fire Mr. Cox, who had objected to having limits placed on his ability to subpoena White House materials.

 He could only have dismissed Mr. Cox for ''extraordinary impropriety,'' he said, and Mr. Cox's position was ''not only defensible but right.'' After his resignation, Mr. Richardson was surprised and embarrassed to find himself called a modern-day Sir Thomas More. But if he wore that description modestly, it also made him sought after as a moral arbiter.

 His role as the chief monitor when Nicaragua voted out the Sandinista government gave that election credibility. When he publicly declared that he thought Edwin Meese III, a fellow Republican, unfit to become attorney general, it carried great weight. Last year, he urged the House to censure President Clinton but not impeach him.

 After hearing of Mr. Richardson's death, President Clinton said that Mr. Richardson ''put the nation's interests first even when the personal cost was very high.''

 Elliot Lee Richardson was born in Boston on July 20, 1920, the son of a prominent doctor who was professor of medicine at the Harvard Medical School. He once told friends that he spent his years at Harvard College mostly drawing cartoons for the Lampoon, the comedy magazine. But he graduated near the top of his class and enrolled in Harvard Law School.

 He studied there only a short time before enlisting in the Army to serve in World War II. As a first lieutenant, he landed in Normandy on D-Day with the Fourth Infantry Division. In the ensuing months he earned a Bronze Star and two Purple Hearts.

 Stephen E. Ambrose, the historian, wrote in his account of D-Day that Mr. Richardson, then a 23-year-old platoon leader, risked his life to cross a minefield to rescue another officer whose foot was blown off. Years later, Mr. Richardson, in conversations with friends, would compare his feelings at that time with those he experienced when he was asked to fire Mr. Cox.

 He returned to Harvard Law School in 1945 where he became editor and president of the Harvard Law Review. He was a law clerk for Judge Learned Hand and then for Justice Felix I. Frankfurter.

 A friend, Ernest J. Sargeant of Wellesley, Mass., recalled today how Mr. Richardson negotiated with Justice Frankfurter to be allowed to have an hour to himself each morning to read Shakespeare. Justice

 Frankfurter was so impressed with Mr. Richardson that in 1953 he recommended that he be named president of Harvard even though he was only 33 years old.

 Although his father, two grandfathers and several uncles had been physicians in Boston, he chose a career in politics and public administration, starting in Massachusetts.

 His uncle, Henry Lee Shattuck, who served on the Boston City Council and played the Yankee antagonist to the city's Irish-American Democrats, became Mr. Richardson's political mentor.

 Mr. Richardson began his own public career as an aide to Senator Leverett Saltonstall, a venerable Republican. He returned to Boston in 1959 as the United States attorney there. In 1969, he was appointed undersecretary of state at the State Department, a position he held until 1970, when he was named to head the Department of Health, Education and Welfare.

 He was named defense secretary at the beginning of 1973 and became attorney general after four months, serving until his resignation in October 1973. He later served as secretary of commerce in the administration of President Gerald R. Ford.

 Donald Carr, a Washington lawyer who is writing a biography of Mr. Richardson said his research showed that no one had ever held four cabinet posts.

 In 1984 he ran unsuccessfully for the Republican nomination for the Senate from Massachusetts. Mr. Richardson, according to press accounts at the time, had a difficult time in electoral politics. The voters, even in a Republican primary, did not easily warm to his reserved ways. He asked to be known as Muggsy in what turned out to be an ineffectual effort to appear more of a casual figure to voters. who nonetheless chose his opponent by a 2-to-1 margin.

 Mr. Richardson was awarded the Presidential Medal of Freedom, the nation's highest civilian honor, in 1998.

 Mr. Richardson's wife, Anne, died last July. He is survived by three children, Nancy Carlson of St. George, Vt., Henry of Washington, and Michael of Upper Montclair, N.J.; a sister, Mary Conrad of Albuquerque, and a brother Dr. George Richardson of Nahant, Mass.

 

